

DELHI UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

Cl. No. 

Ac. No. J t D^te <A Ifl £sc 1 

This book should be returned on or before the date last stamped 
below. An overdue charge of 5 Paise will be collected for each day the 
book is kept overtime. 


ESSAYS IN 
MUSICAL ANALYSIS 

By 

DONALD FRANCIS TOVEY 

CONTENTS 

I. SYMPHONIES 

II. SYMPHONIES (il), VARIATIONS, AND 
ORCHESTRAL POLYPHONY 

III. CONCERTOS 

IV. ILLUSTRATIVE MUSIC 

V. VOCAL MUSIC 

VI. SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAYS, GLOSSARY, AND INDEX 
SUPPLEMENTARY VOLUME.* CHAMBER MUSIC 



ESSAYS IN 
MUSICAL ANALYSIS 

By 

DONALD FRANCIS TOVEY 


Volume VI 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAYS 
GLOSSARY AND INDEX 


LONDON 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 


NEW YORK TORONTO 



Oxford University Press, Ely House , London W. i 

GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON 
CAPE 1 OWN SALISBURY IBADAN NAIROBI LUSAKA ADDIS ABABA 
BOMBAY CALCUT1A MADRAS KARACHI LAHORE DACCA 
KUALA LUMPUR HONG KONG TOKYO 


HRsr pi ni isHi i) nno 

EIGHTH IMPRESSION 1 966 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 



CONTENTS 


BACH 

CCXXIII. OVERTURE IN C MAJOR, FOR ORCHESTRA . i 

CCXXIV. LINEAR HARMONY .... 4 

CCXXV. PRELUDE TO CHURCH CANTATA No. 29, ‘WIR 
DANKEN DIR, GOTT’, FOR ORGAN AND 
ORCHESTRA ..... 7 

CARL PHILIPP EMANUEL BACH 

CCXXVI. SYMPHONY IN D MAJOR .... 8 

GLUCK 

CCXXVII. OVERTURE TO ‘IPHIGfiNIE EN AULIDE’. ‘OR- 
PHEUS AND EURIDICE’, ACT. II .12 

MOZART 

CCXXVIII. SYMPHONY IN D MAJOR (PARIS SYMPHONY). 

(Kfichel’s Catalogue, No. 297) . . .19 

CCXXIX. ARIA FROM ‘DIE ENTFUlIRUNG*, ‘MARTERN 

ALLER ARTEN’ . . . . . 24 

CCXXX. ARIA FROM ‘LA CLEMENZA DI TITO’ . . 27 

CCXXXI. OVERTURE TO ‘COSl FAN TUTTE’ . . 30 

BEETHOVEN 

CCXXXII. FIFTEEN VARIATIONS AND FUGUE, ‘PROME- 
THEUS’, Op. 3J 3 x 

MfiHUL 

CCXXXIII. OVERTURE, ‘LE JEUNE SAGE ET LE VIEUX FOU’ 35 

MENDELSSOHN 

CCXXXIV. OVERTURE, ‘MELUSINE’ . . . .37 

SCHUMANN 

CCXXXV. OVERTURE, SCHERZO, AND FINALE, Op. 52 . 40 



vi 


CONTENTS 


BERLIOZ 

CCXXXVI. ‘SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE’, Op. 14 . .44 

CCXXXV 1 I. OVERTURE, ‘LE CORSAIR’ . . .50 

CCXXXVIII. OVERTURE, ‘BEATRICE ET BENEDICT* . 53 


BRAHMS 

CCXXXIX. A FURTHER NOTE ON BRAHMS’S TRAGIC 

OVERTURE (Op. 81) . . .55 


VERDI 

CCXL. ‘STABAT MATER’, FOR CHORUS AND ORCHES- 
TRA . . . . . . 57 


TCHAIKOVSKY 

CCXLI. SYMPHONY IN E MINOR, No. 5, Op. 64 . .58 


REGER 

CCXLII. SERENADE IN G MAJOR, FOR ORCHESTRA, Op. 

95 ••••••• 65 


MAHLER 

CCXLIII. SYMPHONY IN G MAJOR, No. 4 . . .73 

ELGAR 

CCXLIV. CONCERT OVERTURE, ‘IN THE SOUTH’ (Alassio), 

Op. 50 • • . . -83 

CCXLV. INTRODUCTION AND ALLEGRO FOR STRINGS 

(QUARTET AND ORCHESTRA), Op. 47. .87 

SIBELIUS 

CCXLVI. SYMPHONY IN C MAJOR, No. 7, Op. 105 . . 89 

CCXLVII. ‘TAPIOLA’, SYMPHONIC POEM FOR FULL 

ORCHESTRA, Op. 112 . . - 93 

HAVERGAL BRIAN 

CCXLVIII. FANTASTIC VARIATIONS ON AN OLD RHYME. 96 

ADOLF BUSCH 

CCXLIX. CAPRICCIO FOR SMALL ORCHESTRA, Op. 46 . 96 

zAdor 

CCL. RONDO FOR ORCHESTRA 


IOO 



CONTENTS Vil 

WAGNER 

CCLI. WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM . . ,102 

CCLII. THE VENUSBERG MUSIC (‘TANNHAUSER’) . .114 

CCLIII. ‘KAISERMARSCIP 116 

CCLIV. ‘PARSIFAL*, ACT III 119 

RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA . . - .132 

GLOSSARY 150 

INDEX ........ 169 




BACH 


CCXXIII. OVERTURE IN C MAJOR, FOR ORCHESTRA 

i (Grave: leading to Allegro). 2 Courante . 3 Gavotte I and II. 4 Forlane. 

5 Menuet I and II. 6 Bourrde I and II. 7 Passepied I and II. 

Of Bach’s four orchestral overtures, or suites, the first, in C major, 
is perhaps the most witty. Comparisons in respect of absolute 
beauty are impertinent. Masterpieces of art should never be com- 
pared, except as to technicalities and historical matters. When a 
work of art has attained perfection, it is a form of infinity; and with 
infinities no process of addition, subtraction, or other arithmetical 
operation has the slightest relevance. 

The C major Overture is scored for the ordinary string band and 
a trio consisting of two oboes and a bassoon. To these resources 
we must add the continuo, the harpsichord, or pianoforte in the 
hands of a player whose task is to fill in the harmonies from a 
figured bass. The string harmony of the C major Suite lies un- 
usually well for euphony without the aid of the continuo; but this 
does not mean that a discreet background of keyboard harmony is 
not an immense improvement, or rather a restoration of the true 
character of Bach’s orchestration. The cold and tubby resonance 
of Bach’s and Handel’s string-writing, as left unfilled by the back- 
ground which these masters deemed essential, is really a modern 
invention, and the pious opinion that it represents chastity and 
severity is as the hardness of the Greek G or gamma in the u E\yiv 
marbles. 

Where a large string band is used, Bach’s trio of oboes and bas- 
soon needs reinforcing. It does not matter what reed instruments 
we take for the purpose; clarinets will do just as well as oboes, if 
we cannot afford or obtain the overwhelming number of oboes to 
which Handel was accustomed. Nobody at the present day knows 
exactly what twelve Handelian oboes would sound like, and Handel 
himself was more accustomed to twenty. Anyhow, the resem- 
blance to ordinary oboe-tone would be far remoter than the mix- 
ture of clarinets and oboes which I propose to use in the tuttis 
for purposes of balance. The trio passages, which are especially 
marked ‘trio’ by Bach, should, of course, be played by three 
soloists, who may well be given ample time to breathe during the 
tuttis. 

The title ‘overture’ applies properly to the first number in this 
suite, and means, of course, an overture on Lully’s French model, 
beginning with a grave (in this case rather more flowing and less 

VI P 



2 BACH. C MAJOR OVERTURE 

jerky than the traditional type) and leading to a lively fugato move- 
ment. Here is the theme of the fugue : 



and the quick movement, which is developed at considerable 
length, is very clearly articulated by its natural division between 
the tuttis and the trio passages for the three wind instruments. The 
grave returns at the end by way of climax. 

If this were the overture to an opera, the curtain would rise upon 
a ballet. Hence the suite of dances which follows; and hence, con- 
versely, the custom of prefacing such suites by a French overture. 
The first dance is a French courante, scored for the tutti through- 
out. 



I quote the whole first part of this in order to show two points, one 
of which does not in this case reach the ear at all unless the con- 
tinuo player brings it out. Although the time is 3/2, the last note 
of the first part is written as if it were 6/4. This is a faint trace of 
the fact that the French courante is really in an old kind of triple 
time, in which the rhythms of twice three and thrice two are mixed 
in a manner which always appears at the cadences and often causes 
confusion elsewhere. It is not generally realized that our clear-cut 
notions of triple time, such as the rhythm of waltzes and minuets, 
are of no great antiquity. Occasional groups of three beats are as 
frequent in Palestrina as metrical feet of three syllables in verse; 
but not one per cent, of any sixteenth-century masters work is 
written ostensibly in triple time, and those in which the triple 
time-signature is used are extraordinarily remote from our ideas 
of any such rhythm. The other reason why I quote the whole 
first strain of this courante is that Bach opens the second strain by 
giving the whole of these eight bars a step higher. This is the first 
example of a kind of wit peculiarly characteristic of this suite and 
of the Flute Suite in B minor. 

The next dance is a pair of gavottes, of which the first is scored 
for the tutti. 





The next dance is a forlane, or forlana, which, I learn from Grove's 
Dictionary , is a favourite lilt with Venetian gondoliers. It is scored 
for tutti with a running accompaniment of the second violins and 
violas. The bass supports the harmony with a somewhat derisive 
approval, until towards the end it is carried away with the other 
dancers. Perhaps it represents the strokes of the gondolier’s pole. 






4 BACH. C MAJOR OVERTURE 

original pitch, with the wind group (not necessarily in solo trio) 

playing a flowing counterpoint. 



Bach’s works for unaccompanied violin and unaccompanied vio- 
loncello triumphantly solve a problem, the very existence of which 
has escaped the notice of the eminent but misguided composers 
who have at one time or another added accompaniments to them. 
When, with most of the rest of Bach’s works, these sonatas and 
suites began to attract attention nearly one hundred years after 
Bach’s death, even such great musicians as Mendelssohn and 
Schumann failed to dispossess their minds of the idea that no 
melody longer than the subject of a fugue can support itself with- 
out a harmonic accompaniment. Folk-music, which flourishes 
where harmony is quite undeveloped, had long attracted enthusi- 
astic and respectful attention ; and there was no taint of patronage 
in the zest with which Haydn and Beethoven threw themselves 
into the task of making large volumes of settings of Scottish, Welsh, 
and Irish folk-songs at the instigation of the Edinburgh musical 
publisher Thomson. But even in 1850 it had not yet occurred to 
anybody that melody could still have aesthetic qualities irrelevant 
or contradictory to the use of our classical harmonic system as their 
accompaniment. 

There is no evidence that Bach took any interest in folk-music, 
except in so far as the Lutheran Chorale covers that subject. 
Composers, like other artists, take a spontaneous interest in any- 
thing beautiful that comes naturally into their artistic life; and so 
long as folk-music remains familiar to their own folk, it will influ- 
ence them. Otherwise it will have just the same chance of influen- 
cing them as any other objects of the enthusiasm of learned 
societies. The bearing of these unaccompanied string works of 
Bach upon folk-music is that both rest upon the common ground 
of cultivating the power of a single thread of unharmonized melody. 
They cultivate this power in radically different ways. Folk-music, 
even if it happens to lie along the diatonic major scale, does not 


BACH. LINEAR HARMONY 5 

attempt to imply a modern or classical harmonic system at all. It 
is like line-drawing of more or less power and severity which satis- 
fies a decorative and symbolic range of expression without attempt- 
ing to indicate perspective. You can see from its first seven notes 
that ‘Annie Laurie* is no folk-song; its melody was never conceiv- 
able without the support of a pianoforte. Bach’s unaccompanied 
melodies are magnificently powerful line-drawing which shows 
itself capable of indicating any and every truth of perspective in 
its draughtsmanship. Of course these works are by no means 
entirely or mainly without harmony. The violin and the violon- 
cello have four strings, and Bach writes fugues for his unaccom- 
panied violin. Moreover, rapid passages in single notes not only 
indicate but actually are masses of harmony, if they happen to be 
arpeggios. Thus the preludes of these suites are masses of harmony 
as complete as any orchestral harmony on record; and the sara- 
bandes are, for the most part, harmonized in full chords throughout 
(fuller chords sometimes than the standard violoncello can play, 
for Bach wrote one suite for a five-stringed instrument, the viola 
pomposa, said to be his own invention). Still the fact remains that 
even in the most fully harmonized of these unaccompanied move- 
ments there is a constant exercise of the art of making single notes 
reassert their old prehistoric power of conveying a complete mean- 
ing. That is to say, where the melody is unharmonized it is its own 
bass; hence the miserable failure of even so great a master as 
Schumann, to say nothing of the really deplorable efforts of Raff, 
to furnish accompaniments and basses to this music, of which the * 
melody is, like a genuine folk-song, almost invariably the only 
possible bass. Another topic on which the providers of accom- 
paniments achieve the worst disaster of all is the places in which 
Bach takes advantage of the possibility that his melody may be 
ambiguous. Such passages are really impossible to accompany 
with additional harmonies; not because, like folk-music, they have 
no harmonic interpretation, but because they are intended to have 
two or three conflicting meanings, all of them perfectly clear, but 
leaving it to the event to show how the oracle is infallible. Lastly, 
it so happens that Bach did transcribe some movements from his 
solo violin works for fuller combinations. In so doing he did not, 
as some of the commentators allege, use them as mere sketches, 
nor did he convey any practical hints to any one who might want 
to furnish accompaniments to the works. His instrumental art 
forms are universal. He can turn the violin part of a movement 
from a concerto into a four-part chorus. He can write an arpeggio 
prelude for unaccompanied violin and then afterwards turn it into 
a symphony for organ and orchestra as an introduction to a church 
cantata: the dimensions and form of the work* will remain the 



6 BACH. LINEAR HARMONY 

same, for the time scale is unalterable, whereas the scale of volume 
of tone is for Bach a mere accident of material. In order to trans- 
late from the solo violin or ’cello to an organ and orchestra we 
need, not the technical skill to fill out harmonies and interpret 
ambiguities, but the imagination to conceive the whole work as if 
it had never existed in the earlier medium. In the history of art 
there is no greater example of the power of mind over matter. 

The suite forms are standardized by Bach in his six violoncello 
suites and in the English Suites for clavier. There is a great pre- 
lude — generally a broadly designed study in scales and arpeggios, 
but in the C minor suite a full-sized French Overture of which the 
fugato allegro achieves the paradox of a one-part fugue, distribut- 
ing its subject over different octaves with antiphonal effect. Then 
come the dance movements of the suite proper, viz. allemande, 
courante, sarabande, ‘galanterien’, and gigue. 

The allemande was a rather elaborate and not very dance-like 
movement in slow common time, but it could, as in the C major 
Suite, display a sturdy good-natured energy. 

The courante is usually of the Italian type, which is in lively 
triple time, and furnishes a better contrast to the allemande than 
the French type, with its complicated cross rhythms, used in the 
English Suites, and in the C minor violoncello suite. 

The sarabande is nearly always with Bach the warmest and 
most lyric part of the suite. After the sarabande come the ‘galan- 
terien’, the smallest and most tuneful of dances, often in alternating 
pairs, of which the second member was called trio if and when it 
is in three-part harmony. 

The gigue is, usually, a brilliant finale to the whole. That of the 
C major Suite has at least two well-contrasted themes, of which 
the second, with its drumming on open strings, is one of the most 
picturesque ideas in music before Haydn. Nothing is more re- 
markable in Bach’s suites than the completely individual character 
of each work and each movement within the extremely precise 
limits of the form. The six ’cello suites are perhaps in this respect 
his most remarkable, partly no doubt because of the extraordinary 
tour de force they imply; but the three violin partitas, the four 
orchestral suites, and the nineteen great clavier suites (the six 
English and six French suites, the six partitas, and the French 
Overture) are in no way inferior, except in some cases where the 
abstruse rhythm of the French courante has set Bach a problem of 
which there are not many profitable solutions. The task that has 
in recent years been so triumphantly achieved of securing public 
recognition of the violoncello suites of Bach in their authentic form, 
is one of inestimable service to musical culture. It often happens 
in the history of the appreciation of an art that understanding 



BACH. LINEAR HARMONY J 

comes at first through a tour deforce . Perhaps in this way we may 
hope that these monumental tours de force for violoncello may bring 
more recognition for the not less beautiful clavier suites. 


CCXXV. PRELUDE TO CHURCH CANTATA NO. 29, ‘WIR 
DANKEN DIR, GOTT’, FOR ORGAN AND ORCHESTRA 

This is the prelude to one of Bach’s Rathswahl Cantatas, written 
for the Sunday service at the time of the municipal elections at 
Leipzig in 1731. 

Violinists and their audiences will at once recognize that we have 
here in D major a glorification of the prelude to the E major Partita 
for unaccompanied violin. 

There are several modern arrangements of this prelude. The 
objection to them is not merely the general objection to such things 
on principle; it is that the arrangers have for the most part shown 
no knowledge of Bach’s own solution of their problem, although 
the cantata containing it was published by the Bach-Gesellschaft 
as long ago as i860. Arrangers who show so little curiosity as to 
Bach’s own methods are not likely to show much grasp of the 
technical problems of translating ‘into the round’ a composition 
originally not only flat but consisting of pure line. It is indeed an 
extraordinary tour deforce to find an independent bass for a thing 
that is already its own bass. Only the fact that most of this prelude 
consists of arpeggios makes the tour deforce possible at all. If the. 
movement really were pure line-drawing, like most of these violin 
solos, its own bass, being also its melody, would not bear doubling, 
and any other bass would be either stupid or ungrammatical. 
Even in this prelude there are several places where an arranger can 
go wrong, and the opportunities have not been neglected. Yet one 
of my earliest recollections is that of a performance in the ’eighties 
by Lady Hall£ of this prelude in its original key with an orchestral 
accompaniment of which I distinctly remember the comments of 
Bach’s trumpets, represented delicately by flutes. That is to say, 

I remember the glorious details of these flutes; and the fact that 
many years later I recognized them in the trumpets of Bach’s score 
makes me almost certain that Sir Charles Halle, with characteristic 
honesty and modesty, produced Bach’s own version retransposed 
to the original key and replacing the organ by the original violin. 

Bach’s arrangement achieves the miracle of being necessary in 
every detail though the original was already perfect. In essentials 
what he has done has been to write a new prelude for orchestra, 
which combines with the original violin prelude as arranged for 
the organ, and throws it into high relief by radical contrasts of 



8 BACH. PRELUDE TO CHURCH CANTATA NO. 29 

rhythm. This new orchestral prelude consists mainly of staccato 
chords distributed antiphonally among the groups of orchestral 
instruments. Sustained chords now and then strike a deeper and 
more solemn note, and flourishes of trumpets mark a livelier 
rhythm, to which the strings add rapid descending scales. To- 
wards the end the livelier rhythm -j pervades 

the whole orchestra, including the drums, and thus becomes a 
definite theme. Otherwise the form consists merely in the sym- 
metrical balance of long sequences of harmony establishing first 
the tonic and then the other related keys in a natural order, working 
round to the tonic again with recognizable repetitions of long sec- 
tions. One thing only is needed to hold the scheme together, and 
that is supplied by the perpetual motion of the original prelude, 
the outlines of which coincide with such details as the occasional 
descending scales of the strings, while the first two bars (and no 
others in the whole original prelude) give rise to the livelier rhyth- 
mic figure of the orchestra. The efforts of later arrangers are all 
very much cleverer, and, like a well-known make of safety-match, 
harmless to those employed in the manufacture. 

The cantata ‘Wir danken dir, Gott’ then proceeds to a chorus 
which afterwards became (to the same words in Latin) the ‘Gratias’ 
of the B minor Mass. But the prelude is an equally appropriate 
introduction to the mighty double chorus ‘Nun ist das Heil\ which 
is published as No. 50 of the Cantatas in the Bach-Gesellschaft 
edition, but consists of a single chorus, which may or may not be 
part of a larger work. (See Essay ccm, vol. 5, p. 71.) 


CARL PHILIPP EMANUEL BACH 

CCXXVI. SYMPHONY IN D MAJOR 

r Allego di molto , leading to 2 Largo , leading to 3 Presto . 

The symphonies of Philipp Emanuel Bach beautifully display 
the gradual emancipation of the orchestra from its slave-state 
dependence on the continuo. The emancipation was not the phil- 
anthropic process of emancipating slaves. It was the still nobler 
and more austere problem of teaching the orchestra, including the 
most aristocratic solo instruments, to serve themselves. To the 
second volume of The Heritage of Music (Oxford University Press) 
I contributed an essay on Gluck in which I have tried to show that 
Gluck’s reform of opera — that is to say, the whole problem of 
making music dramatic, instead of merely architectural and decora- 
tive — was but one aspect of a radical revolution in the whole art of 



CARL PHILIPP EMANUEL BACH. SYMPHONY 9 

music. Social philosophers may consider whether there is not in 
political, as well as in artistic, history a negative aspect of such 
revolutions that is more evident to contemporaries than the posi- 
tive aspect. Certainly, one of the greatest pioneers and emancipa- 
tors in the musical revolution of the eighteenth century was loudest 
in his complaints that the art of accompanying from a continuo 
had declined. His symphonies profess to rely upon a pianoforte, 
with chords indicated by a figured bass, to fill up hollow places in 
the written score. Philipp Emanuel Bach tells us that this is always 
necessary, that the pianoforte is better for the purpose than the 
harpsichord (an opinion which I am delighted to find that Dr. 
Schweitzer emphatically endorses in the case of John Sebastian’s 
works), and that, even in open-air performances where you cannot 
hear the keyboard instrument at all, its use greatly improves the 
general quality of tone. But, if we want an excuse for the neglect 
of continuo playing which so alarmed Philipp Emanuel Bach, we 
need seek no farther than the remarkable efficiency of his own 
orchestration without any such supplement. He is himself obliged 
to tell the continuo player to rest for pages together, and the only 
passages where he can indicate any figuring at all are simple and 
massive outbursts of full harmony. The continuo part is mani- 
festly obsolescent in the very works in which it is most carefully 
prescribed. 

Nevertheless, I was greatly relieved when I found in an edition 
of this symphony older than the current reprints that there was a 
genuine continuo instead of the mid-nineteenth century additional* 
accompaniments which I suspected as being such in the ordinarily 
available score. I was also amused to find that my conjectures 
were right as to certain places where the Leipzigers of the ’fifties 
or ’sixties had found Philipp Emanuel’s style not quite literal 
enough to be accepted as correct. Their minds had not advanced 
from the use of explicit simile to that of metaphor, pure or mixed; 
and I found my suspicions well grounded that the symphony has 
been carefully amended on the lines of the great Shakespeare 
scholar who restored its manifest original common sense to the 
sentiment of the Duke who could find (according to the true 
reading) ‘sermons in books, stones in the running brooks’. Another 
thing which the mid-nineteenth century Leipziger abhorred was 
abrupt endings, and my head swells with the pride with which 
I verified my guess that the end of Philipp Emanuel’s finale had 
been amended in the style of one of Barry Pain’s sententious 
domestic tyrants, who observed that ‘the inevitable consequences 
then happened, as they so often do’. 

Philipp Emanuel Bach is, as all the world knows, the link be- 
tween the polyphonic style and forms of his father and those of 



IO CARL PHILIPP EMANUEL BACH. SYMPHONY 

Haydn and Mozart. On this assumption nothing should be easier 
than to distinguish between those aspects of his art which reflect 
the past and those which ‘coldly predict the style of the future* ; 
and if you happen to quote from an edition of his sonatas by Biilow 
you can easily find excellent illustrations of both tendencies when- 
ever Biilow has been pleased to put in something of his own. Even 
without Billow’s ‘splendid emendacity’, the history of music is 
enormously simplified if we do not drag in dates. The trouble 
begins when we find that Philipp Emanuel Bach was writing in 
a well-developed style of his own at the time when his father 
produced the B minor Mass, and that his last set of sonatas was 
produced in the year of Mozart’s Don Giovanni . The present 
symphony was, as far as I can make out, composed in 1780, and is 
thus a year later than Mozart’s epoch-making Paris Symphony. 
In style and form it has not the remotest resemblance either to his 
father’s work or to the styles of Mozart and Haydn. Unlike the 
pianoforte works, it is not really on sonata lines at all, except in 
certain superficial matters. In relation to contemporary music, it 
is in line with Gluck’s overtures, and it shares with them a doubt- 
ful collateral ancestry with the early concerto grosso. Probably 
Sammartini’s style may be among its origins. At all events, we 
have the negative evidence that Haydn was very much annoyed 
with people who saw in his work the influence of Sammartini, who 
he said was ‘a dauber’, and who, as I have pointed out in the 
above-mentioned essay on Gluck, was for that very reason a most 
useful pioneer in the art of splashing the colours of stage scenery 
out of a pail. 

Philipp Emanuel Bach’s Symphony in D has the right of a 
mature work of art to exist on its own merits. Its historical origins 
have needed this amount of explanation, because without them the 
listener is sure to approach the work under preconceptions equally 
historical in appearance, but entirely misleading as to its character. 



CARL PHILIPP EMANUEL BACH. SYMPHONY 


II 


Ex. 2. 



The first movement consists of masses of material alternating 
more or less on concerto grosso lines and connected by an all- 
pervading rhythmic figure. Of the two groups, one is for strings 
and the other for wind. They alternate in a scheme not unlike that 
of Gluck’s Iphigenie en Aulide (without the introduction), and 
have, in virtue of a certain amount of recapitulation, the same 
resemblance to sonata form. The second group contains a definite 
new theme. 



At the end of the movement there is a surprising modulation to 
the dominant of E flat, with a moment of dramatic recitative. 
Philipp Emanuel Bach’s works are often distinguished by some 
such fantastic event, but his dramatic or recitative-like gestures, 
while beautiful in themselves, are precisely what deprives the 
incidents of any importance as an addition to the resources of 
music. Not many years after this symphony, Haydn put the slow 
movement of his greatest pianoforte sonata into the key a semitone 
above that of the first movement; but you will not find Haydn 
explaining away his paradox by saying ‘Then a strange thing hap- 
pened’. He is not telling fairy tales, but is establishing facts which 
permanently enlarge the range of music. Far be it from us to say 
that Philipp Emanuel Bach is mistaken in leaving his harmonic 
miracle in the state of a fairy-tale surprise. The Arabian Nights 
would not be improved, either as a work of art, or as a study in 
anthropology, by any explanation of the Magic Carpet as an intel- 
ligent anticipation of the aeroplane. 

Philipp Emanuel Bach’s little miracle leads to a delightful slow 
tune scored for divided violas and basses doubled by two flutes 




12 CARL PHILIPP EMANUEL BACH. SYMPHONY 

a couple of octaves higher. Bach explicitly leaves this essentially 
modem or Haydnesque orchestral effect without help from the 
continuo. Certainly, nothing better illustrates how inevitable was 
the doom of that excellent institution. It has, in fact, already 
attained the state indicated by Barry Pain’s hero; the inevitable 
consequences are beginning to happen often, and the Bread-and- 
butter-fly has already perished for lack of weak tea with cream 
in it. 

Bach’s delicious tune rouses itself to begin a second part, which 
has the energy to modulate in rising sequences. Such energy is 
dangerous. The original D major breaks through the unguarded 
harmonic frontiers, and the symphony ends with a brilliant little 
jig in binary form. 

Some ten or a dozen years after this symphony Haydn produced 
his ninety-eighth symphony in London and galvanized the gentle- 
man ‘at the pianoforte* into life by a brilliant figure near the end of 
the finale, pencilled into the score, probably during rehearsal. That 
gentleman ought already to have long been obsolete, but Spohr 
found him still in possession in London years after Mendelssohn 
had persuaded the Philharmonic Orchestra to play under the 
guidance of his baton. Thus slowly did we bid farewell to the 
continuo generations after we had lost all idea of what it meant. 


GLUCK 

CCXXVII. OVERTURE TO ‘iPHIG^NIE EN AULIDE*. 

‘ORPHEUS AND EURIDICE*, ACT II 

The symphonies of Philipp Emanuel Bach, rightly understood, 
show that in reforming — or rather, bringing to dramatic life — the 
art of opera, Gluck was a pioneer not merely in that matter, but in 
the whole art of music. In his operas there are two great overtures, 
that to Alceste and that to Iphiginie en Aulide. There are also a few 
great ballets of symphonic dimensions: the chaconne in the Paris 
version of Orfeo, which is expanded from the shorter version in 
Iphiginie en Aulide ; and the big dance of Furies in D minor which 
in Orfeo accompanies the change of scene from the banks of 
Acheron to the scene in the Elysian fields. Gluck’s reforms in- 
volved no attack upon the insatiable appetite of the French for 
ballet music. On the contrary, they are the reforms of a musician 
who was as fond of music as Mozart. In his famous declaration of 
faith, in the dedication of Alceste to the Duke of Tuscany, he 
declares that his object was to ‘ reduce music to its proper function 
of serving the drama, as well-considered colouring serves the pur- 



GLUCK. ‘iPHIGl^NIE* OVERTURE. ‘ORPHEUS*, ACT II 13 
poses of a well-composed picture*. Mozart, on the contrary, more 
than once declared that in opera music should be considered first 
and all the time. 

Both Gluck and Mozart are unintelligible as opera writers until 
we realize that their points of view converge to much the same 
result. Both of them were supreme masters in the art of bullying 
their librettists; in fact, greater masters than Wagner, who was 
sometimes a little shy of bullying himself. It is true that Gluck’s 
first and most important librettist, Calzabigi, flattered himself that 
he did most of the bullying; but he was a simple soul and Gluck 
was, among other things, a clever pamphleteer, with a pen almost 
as venomous as Wagner’s. When we come to take the operas of 
Gluck and of Mozart as they are, we find that with both composers 
the music comes first and last and all the time, and that what both 
composers removed was every convention that produced a conflict 
between musical and dramatic necessity. Gluck and Calzabigi 
effected their reforms as conscious doctrinaires. Mozart, being 
unconscious of a duty towards any art but that of music, began as 
a boy with indulging in fashionable vocal fireworks because he 
enjoyed them; then in his first really great opera, Idomeneo (which 
is powerfully and obviously influenced by Gluck’s Alceste ), he 
began to feel, as we feel, that the cadenzas and formulas were 
intrusive; and he ended, in Cosifan tutte and Die Zauberflote , by 
rationalizing them and satirizing them where he did not abolish 
them altogether. In the meantime he bullied his librettists and . 
kept them in a perpetual state of exasperated astonishment at the 
way in which he took their modest schemes out of their hands and 
turned their puppets into demigods. Calzabigi claimed that he 
furnished Gluck with precise directions as to the rise and fall, as 
well as the rhythms, required for the singing of his verses. Perhaps 
he did; in which case Gluck deserves the highest praise for his tact 
in suffering a fool gladly for the sake of that fool’s grains of com- 
mon sense. We need not suppose that he followed the directions. 

As for Gluck’s own modest avowal that he reduced music to its 
proper function of colouring the drama fitly, the plain truth is that 
Calzabigi enabled Gluck’s music to reign as supremely as Mozart’s 
by the contrary process of reducing the action to something con- 
siderably less than that of a ballet. He had published an edition of 
Metastasio’s works which that poet regarded with special favour; 
and Metastasio is not to blame for the fact that his scheme of opera 
was so fool-proof and gave such universal satisfaction to full-sized 
theatre troupes that not only Handel and Hasse but every con- 
temporary, down to the worst, composed his operas without the 
slightest exercise of the brain. The Metastasio scheme was excel- 
lent common sense. For the conflict between music and action is 



14 GLUCK. ‘iPHIGgNIE’ OVERTURE. ‘ORPHEUS*, ACT II 

the conflict between poetry and action. Even the Elizabethan audi- 
ence, no less than the Elizabethan poet, wished the action to be 
shown in dialogue of business-like efficiency culminating at every 
possible point of repose in a tableau during which poetry might 
display itself. Poetry and action could attain a high temperature 
simultaneously whenever there was any dramatic tension in the 
mere awaiting of a doubtful event. The only trouble with Metastasio 
was that he was a born improvisatore with a fatal facility in orna- 
mentation, and so serviceable a mastery in constructing plots that 
every one of his operas could provide work for a troupe of seven 
actors, and keep the poet himself too busy ever to concentrate 
his poetry on a focus of genuine passion. 

It was all this pleasant work which Calzabigi swept away. For 
two of the three acts of Orfeo there is only one actor, Orpheus 
himself. In the Elysian fields Euridice may be replaced with great 
advantage to the drama by an unnamed chorus-leader. In the 
third act she has the tragically important part of exasperating 
Orpheus into looking upon her face before he has brought her into 
the light of mortal day. Calzabigi is obviously in great difficulty 
as to how to execute this part of the story at all. We know that 
Orpheus has been told by Eros, or Amor (who in the first act has 
a small part as the messenger of the gods), that the condition on 
which he can fetch Euridice from the world of shades is that he 
must not look upon her face until he has brought her into daylight. 
But Amor has not told him that he must not explain this to her; 
and it is clear that, if Orpheus did explain it, not even such a goose 
as Calzabigi’s Euridice would have plagued him into breaking the 
condition. The miracle of Calzabigi’s libretto, and of Gluck’s 
setting of it, is that it nevertheless does result in what is not only the 
first, but remains to this day one of the most intense, of all mature 
music dramas. It is not surprising that the story should from the 
outset have fascinated musicians. The very first opera was Peri’s 
Euridice (1600). It made an immense impression, eclipsed seven 
years later by Monteverdi’s Orfeo . I have not space here to recapi- 
tulate what I have written in an essay on Gluck contributed to The 
Heritage of Music . The history and importance of Gluck’s opera- 
tic reforms are far more complicated than they appear to be from 
the accounts of orthodox historians. What remains for me to do in 
this analysis is to explain why I preface Act II of Orfeo by the 
Overture to Iphigenie en Aulide ; and then to give a short account 
of all the music in question. 

In the famous Preface to Alceste Gluck says that the overture 
ought to give some indication of what is to follow, and, in fact, to 
be a kind of argument of the play. He had not formulated this 
doctrine when he wrote Orfeo , and in any case he had no 



gluck. * iphigenie en aulide’ overture 15 

Wagnerian leitmotiv system by which his overture could definitely 
foreshadow musical themes used in the opera. Moreover, even his 
ripest works lived, like Handel’s, if not more so, by taking in each 
other’s washing; and the last of his great operas, Armide , uses the 
Overture to a probably quite unrevivable work called Telemacco. 
I do not remember whether the Overture to Orfeo has had any 
previous use; what is quite clear is that its sole function is to throw 
into relief the funeral rites of which most of the first act consists. 
Pious commentators quote this or that more or less dignified for- 
mula from it as representing Orpheus’s descent into Hades, or as 
typifying his heroic resolve; but they might as well quote any 
chance passage from the symphonies of Philipp Emanuel Bach. 
The Overture to Iphigenie en Aulide has, indeed, a direct connexion 
with its drama; and, in fact, its last phrase is ended by the rise of 
the curtain upon the entry of the heart-broken Agamemnon, who 
sings its introductory theme : 



Dia - - - ne im - pi - toy - a - blc. 


But we need not scruple to use this heroic overture as a prelude to 
the second act of Orfeo. One hero in dire distress is as good as 
another, if his problem be worthy for the gods to solve. The Over- 
ture to Iphigenie en Aulide shows all the finest features of Gluck’s* 
orchestration, which, by the way, are treated with the utmost 
reverence by Wagner in his version, which we adopt for concert 
use. 

Many misunderstandings as to tempo have resulted in perfor- 
mances which sound like a schoolboy’s literal construe of Euri- 
pides ; in particular the confusion between the French grave and 
the Italian grave . 


Ex. 2. 
Grave . 



There is no evidence that this mighty theme is more than a little 
slower than the semiquaver tutti which follows it, and which would 
be intolerable if spelt out slowly. 

A second group brings gentle pathetic elements into the scheme; 
and the treatment of the horn and oboe, while avoiding direct 
anticipation, decidedly resembles one of the most epoch-making 
passages in all music, Agamemnon’s lines beginning ‘J’entends 
retentir dans mon sein le cri plaintif de la nature’. 



16 GLUCK. ‘IPHIG^NIE’ OVERTURE. ‘ORPHEUS’, ACT II 
Ex. 3. 

Violins. - “■ 



Wagner most ingeniously and reverently ends the overture for 
concert performance by resuming the introduction (Ex. 1) exactly 
as Agamemnon takes it up on the rise of the curtain. Not for 
worlds would I part with the slight imperfection of Wagner’s end, 
which presents with priceless subtlety the evidence that Wagner 
cannot, with all his reverence, accommodate himself to the classical 
time-scale. Every naive listener, and all the non-Wagnerians of past 
generations, have felt that this end is at least four bars too long. 
But if you try to reduce it, you will find that the problem is insoluble, 
which may be said of every adaptation of one composer’s work by 
another, and of most efforts of a composer to adapt his own work. 

At all events, there is nothing in the Overture to Iphigenie en 
Aulide which prevents it from being an admirable concert-room 
introduction to the second act of Orfeo. Wagner’s end can be 
followed with excellent effect by the awe-inspiring sounds upon 
which the curtain rises on the banks of Acheron. According to the 
rather vague stage directions, the Furies and other shades are 
moving in some kind of dance, though the music is exceedingly 
slow, when the sound of Orpheus’s lyre alarms them. The 
Furies give out the first five lines of their chorus, asking who this 
audacious mortal can be. Except for the places where they inter- 
rupt Orpheus with cries of No, their rhythm is exactly that of ‘God 
save the King’, and in the style of their melody, their harmony, 
and their monotone, Gluck has achieved an astonishing majesty 
and consistency. Their highest indignation is expressed by singing 
in octaves or unison. One of the most wonderful features is the 
representation of Cerberus. A more dangerous occasion for bathos 
could hardly be conceived, but I will venture to assert that nobody has 
ever dreamt of thinking the threats of Gluck’s Cerberus grotesque. 

I prefer to leave without quotation the series of passages in 
which the pleadings of Orpheus alternate with the lessening oppo- 
sition of the Furies. One incident must be illustrated from the 
passage which the Furies interrupt with cries of No. In the first 
fine careless rapture of Rameau’s discovery of the fundamental 
bass, Rousseau poured out pages of enthusiastic theoretic nonsense 
about the enharmonic conflict between B natural and C flat as the 
Furies become more menacing; which nonsense Berlioz afterwards 
annihilated in his best and most derisive vein, while far tran- 
scending Rousseau’s highest efforts in deifying Gluck. 


*7 


GLUCK. ‘ORPHEUS AND EURIDICE*, ACT II 

Ex. 4. 



But I have not met with a commentator who has noticed what 
seems to me the crucial point in the conflict between Orpheus and 
the Furies, and which is the more remarkable because a similar 
point happens in the Andante of Beethoven’s G major Concerto, 
a movement which Liszt compared not inaptly to Orpheus taming 
wild beasts. At the last No> the Furies, who have been menacing 
Orpheus with an ominous rise of pitch at each step of his melody, 
melt into harmony. 

Ex. 5. 

No! No! No! No! 

Further musical illustrations do not seem necessary. Berlioz, 
in his generous jealousy for Gluck, protested indignantly at the use 
of trombones elsewhere than to support the No of the Furies. It 
is true that the trombones do not appear in Gluck’s autograph, but 
there is cogent evidence that the extant trombone parts were used 
under Gluck’s direction; and the fact is that a more shocking mess 
than a Gluck autograph, even if it begins like a fair copy, is hardly 
to be found in the history of paleography. 

The long ballet that covers the change of scene to the Elysian 
fields is one of Gluck’s finest instrumental movements, and can be 
followed without the aid of quotations. So also can the exquisite 
Elysian ballets upon which the curtain rises again. The flute solo 
which serves as a kind of trio to the first air de ballet gives that 
Undine of instruments such a soul as only Bach had hitherto 
granted to it. But perhaps the climax of all Gluck’s inspirations 
is the first Elysian chorus, the tune of which is according to some 
directions assigned to Euridice — and no wonder, as the actress of 
that thankless part has otherwise nothing to sing until the third 
act. There are many greater composers than Gluck, but if, like 
Matthew Arnold, we wish to keep in our memories certain unsur- 
passable lines as ‘touchstones for poetry’ or for melody, I do not 
know any touchstone more capable of eclipsing lesser melodies 
than the tune of the first Elysian chorus. 





Fu - rie, lar - vc, om - - bre sde-gno - se. 

J 



VI 


c 



l8 GLUCK. ‘ORPHEUS AND EURIDICE\ ACT II 

Its emotional effect is quite extraordinary; and one of the most 
experienced conductors of opera whom I know frankly confesses 
that a performance of Gluck’s Orfeo is, in spite of an apparatus 
which is primitive in every technical and dramatic direction, more 
exhausting to him from the concentration of its emotional power 
than a whole cycle of Wagner’s Ring . 

The Happy Shades disperse, and Orpheus enters upon the 
scene alone. The wonderful arioso during which he gazes around 
might well deserve another quotation, but defies reduction to 
much less than the full score, which is remarkably elaborate as 
judged by the standards of any period. In the original Italian 
version it was still more elaborate, and there is no doubt that the 
Parisian version has eliminated unnecessary and disturbing fea- 
tures of the scoring. 

The history of the Paris version of Orfeo is very sad, and its 
consequences threaten to be sadder still. Every piece of music that 
Gluck added for Paris, and every alteration in the essential musical 
rhetoric, was an incalculable improvement. But it was all vitiated 
by the fact that the part of Orpheus was transposed from contralto 
to tenor. This involved dislocating the whole key-system of the 
scene with the Furies; and the dislocation is one of the most ghastly 
pieces of mangling that could be conceived. How the eminent 
scholars who brought out the great Pelletan-Damcke idition de 
luxe of Gluck’s chief works could bring themselves to put this for- 
ward as the definitive form of Or fie et Euridice is one of the 
mysteries which only patriotism — or, rather, nationalism at its 
worst — can explain. Many people see the obvious objections to 
representing Orpheus by a woman. Gluck’s Orpheus was never 
represented by a woman. The great but unfortunate artists who 
sung him with a contralto voice represent a disgrace to civilization 
which only the most hateful of racial prejudices could have the 
criminal audacity to revive. Those who can remember the per- 
formances of Orfeo by the sisters Ravogli in the early ’nineties will 
reject with indignant contempt the idea that there was anything 
half so unnatural to Gluck’s music, or to nature itself, in such a 
performance as the ruining of the whole composition which he had 
the weakness to accept while adapting, and in many respects im- 
proving, his work for Paris. The version performed in London 
somewhere about 1890 by the sisters Ravogli was ideally in the 
spirit of Gluck in every respect that I can recall, except in the fact 
that the bravura aria with which Gluck ends the first act in defiance 
of all his own propaganda, was retained. I cannot verify the date 
of this wonderful performance, though I can remember most of 
the details and can certify that the version was as it stands in my 
own excellent Peters full score, which was given to me in February 



GLUCK. ‘ORPHEUS AND EURIDICE’, ACT II 19 

1890. The sisters Ravogli were duly commemorated in early editions 
of Grove's Dictionary. My up-to-date one has removed them to make 
room for names (not necessarily in the same part of the alphabet) 
which I might not feel inclined to consider equally worthy. 

The current English version seems to me to deal as well as can 
be expected with the tangle of compromises that have been forced 
on Gluck by translation from Calzabigi’s Italian into I forget 
whose French, and re-translation from the French back into some- 
thing which has to differ from Calzabigi where Gluck has altered 
the music. Nobody should blame our singers for the common con- 
sensus of Gluck’s music and four modern languages to pronounce 
the name of Euridice as wrongly as we pronounce Trafalgar. 
But piety towards the French text seems to me rather superfluous. 
We have our own provincial standard of poetic diction, and this dis- 
qualifies us from appreciating the Greek simplicity of Racine; but I 
do not think that the French translator, writing under Gluck’s own 
eye, achieved Racine’s plainness when he made the Elysian spirits 
promise that Euridice was to return avec de nouveaux attraits\ 
Racine literally translated may seem to us to fall into flat prose, but 
I should be surprised to learn that he was capable of so misinter- 
preting the condition in which Orpheus would prefer to rejoin 
Euridice. Calzabigi was no such fool. What he said was Euridice 
gid riprende la primiera sua beltd. 

The latest, and almost the most infuriating, stage in the history 
of Orfeo is that editions are now being published of the pure ' 
Italian text minus all the substantial improvements with which 
Gluck made the chief roles worthy of the genius of the sisters 
Ravogli. Before long it will become difficult to get an edition of 
Orfeo that combines the essentials of Gluck’s final thoughts with 
the integrity of his original plans. I have no use for a purism and 
a scholarship which refuses to make the compromises necessary 
for such an end. 


MOZART 

CCXXVIII. SYMPHONY IN D MAJOR (PARIS SYMPHONY). 

(kochel’s catalogue, no. 297) 
i Allegro assai. 2 Andantino. 3 Allegro . 

Mozart’s Paris Symphony is famous as a work of great historical 
importance. While I am writing this analysis an eminent colleague 
is stimulating the musical intelligentsia of Harvard by inveighing 
against reverence for the classics; which in some forms does, in- 
deed, as he says, clutter up the minds of people whose opinions 
might otherwise become independent and valuable. An ap- 
parent reverence for the classics is as likely as any other form of 



20 MOZART. K. 297 

snobbishness to mask an inactive mind which is too vacant to be 
charged with being cluttered up with anything at all. Accordingly, it 
cannot be said to do any harm so far as it goes, since it goes nowhere. 
But I know nothing that can clutter up the mind more ruinously 
than a preoccupation with the squalid conditions to which all 
artists, great and small, accommodated themselves with more or 
less difficulty or complacence in periods that have become classical. 
Some ingenuity may be wasted in imputing psychological thought 
to Shakespeare when he is producing inconsistencies which are 
more completely explained as crass accommodation to inartistic 
conditions, or even as carelessness. The more we know of such 
things the better, so long as we realize that a man of genius cannot 
suppress his real self, however much he may try; unless, indeed, 
he stops working altogether. Under mundane conditions, art may 
attain three heavens: one, the highest, which is above all conflicts; 
the second, where an artist enjoys accommodating himself to his 
world and is above consciousness of his irony; and the lowest, but 
still a heaven, in which he writes with his tongue in his cheek. Below 
this lies hell, into which Mozart did not descend even in his church 
music. Of purgatory I have no official information. We Protes- 
tants have our limitations. 

Mozart’s trials in Paris may have brought him down to the third 
heaven, but I see no evidence that he did not enjoy the concessions 
to Parisian taste which make the features of the Paris Symphony 
almost amount to a code of etiquette. He took such advantage of 
these concessions that he enlarged the Parisians’ ideas of music 
almost as extensively and quite as deeply as Gluck had enlarged 
their ideas of music drama. He writes to his father on 1 1 Septem- 
ber 1778, that his earlier symphonies wouldn’t do there: ‘Our 
taste in Germany is for length, but really it is better to be short and 
sweet/ This was apropos of the advice that the Parisians preferred 
symphonies to have no ‘repeats’ ; and, accordingly, the Paris Sym- 
phony is the first important sonata-work before Beethoven in 
which there are no long repeats. Yet it is longer than any of Mozart’s 
earlier symphonies. For Parisian audiences needed repetitions pf 
phrases on the spot as much as the audiences of any mob orator. 
To this day French composers tend, like Couperin and brilliant and 
colourful Russians like Rimsky-Korsakov, to say each sentence twice 
over: sometimes in other words, like the parallelism of Hebrew 
poetry, but more often in the same words. 

Another instruction which amused Mozart very much was that 
every symphony should begin with a grand coup d'archet. Mozart 
obeyed instructions, and, before the symphony was played, was 
well satisfied that it would please the few French people whose 
opinion was worth anything. As for stupid people, he saw no 



21 


MOZART. K. 297 

great misfortune if it didn’t please them; but he had hopes that 
even donkeys would find something to like in it, and above all, he 
had not muffed the premier coup d'archet. He didn’t see why the 
dolts made such a ridiculous fuss about an orchestra that just 
begins all together as in other places. A friend told him that an 
excellent musician, Dal Abaco, was asked whether he had been at 
Paris and heard a Concert Spirituel , and what did he think about 
the premier coup d'archet ? ‘Did you hear it?’ ‘Yes,’ said Dal 
Abaco, ‘I heard the first stroke and the last; and the last pleased 
me better.’ Well, here is what Mozart made of the premier coup 
d'archet and of the need of mob-orator repetition — 




* f*- r r &c - 

As for the mob-orator repetition, it was as much a need to the 
twenty-year old Mozart at this stage of his development as it was 
to any contemporary audience. But you will notice: first, that the 
coup d'archet has found its organic and thematic answer in the 
rhythm of the wind instruments, whose every note is so significant 
that the second flute is an individual who prepares for the entry 
of the first flute. Moreover, the repetition expands. Mozart, at 
the age of twenty, cannot make a concession to the stupidest 
Parisian conventions without producing musical forms decidedly 
more advanced than anything you can find in the phrasing of 
Schumann’s Quintet, with all its wealth of epigram; and so it is 
through the whole symphony. There is not a note without its 
permanent value, and Mozart is able to use the stupid Parisian 
conventions as a means of educating the Parisians out of them. 
He was instructed that finales ought also to begin with a coup 
d’archet in unison, instead of which he began his finale with eight 
bars piano for the violins alone. As he expected, he heard an 
excited ‘Hush, hush* from the audience at the beginning. Then 
came the forte, and at the same moment a burst of applause; 
whereupon Mozart, who had been in deadly anxiety at the horrors 
of the rehearsal, went with feelings of great relief to the Palais 
Royal and ate an excellent ice. 

I need not quote many of the twenty or thirty other themes with 
which the symphony is comfortably packed. 


£ 


Two octaves deep. 


As far as I can see, Ex. 2 must be the theme of which Mozart 
writes: ‘In the middle of the first allegro was a passage which I 
knew could not fail to please. All the audience were charmed by 
it, and there was great applause, but as I knew when I wrote it 
what an effect it would make, I brought it round an extra time at 
the end of the movement, with the same result, and so got my 
applause da capo.’ 




MOZART. K. 297 23 

Monsieur Le Gros, the director of the Concerts Spirituels , de- 
clared that this was the best symphony he had ever heard, which, as 
Parry remarks, is not be to wondered at, considering that nothing 
like it had ever been written before ; but he did not like the andante, 
and told Mozart that it modulated too much and was too long. 
‘This impression*, said Mozart /arose merely because the audience 
had forgotten to clap so noisily and so persistently as in the first 
movement and finale. The andante pleased me and all connoisseurs 
and amateurs, and most of the audience, best of all. It’s the exact 
opposite of what Le Gros says. It’s quite natural — and short; but 
in order to please him and, as he believes, many others, I have 
made another andante. Each is right in its way, because each has 
its own character, but I like the second still better.* The second 
andante is, accordingly, the one that survives in the Paris Sym- 
phony. Mozart took unusual pains over the second andante, revising 
it so much that he had to clear it up by writing an extra fair copy. 
Le Gros and his like cannot have had the slightest conception of 
the meaning of Mozart’s alterations; but they were doubtless 
flattered by the fact that he had written a new movement to please 
them. Here is its main theme — 


>zs . r 


and here is the beginning of the finale which surprised the Parisians 
out of their dependence on the premier coup d'archet — 



Sh-sh • • • Qu’est-ce que c’est que (a? 



Tf TT 

Trumpets. Aha I 


Loud and pro- 
longed applause. 


Grateful as the Reid Orchestra is for all evidences of public recog- 
nition, we are glad that the music-lovers of Edinburgh are not so 
immediate in the expression of their opinions as the public of the 
Concerts Spirituels in 1778. 


24 MOZART. K. 297 

Mozart was afraid of no one; and he took the opportunity of 
beginning his second group with a fugato which must have im- 
pressed the Parisians as very learned. For the orchestra it has a 
characteristic advantage: like the rhythmic figure of the initial 
coup d'archet (Ex. 1), it gives opportunity for every member of the 
wind band to assert himself as an individual, the second player 
answering or anticipating the first. 


Ex. 5. 




However much the historian’s mind may be cluttered up by his 
knowledge of the philistinisms with which Mozart dealt so diplo- 
matically in the Paris of 1778, there is no denying that, while these 
philistinisms may have prevented Mozart at the age of twenty-two 
from offering the Parisians work that might anticipate the depth of 
his later thoughts, he thoroughly enjoyed enlarging — or, rather, 
revolutionizing — their notions of craftsmanship by introducing to 
them all, and rather more than all, the refinements of orchestral 
technique developed at Mannheim, such as the crescendo, the 
diminuendo, and other coups d'archet than the first and last. 


MOZART 

CCXXIX. ARIA, FROM ‘DIE ENTFUHRUNG’, ‘MARTERN 
ALLER ARTEN’ 

Mozart and Gluck arc the two great reformers of opera, and the 
way in which Mozart reformed it is a most disconcerting lesson for 
Earnest Persons. He reformed it because, though, as all Italians 
averred throughout most of the nineteenth century, his genius was 
melancholy, he was an inveterate comedian and sinfully fond of 
music. The first opera which brought about the reform was Die 
Entfuhrung aus dem SeraiL The librettist of that work meant to 
produce a harmless Singspiel with some Turkish local colour, but 
Mozart ran away with both ends of the project. The exploit of the 



MOZART. ARIA FROM ‘DIE ENTFUHRUNG’ 25 

young Englishman who rescued his wife from the Turk’s harem 
had its heroic side, and the poor librettist, Bretzner, found to his 
disgust that Mozart insisted on imposing the noblest sentiments 
upon Belmont and Constanze. On the other hand, Mozart had a 
shocking facility of his own in rhymes for patter-singing, the 
Rabelaisian tendencies of which he could, under dire necessity, 
keep within bounds producible before a public less squeamish 
than ours. Hence, the part of Osmin, the keeper of the Turk’s 
harem, also became a thing mainly of Mozart’s creation. 

The tremendous emotional concentration of Gluck’s music 
disguises from us what is self-evident in what we must call Calza- 
bigi’s plots, that his reform of opera was ascetic to the verge of 
annihilation. Mozart’s serious opera, Idomeneo , is influenced by 
Gluck’s sublimity and emotional power in immediate juxtaposi- 
tion to luxuries which exaggerate much of what Gluck sternly 
rejected. This, again, is disguised by the fact that Mozart is an 
immeasurably greater musician than any previous opera writer, 
so that it is difficult to say that his most reactionary procedures 
have not some element of progress in them. In Die Entfiihrung , 
where the dialogue is spoken and the mixture of serious heroics 
and farcical comedy is extreme, we find ourselves able to acquiesce 
in anything Mozart is kind enough to give us. His music is so 
inveterately dramatic that it was bound to reform the music drama, 
even if it flew in the face of every principle that Gluck held sacred. 
Any attempt to rationalize the mise en scene of Constanze’s great 
aria, ‘Martern aller Arten’, is doomed to failure. Mozart is seized 
with a violent combined attack of character-portrayal and music. 
The result is a quadruple concerto for flute, oboe, violin, and 
violoncello which serves as background and framework to a heroic 
coloratura aria displaying the character of Constanze, the noble 
English wife imprisoned in the house of a not less noble Turk and 
defying him when he threatens to insist upon his rights of conquest. 
Away with all minor problems of what the poor man is to do with 
his hands or his gestures while the heroic woman presumably 
walks round the room or poses as a statue until the ritornello of the 
quadruple concerto is over! Probably the best thing is to pose the 
whole group as a waxwork and listen to the music. Immense as 
this aria is, and often as it is cut even in concert performances, 
the autograph shows that Mozart had already cut from it one 
passage of 12 bars and another of 15. His own account when he 
later apologized for the aria was that he simply could not stop 
when he was writing it; and why should he? There are times 
when a dramatic situation is static enough for good music to be 
more important. The present situation is that the excellent Bassa 
Selim, who turns out in the end to be a perfect gentleman, is 



26 MOZART. ARIA FROM ‘DIE ENTFUHRUNG* 

pointing out to Constanze that she is absolutely in his power, that 
his patience is not illimitable, that he is within his rights, and that 
torments of all kinds await those who disobey him. To which she 
replies in a noble tirade — but not just yet. The six themes of the 
quadruple concerto must be exposed and concluded after a cadenza 
before Constanze can begin. Here are the six themes, which I 
designate by the sentiments which they ‘register’: 

Ex. i. 




MOZART. ARIA FROM ‘DIE ENTFUHRUNG’ 27 


Ex. 6 . The Last Word (Whose ?). 



■F -F 


Not only does Constanze work these six themes, cadenza and all, 
into concerto form, but, finding Bassa Selim unresponsive, she 
interpolates an independent movement in double quick time, 
demanding (in vain) that he should lose his temper, and triumph- 
ing in the hope of final release by death. This substitute for a 
development-section makes the recapitulation of the concerto 
stand out in beautiful relief, and furnishes a noble work with a 
grand close on ‘der ... Tod T 


CCXXX. ARIA FROM *LA CLEMENZA DI TITO* 

The corno di bassetto, a favourite instrument of Mozart’s, is diffi- 
cult to procure nowadays; and the ordinary alto clarinet of modern 
commerce has, with the sublime contemptuousness of Big Business, 
neglected to supply it with the bottom notes required by Mozart, 
who wrote the only music worth playing upon it. For this reason . 
the only one of the great arias in La Clemenza di Tito that is heard 
in the concert-room is the weakest: the big aria by Sesto, ‘Deh per 
questo istante solo’. Another aria in the role of Sesto, ‘Parto, ma 
tu ben mio*, has a clarinet obbligato, which, in relation to its pitch, 
needs the same extra keys as the corno di bassetto in passages 
difficult to arrange without mutilation. The history of this special 
instrument is unknown. There is an unfinished clarinet quintet, 
the sketch of which breaks off soon after Mozart has betrayed a 
manifest absence of mind as to the downward compass of the 
instrument. The plan of this work, as revealed by its opening, 
became gloriously realized in the Clarinet Quintet which we 
possess. 

There cannot have been any oversight about the clarinet part in 
Sesto’s aria ‘Parto’, because La Clemenza di Tito was written for 
and performed at the wedding of the Emperor of Austria to an 
Italian princess, who graciously remarked that the work was una 
porcheria tedesca. Mozart had, indeed, patched his German 
piggery as quickly as possible in the intervals of composing and 
producing Die Zauberflote , and at inns where the^coach stopped to 


28 MOZART. ARIA FROM *LA CLEMENZA DI TITO’ 

bait in journeys between Vienna and Prague. Neither the libretto, 
which is Metastasio at his stiffest and stuffiest, nor the occasion 
was inspiring; and, except for a few bright spots, such as the 
overture and the aria 'Non piii di fiori’, the score of Clemenza di 
Tito as a whole gives one a nightmare impression of the Zauberflote 
having dried up and gone wrong. Among the bright spots I insist 
upon including a passage from the first finale which Professor Dent 
quotes in his standard work on Mozart’s operas with averted eye, 
as anticipating the style of Dykes, the author of our treacliest 
Victorian church music. I respectfully submit that, on the con- 
trary, the end of the first act of Tito is theatre music of the highest 
quality ; and that Mozart is not to blame if the appropriate lugubrious 
chords of the chorus behind the stage inspired the Reverend John 
Bacchus Dykes to reproduce it in church before the altar. I have 
my own weakness for treacle in season. 

The greatest thing in Tito is, unquestionably, Vitellia’s aria, 
'Non piu di fiori\ In comparison, the better-known aria, ‘Deh per 
questo istante solo’, is not only a pale substitute, but almost a 
caricature. Just compare with Vitellia’s noble second theme 
(Ex. 3) the tune, almost identical in rhythm, to which Sesto asks: 
‘Can a heart endure such suffering and not die of grief?* 


Ex. 1. 



Tan - to affan-no sof-freun co-re, ne si mo - re di do - lor? 


Obviously it can, with a tune like that! Of course, Sesto must 
punctuate his singing with sobs, and the repeated chords must be 
played appropriately, and not so as to suggest the syllables ‘turn- 
turn’ ; but it would be difficult to find a more extreme illustration 
of the efficient perfunctory elasticity of classical convention. But 
in ‘Non piu di fiori’ Mozart rises to the occasion as if stung, like 
Vitellia herself, by the words of Servilia, the singer of a small part, 
who has just told Vitellia in a graceful minuet: ‘If you can’t do 
better for him than tears, all your weeping won’t help. This use- 
less pity which you feel seems to me mighty like cruelty.’ Exit 
Servilia, while the orchestra finishes her minuet with a couple of 
exquisite curtsies. Vitellia is now alone with her thoughts. During 
the first act of the opera she has been keeping her lover Sesto at a 
distance, until he has executed his promise to her that he will 
assassinate the Emperor. As soon as she has sent Sesto about his 
business, she learns that the Emperor has dismissed her rival 
Berenice, and has sent for her to make her his Empress. She can- 
not recall Sesto, and the Capitol is fired to the strains which inspire 
Dykes. 


MOZART. ARIA FROM *LA CLEMENZA DI TITO* 2g 

The second act is concerned with the Emperor's clemency ; and 
Vitellia’s great aria occupies the penultimate scene. In recitative 
she meditates as follows: 

Now is the moment, O Vitellia, to test thy firmness. Hast thou the 
courage to see thy faithful Sextus lifeless ? 

Sextus, who loves thee more than his life, who became a criminal only 
through thy fault, who obeyed and adored thee through all thy cruelty 
and injustice, who has been so faithful to thee in the presence of death? 
And would’st thou now, well knowing what thou dost, calmly go to the 
bride-chamber of Augustus? Alas, I shall see Sextus before my eyes. 
I shall fear lest the very stones and winds betray my secret to Titus. 
{With resolution ) I will fall at his feet and reveal everything. My crime 
shall at least diminish the crime of Sextus, if it cannot excuse it. Fare- 
well, all hopes of empire and espousals. 


Ex. a. RONDO 


Larghetto. 



No more shall Hymen come down to weave beautiful chains of 
flowers. I see Death approaching me through myriad cruel torments. 

{Allegro) Me miserable, what am I ? Surely they who behold my 
sorrow would have mercy upon me. 


Ex. 3 . 



Chi vc - des - se il mio do - lo - re, pur a - vria di me pie - t&. 


In the coda of the aria, this last noble theme is matched by an 
equally distinguished passage, where the voice and the corno di 
bassetto sing together in double counterpoint. 

Ex. 4. 



with Flute 8 va. 




30 MOZART. ARIA FROM ‘LA CLEMENZA DI TITO* 

Students of instrumentation should note that the corno di bassetto 
makes an admirable bass to the voice, but that when the parts are 
reversed, so that the voice becomes bass, the violins must support 
it; and that, moreover, the violins will make a bass to the corno 
di bassetto even when they go above it at the notes marked with 
an asterisk. 


MOZART 

CCXXXI. OVERTURE TO ‘COS* FAN TUTTE* 

Not only the wit of Da Ponte, but the irony of Mozart’s music in 
Cosi fan tutte baffled their contemporaries and the literal-minded 
romanticists of the nineteenth century. In my young days the 
orthodox view of Cosi fan tutte was that it showed a reactionary 
falling-off into operatic conventionality after the epoch-making 
advances that Mozart had achieved in Figaro and Don Giovanni . 
We had to wait for Richard Strauss to point out to us early in the 
present century that Cosi fan tutte is a masterpiece of parody and 
irony. The story is ridiculously improbable, and the improbability 
becomes infuriating if, as has been averred, it was founded on fact. 
The cynical old bachelor has persuaded the two heroes to test the 
fidelity of the two heroines by pretending to go off to the wars, 
and returning, fantastically disguised, in order to make love to 
each other’s lady. After violent protestations and sham suicides, 
the disguised lovers are accepted; but the wedding-breakfast is 
interrupted by their sudden return as themselves. On such alti- 
tudes of farce emotions are extremely lofty, but their boiling-point 
is low, and the wedding-breakfast is quickly redistributed in the 
right way. The first requirement of the highest order of parody 
is that it should take its opportunity of being obviously more 
beautiful than the things parodied. The things parodied are 
severely limited by irrelevant realities. As Stevenson’s young poet 
of the Cream Tarts discovered, when ‘opulent orotunda’ is ob- 
viously what you want to say, some nonsense about sense inter- 
feres. From any such nonsense Cosi fan tutte is free, and takes its 
opportunity to become a miracle of irresponsible beauty unlike 
anything else in Mozart. No other opera has such a wealth of 
ensemble-music, and such a variety of forms. All the emotions 
are, ex hypothesis either superficial or feigned. Mr. Christie, the 
Maecenas of Glyndebourne, has hit the mark in describing Cosi 
fan tutte as a dream. 

The Overture is one of the funniest things Mozart ever wrote. 
Its themes, alternating their whisperings and chatterings with a 
hilarious kind of Hallelujah Chorus, tell us in Mozart’s language 



MOZART. OVERTURE TO *0081 FAN TUTTE' 31 

that the persons of this dream are, humanly speaking, rubbish, 
but far too harmless for any limbo less charitable than the eternal 
laughter of Mozart. The only theme I need quote is the solemn 
motto of the introduction and of the whole opera: ‘That’s what 
all girls do.’ 



Co - si fan tut - tel Co • si fan 



tut - - tc 1 


BEETHOVEN 

CCXXXII. FIFTEEN VARIATIONS AND FUGUE, 
‘PROMETHEUS’, OP. 35 

Although in analysing the finale of Beethoven’s Eroica Symphony 
I go so far as to deprecate thinking of the remarkable set of varia- 
tions on the same material written by Beethoven a few years earlier, 

I believe that that finale cannot fail to gain in impressiveness if the 
earlier work has been duly appreciated during the same concert. 

The Variations (Op. 35) are a very complete and perfect work, 
eminently characteristic of the pianoforte and marking an epoch ( 
in the history of the variation form. The finale of the Eroica is the 
finale of a symphony, and, while it contains the principal ideas of 
these earlier Variations and Fugue transformed into an orchestral 
style unusually rich and free even for Beethoven, it leaves an 
immense amount unsaid for which the Pianoforte Variations have 
abundant scope. The Variations are in the position of the epic 
poem with its almost unlimited room for description and rhetoric. 
The finale of the symphony has all the heightened and direct effect 
of drama, with all its stern practical and aesthetic necessity for 
compression and immediate action. The difference between the 
two works is thus no mere question of Beethoven’s progress in 
musical thought. For instance, it is right for the symphonic finale 
to begin abruptly with an outburst in a foreign key; but it is right 
for the Pianoforte Variations as an independent work to begin 
simply with an introductory tonic chord, which, by the way, is in 
the same position as the first chords of the whole Eroica Sym- 
phony. 

Then Beethoven proceeds to build up his work as in the sym- 
phonic finale, with the grotesque bare bass of his theme. Speaking 


32 BEETHOVEN. ‘VARIATIONS*, OP. 35 

strictly from the point of view of the work in itself, this absurd 
bass is the real theme, and Beethoven might perhaps have called 
it so if the fully harmonized tune had not existed years before in 
the Prometheus Ballet. On the other hand, much of the point of 
this bare bass lies in its extreme grotesqueness, which in the 
second part amounts to a sheer practical joke; and even the 
counterpoints with which it is gradually clothed in the three sec- 
tions marked & 2, k 3, k 4 (i.e. duet, trio, and quartet) are all of the 
nature of formulas; so that there is no doubt that when the tune 
sails in on the top with a dance-rhythm accompaniment it is what 
we have been waiting for all the time. You will find this Tune 
(which I spell with a capital T) with its bass in Ex. 6 of my analysis 
of the Eroica Symphony. 

Now we come to the variations officially recognized as such. 

Var . 1 ornaments the Tune with brilliant arabesques. 

Var. II retains much of the outline of the Tune in still more 
brilliant passage-writing. 

Var. Ill . In Variation III only the harmonic scheme is pre- 
served, and the bold pianoforte writing remarkably anticipates the 
key-board technique of a later generation of pianists with whose 
tendencies Beethoven was by no means wholly in sympathy. On 
the strength of this Variation a very plausible case might be made 
for Beethoven’s claim to have invented some of the features of the 
virtuoso technique of Thalberg and even of Henselt. 

Var. IV is a running £tude for the left hand, very quiet. 

Var. V is a graceful cantabile in the lightest open part-writing, 
with much of the melody in the bass as well as on the surface. 

Var. VI. In Variation VI the Bass is abandoned and the Tune 
is ingeniously put into C minor by mere alteration of the harmonies 
without transposition. Just in the last two bars the harmony is 
screwed back again into the tonic so as to lead to 

Var. VII , which is mostly in two-part canon in the octave. Like 
all Beethoven’s canons, this is a humorously crude performance; 
but let no one be misled by some otherwise excellent authorities to 
suppose that it expresses nothing but an inability to handle the 
technique of such forms. It expresses the spirit of caricature in 
which an archaic form may most effectively enter into a work which 
is eminently brilliant and full of allusive wit. For this very reason 
there is now a call for a deeper note; and 

Var. VIII begins quietly with one of the great romantic 
moments in this work. 

Var. IX reacts from this in very brilliant and sonorous piano- 
forte style which can only fill one with astonishment that con- 
temporaries should have thought even Weber, to say nothing of 
Hummel, Beethoven’s equal in the treatment of the instrument. 



BEETHOVEN. ‘VARIATIONS’, OP. 35 33 

Var . X is brilliant in another way, entirely pianissimo until the 
second part, where a harmonic stroke of genius lifts the whole 
conception to a higher intellectual plane, or rather shows the real 
nature of Beethoven’s interest in brilliant technique. Throughout 
these variations, as also in the Eroica finale, you may expect the 
beginning of the second part of the theme to be the place in 
which strange things may happen ; and what happens here is that 
the pitch is suddenly screwed up from B flat to C flat. 

Var . XI is graceful and playful with an entirely new melody (by 
the way, the original Tune has hardly been recognizable since Var. 
VI, except in very faint outline in Var. X; while the Bass has long 
refrained from obtruding itself at all). The second part of this 
nth Variation again contains a beautiful harmonic feature, though 
not one which radically changes the key. 

Var . XII is another interesting pianoforte 6tude in humorous 
dialogue between the right hand and the left; while Var. XIII 
brings the bravura aspect of the work to a very original climax with 
a device extremely troublesome to the player (so that, like almost 
all Beethoven’s brilliancies, it has never been imitated since) but 
hilariously effective. 

The natural reaction from this is the sad sobriety of Var. XIV, 
in the minor mode. The long-lost Bass does duty as a tune with 
a new melody below it. In the repetitions the Bass resumes its 
proper position below, and another new melody is given above. 
When this variation has reached its despondent end, a melodious 
run leads back to the major mode, and Var. XV begins in extremely 
slow 6/8 time with a highly ornamental version of the Tune. 
Though nothing has been added to the framework, the Tune 
has become so enormously expanded by the slow time that I give 
a musical illustration of it below the original Tune to show the 
relation between them: 



The whole theme, stated in this style with repeats, lasts fully a 
couple of minutes and fills several pages. The ornamentation 
becomes more and more brilliant, especially in that musical blank 
cheque, the second part of the theme ; until some listeners might 
almost think it an open question whether Beethovep is taking quite 

VI D 


34 BEETHOVEN. *VARI ATIONS*, OP. 35 

seriously these great ladies whom he is portraying with such a bold 
technique. But Beethoven is too great a portrait painter to be 
unsympathetic even in satire; and there is no fundamental change 
of tone when in the coda he reverts harmonically to the plaintive 
rewriting of his Tune in C minor (as in Var. VI) while transforming 
it rhythmically to the following altogether new structure: 


Ex. a. 



where you will see he gets the whole of the first part of the theme 
easily into the space of two bars. He hesitates for a long time on 
the dominant of this new key and strikes a solemn dramatic pause 
there. 

Then the fugue begins quietly. Although it is on quite different 
lines from the fugue-passages in the Eroica finale, it foreshadows 
many salient features in the later work, being of course founded on 
the first four notes of the Bass which in later developments it turns 
upside down. 

Ex. 3. 


Fugue subject. 



It also brings, as in the Eroica finale, the first phrase of the Tune 
into effective combination, reversing its accents in just the same 
surprising way as in the later work: 



But, being exclusively a fugue, it has no room for those glorious 
episodes and complete variations which constitute half the bulk 
of the Eroica finale. However, it veiy clearly embodies the most 
glorious part of the whole scheme, in the culminating pause on 
the dominant followed by the final return of the Tune in slower 
time (andante) with its repeats varied and crowned with a last 
triumphant complete variation. After this the pianoforte work has 
little more to say. It concludes with the first notes of the Tune 
repeated in more and more rapid versions, like the last rotations 
of a spinning top. That is the way this great set of Pianoforte 
Variations ought to end. The Eroica finale uses the variation form 




BEETHOVEN. * V AR I ATI ONS*, OP. 35 35 

only as one of many resources, and perhaps we shall enjoy its 
wonderful coda all the better for having now heard a work on the 
same material, where a simpler wind-up was right. 


MfiHUL 

CCXXXIII. OVERTURE, * LE JEUNE SAGE ET LE VIEUX FOU* 

M6hul is one of those composers whose fate is to be overrated by 
historians and underrated by musicians who approach his music 
keyed up to its historical reputation. Yet, music and all, he is one 
of the most sympathetic characters in the quiet backwaters of art. 
It is only his music which is a quiet backwater. His life extended 
from 1763 to 1817, and the one-act opera of which we arc dis- 
cussing the overture, was produced in the Year of Terror during 
which I forget what famous person’s aunt continued her Tuesday 
afternoon receptions without interruption. 

I do not know when I shall have leisure to write an essay on 
M£hul, for I see no opportunity of producing his most important 
works. He has been credited with powerful genius and an inex- 
haustible vein of melody. These compliments are so manifestly 
falsified by his works as to be positively slanderous. What chance 
would any of us have of appreciating Jane Austen if every primer 
of English literature inculcated that she was a powerful genius 
with an inexhaustible fertility in the invention of thrilling plots ? * 
On the other hand, I do not wish to imply any resemblance be- 
tween Mehul and Jane Austen. He resembles no one but himself, 
and I have not space to indicate the range of his qualities here. 
The one thing for which he has been rightly praised is his instru- 
mentation, which, though often primitive and perfunctory, is 
never for long without points of extraordinary interest. His chief 
misfortune is that his field of musical activity was opera, though 
I am not sure that he could have done better in other fields. 
Church music ought to have suited his style, and its opportunities 
in Paris throughout his career were as glorious as martyrs’ crowns 
and angels’ harps; but he missed them. He is said to have written 
forty-two operas, of which I have read fourteen. Sir Thomas 
Beecham, when I mentioned the subject to him some years ago, 
had read about twice as many, and probably by this time knows 
all the rest by heart. The only entire work of his which is revived 
nowadays is the Biblical opera Joseph , which I for my part con- 
sider rather his most characteristic than his most musical work. 

The Overture to Le Jeune Sage et le Vieux Fou has recently 
found its way into concert repertoires for reasons which will be 



36 m£hul. ‘le jeune sage et le vieux fou’ 
obvious to the listener. It is an excellent and exhilarating little 
piece, and contains by far the best music in the opera. None of 
the music, however, is as good as the libretto, which is among the 
most perfect one-act comedies I have ever read. It is by one Hoff- 
man, presumably an Alsatian, who wrote a number of opera 
libretti, most of them very serious, for the French composers of 
those troubled times, his most famous libretto being that of 
Cherubini’s Midie . Perhaps a faint threat of interruption to ‘my 
aunt’s Tuesday receptions’ may be traced in the fact that the 
librettist’s name is not mentioned on the title-page of the score of 
Le Jeune Sage et le Vieux Fou . 

The overture begins with a solemn introduction, massive in 
rhythm and conception, but youthful in instrumentation , 1 and 
evidently representing the Good Young Man. The Giddy Grey- 
beard is appropriately represented by a lively rondo, in which a 
fairly full orchestra comes into play, led off by bass instruments. 
Musical quotations are unnecessary, but the listener will appreciate 
the overture better, besides obtaining an unexpected sidelight on 
French music and literature during the Terror, if I outline the plot 
of the opera. 

The curtain rises upon young Cliton in his dressing-gown, 
reading philosophy and distracted from his study by anxiety on 
account of his dissipated father, Merval. He decides that the only 
salvation is to marry his aged parent to some one with enough 
beauty and virtue to keep him straight; and he knows that a Suit- 
able Young Person is about to call that very afternoon with her 
aunt. Merval, who had not come home till five o’clock that morn- 
ing, enters humming the rondo-theme of the overture, and Cliton 
solemnly explains his plan. The old gentleman is so completely 
master of the situation as to know that Cliton’s priggishness is far 
too innocent to be a bad sign. He also happens to know the charm- 
ing Rose and her acidulated aunt, Elise, somewhat better than 
young Cliton is as yet capable of knowing anything but a book. 
Rose and Elise arrive. Conversational courtesies and operatic 
arias are exchanged, and the Young Philosopher’s aria, in the style 
of the powerful introduction to the overture, discriminates diplo- 
matically between the ephemeral charms of beauty as mentioned 
in the first stanza and those (with a bow to Aunt Elise) which 
remain to persons of mature years whose education has not been 
neglected. 

Elise does not wish her niece to marry a prig, and has no inten- 
tion herself of marrying a giddy-goat. When Merval says that 

1 I purposely refrained from giving particulars to the audience. The 
introduction, which should be conducted with Handel-Festival gestures, 
is scored for two flutes. 



m£hul. ‘le jeune sage et le vieux fou* 37 
Cliton’s character will change, she crushes him with the question, 
‘Has yours ?’ 

Nevertheless Merval and Elise leave the young people together. 
Rose is as clever as Merval — that is to say, considerably cleverer 
than her aunt — and not only sees that a real person will, under 
suitable stimulus, some day emerge from young Cliton’s chrysalis, 
but has with all maiden modesty already made up her mind to 
supply the stimulus. It therefore comes as a considerable shock to 
her when Cliton’s solemn proposal ends with: ‘Very well, to- 
morrow you will marry my father. 1 With superb presence of mind, 
she consents on one condition — that Cliton shall marry her aunt. 
This seems to Cliton, after a moments reflection, to be a very 
sensible arrangement. His father needs all Rose’s charms to keep 
him in order. Cliton himself is of steadier character, and the aunt 
will suffice for him. For a while, poor Rose does not feel her pros- 
pects to be particularly bright. She is, however, amused enough to 
tell this news, bursting with laughter, to her aunt, who instantly 
forms a totally different opinion of this most sensible young man’s 
intelligence. (I have not space to indicate the excellent stagecraft 
by which the exits and entries in this one-room scene are managed.) 
The shrewd Merval, who perhaps may have read Much Ado about 
Nothing , contrives to put into his silly boy’s head that Rose could 
allow herself to tell an old man what she could not tell his son. 
Then comes Aunt Elise, in full cry after her quarry. Cliton, not 
knowing that his original plans have leaked out through an indis- 
cretion, finds her enthusiasm rather alarming, until he dutifully* 
acquaints her with his intention of proposing to her niece. Her 
exit is abrupt, and Rose returns wondering what Cliton has said 
to put her aunt in such a temper. Cliton gravely explains that his 
plans, as previously sketched, must be altered. ‘You love me; you 
told my father so, and you are incapable of lying. Hence it obvi- 
ously follows that we must marry.’ Merval brings Aunt Elise 
round in both the theatrical and the human sense, and the two 
couples are properly sorted in a happy finale. 


MENDELSSOHN 

CCXXXIV. OVERTURE, ‘MELUSINE’ 

M61usine was, as we are told by the Encyclopaedia Britannica , the 
tutelary fairy of the house of Lusignan. In consequence of the 
kind of family quarrel that is to be expected with mixed marriages 
between fairies and mortals, she suffered on every Saturday from 
a change into serpent-form from the hips down. The condition 
was temporary and remediable by suitable battling. But it was 



38 MENDELSSOHN. ‘MELUSINE’ OVERTURE 

necessary for her to find a husband who would never see her on 
Saturdays. Raymond of Poitiers fulfilled this condition until he 
yielded to the fatal curiosity of fairy-tale husbands, whereupon 
she flew away in serpent-form , — poussant des cris de Mdlusine, as 
the proverb still runs. Henceforth her cries have always been 
heard before the death of a Lusignan. This is the official legend, 
but there seem to be other versions, in which Melusine ’s trans- 
formations were more fish-like than serpentine. 

Although Mendelssohn had already written his wonderful 
Hebrides Overture, he thought the Melusine Overture the best 
thing he had ever done. He finished it in October 1833, anc * * n 
April 1834 he writes to his sister, Fanny Hensel, in answer to her 
questions about its subject: ‘Now attend. I’m cross! There you 
go, asking me which tale you're to read! Well, how many are 
there ? And how many do I know, and don’t you know the story 
of the lovely Melusina? It’s enough to make one crawl away and 
disguise oneself in all manner of instrumental music without titles 
when one’s own sister (unnatural woman!) doesn’t even approve 
of the title. Perhaps you’ve really never heard of this beauteous 
fish. However, when I consider how you might growl at me for 
growling at you in April about a letter you wrote in February, 
I will give in and be kind. I wrote this overture for an opera by 
Conradin Kreutzer, which I heard about this time of year in the 
Konigstadter Theatre. The overture, I mean Kreutzer’s, was 
encored, and I disliked it quite particularly, and also the rest of 
the opera, except Hahnel; but she was very engaging, especially 
in one scene where she appeared in her fish-form and combed her 
hair; whereupon I got a wish to make an overture which people 
wouldn’t encore, but would receive more inwardly, so I took 
what I liked of the subject (and that corresponds exactly with 
the fairy-tale), and, in short, the overture came into the world, and 
that’s its family history.’ 

In August 1834 he writes from Diisseldorf to his father that he 
wanted to try his new Pianoforte Rondo in E flat from the proof- 
copies, and summoned all the local musicians to rehearse it. As 
they would have been offended at being paid for it, he gave them 
a supper and made them as drunk as they liked. This, however, 
was not the chief fun, but the Overture to Melusine , which he 
also played for the first time, and which pleased him much. ‘With 
many pieces I know from the first bar that they’ll sound well and 
have some go in them, and so it was now, as soon as the clarinets 
curled upwards in the first bar. The thing went badly, and yet 
I had more pleasure than with many perfect performances and 
went home in the evening feeling more cheerful than I had for 
a long time. We played it three times, and after the third time, 



MENDELSSOHN. ‘MELUSINE* OVERTURE 39 

directly after the last soft chord, the trumpets burst out in a flourish 
with very comical effect. It was also nice when we were at supper, 
and someone made a long speech . . . and toasted me, whereupon 
the trumpeters and drummer jumped up like mad and ran to their 
instruments to make another flourish; and then I made a manly 
speech, worthy of Sir Robert Peel, in which I preached unity and 
Christian love and keeping time, and concluded with toasting the 
progress of Diisseldorf music.* 

The proceedings lasted till midnight, not without some quarrel- 
someness by way of showing the effect of Mendelssohn’s Peel-ine 
oration. 

Later, on 30 January 1836, Mendelssohn writes from Leipzig 
to his sister that ‘Many people here think Melusine is my best 
overture ; anyhow, it *s the most intimate, but the rigmarole of the 
Musikalische Zeitung about red coral and green sea-beasts and 
magic castles and deep seas is all rubbish and astonishes me. All 
the same, I’m going to take leave of water for some time, and 
must look around for other prospects.* This last sentence refers 
to his father’s advice that he should ‘hang upon a nail* the fairy- 
tale subjects which had hitherto occupied him, and turn to some- 
thing more serious. Perhaps the chief tragedy in Mendelssohn’s 
short career was that he took this advice. 

The only weakness in the Melusine Overture is shown in the 
half-phrase from the fifth to the eighth bar of its main theme — 


Ex. 1 . 



a weakness for which the locus classicus is the Duetto in the Songs 
without Words , where the inefficiency of the second clause shows 
up fatally against the Aria ‘With verdure clad* in Haydn’s Creation. 
The orthodox Mendelssohn-baiter glances at the first eight bars 
of the Melusine Overture and inquires no farther. He does not 
improve his taste by any so easy and summary a judgement. The 
flaccid second clause is the only weakness in a composition very 
perfect and distinguished and incomparably more serious than any 
of Mendelssohn’s later efforts to follow his father’s deplorable 
advice. The other themes are undistinguished; but weightier 
themes would have spoiled the whole. The agitations and sorrows 
of this piece are those of a fairy-tale, even if it be one that for some 
persons concerned in it may end sadly. They are true and deep 




40 MENDELSSOHN. ‘MELUSINA’ OVERTURE 

( innerlich ), as Mendelssohn always is when he is writing what he 
wants to write and not what he thinks he ought to write. 

The opening clarinet-figure, whether it curls upwards, as in 
the theme, or downwards, as in the counterpoints, presumably 
represents the Saturday lower half of the lady, whether fish-like 
or serpentine or in the compromise of an eel. It may also represent 
waves of water, or, for all I know, the waves in which ‘die HahneT 
combed her hair. None of these questions has the interest of good 
gossip, and for all they are worth Mendelssohn might just as well 
slink away from his Rabenschwester's questions and bury himself 
in absolute music. Far more interesting are the originality and 
freedom of the whole musical form, with its alternation between 
the beauty of calm water and fairy-tale terrors and woes. These 
more passionate elements are represented by the following pair 
of themes ; conventional, but in the right conventions. 


Ex. 2. 




The work is undoubtedly not so deep as the Hebrides Overture 
or the music for A Midsummer Night's Dream ; but Mendelssohn 
was not mistaken in thinking it one of his best. His father was 
mistaken in thinking that his son’s fairy-tale world was a groove 
or in any danger of becoming a groove. Within that kingdom 
Mendelssohn was free and able to produce works far more distinct 
from each other than his ‘more serious things’. You cannot drift 
from Melusine into the Hebrides or the Midsummer Night's Dream 
any more than you could drift into Elijah . 


SCHUMANN 

CCXXXV. OVERTURE, SCHERZO, AND FINALE, OP. $2 

x Andante con moto: leading to Allegro . 2 Scherzo: Vivo. 3 Finale: 
Allegro molto vivace . 

This work was written at the same time as Schumann’s First, 
Second, and Fourth Symphonies — that is to say, it was written in 


SCHUMANN. OP. $2 41 

1841 and revised, especially as to the finale, in 1845. Schumann is 
said to have thought of calling it a Sinfonietta. It is a pity that he 
did not finally decide on that title, for it precisely describes both 
the character and range of the work; whereas its present title im- 
plies something much less coherent, besides bringing in the quite 
irrelevant idea of an overture. There is, however, some colour 
for the title of ‘overture’ for the first movement, inasmuch as that 
movement is clearly influenced by a classic which we might as well 
revive, Cherubini’s Overture to Les Deux Journdes. Professor 
Niecks points out that that overture and other works of Cherubini 
impressed contemporaries as eminently romantic. What Berlioz 
says about Cherubini is not evidence ; or, at all events, it is more 
evidential of Berlioz than of Cherubini. The sprechender Bass , the 
dramatic utterances of unaccompanied violoncellos and basses 
descending into the depths in impassioned recitative, is not the 
exclusive property of Berlioz and Liszt; nor are the sublime instru- 
mental recitatives in Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony its prototype. 
It was discovered by the earliest pioneers of instrumental and 
dramatic music in the seventeeth century; and in the Overture to 
Les Deux Journdes Cherubini used it with a power which Beethoven 
could surpass only on the condition of seeing exactly what Cheru- 
bini meant by it. 

The trouble with Cherubini is not that his style in opera is 
pedantic, but that his excellent histrionic devices are executed with 
an irreducible minimum of music. His style is theatrical in no 
vulgar sense. On the contrary, it is meticulously noble, if that is* 
not a contradiction in terms; and so his romantic rhetoric impresses 
us now like stage scenery lying on the ground exposed to daylight. 
Schumann under the influence of Cherubini is more fortunate. 
Four bars of the introduction to his Sinfonietta, as I prefer to call 
it, compress into an epigram the whole romance of Cherubini’s 
Overture to Les Deux Journdes. 



The allegro of the overture dances its way in Schumann’s hap- 
piest vein of homage to Mendelssohn. 

Ex. 2. 



It drifts easily towards a second group in which the rhythms be- 
come broader and broader. * 


42 SCHUMANN. OP. 52 


Ex. 3 . s 334X2 3 4 I 



The intervention of material from the introduction, developing 
figures (a) and ( b ) at full speed, shows that Schumann intends to 
strike a dramatic note; but the continuation, after an abrupt 
pause — 


Ex. 4. 



proves that the movement of drama is precisely what his music 
cannot achieve, and is not really attempting. More clearly than in 
his larger symphonies, Schumann is building quasi-lyric epigrams 
into the musical equivalent of narrative or descriptive poetry that 
does not attempt the movement of either epic or drama. His 
Pegasus does not fly, but it ambles very comfortably and becomes 
more lyric than ever when the tempo becomes faster in the coda. 



Our recovery from the anti-romantic reaction ought by now to 
allow us to treat this music as its boyish enthusiasm deserves. 
When Schumann was in fashion, every sentimental person pro- 
claimed him as essentially manly, and therefore a composer in 
whose sentiment we could wallow without risk. But the truth is 
that Schumann is essentially boyish; and one paradoxical result is 
that he can afford to be crassly Mendelssohnian and to echo pre- 
cisely Mendelssohn’s weakest turns of phrase, because he is a 
naive hero-worshipper. We must not sentimentalize Schumann. 
He has all the manly schoolboy’s horror of any such tendency. 
On the other hand, nothing could be more detestably inartistic 
than to treat him with a schoolmasterly patronage or irony. 

In the compact little scherzo — 


Ex. 6 . 



and trio — 


Ex. 7 . 






strings/ 



SCHUMANN. OP. 52 43 

we have Schumann in his normal lyric element, with the normal 
sectional forms of his Phantasiestiicke . The coda alludes very 
prettily to Ex. 2 from the first movement. 

The finale moves imperturbably like the Red Queen crying, 
‘Faster, faster F as she rushes with Alice ever onward under the 
same tree in Looking-Glass Land. The first theme starts as a kind 
of double fugue — 



which after three entries continues in lyric couplets or qua- 
trains. 



It drifts into the dominant, and there proceeds with new themes 
which constitute a second group, the result being a sonata exposi- 
tion in the sense in which Berlioz purports to have achieved such 
a thing in the Symphonie Fantastique and the Harold Symphony; 
but, as we shall see, Schumann shows that he is aware that he has 
not achieved a classic example of the form. He directs that his . 
exposition should be repeated, and he proceeds to extract from its 
last notes material for a discursive, but episodic, development — 



Alice is decidedly short of breath ; but she clings to the hand of the 
flying Red Queen, while the four-bar phrases pursue their inex- 
orable course. When Alice’s second wind makes a quiet legato 
possible, the second violin and viola convey fierce hints of an im- 
minent return — 



Ez. iz. 


^ ^ _$= 


&C. 

! 

n 


e-Li 

pEj 



gj 

pfcEjj 




! — 

p 

U 

'mmm 


Pi 

r 




1 

T 5 T 


a 3 4 I 3 3 4 !#a#U3 


In due time the opening fugato (Ex. 8) returns in the home 
tonic, and is cunningly expanded before proceeding with its lyric 
continuation; and now Schumann proves that he knows that his 



44 SCHUMANN. OP. $2 

exposition had not the key-perspective of the sonata style, for he 
gives his whole second group unaltered in the dominant, reserving 
the home tonic for a coda which consists of a boyishly pompous 
augmentation of the whole main theme of its sequel (Exx. 8 and 9), 
and so brings one of his most delightful works to a punctual close. 
The boldness of keeping his whole second group in its original 
dominant shows a recovered mental energy far in advance of the 
convalescence which had proved manifestly not equal to carrying 
him through the finale of his Second Symphony. 


BERLIOZ 

CCXXXVI. ‘SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE*, OP. 14 

1 Ri: varies, Passions. Largo f leading to Allegro agitato e appassionato 
assai. 2 Un Bal. Valse. Allegro non troppo. 3 S(±ne aux champs. Adagio. 
4 Marche au supplice. Allegretto non troppo . 5 Songe d’une nuit de 
Sabbat. Larghetto , leading to Allegro . 

Boiling oil awaits me for my irreverent treatment of Berlioz in the 
fourth volume of these Essays. Nevertheless, I claim to see a great 
deal more than his out-and-out admirers see in Berlioz, for they give 
me no sufficient evidence that they see enough in the art of music to 
measure anything so important as Berlioz’s actual musical achieve- 
ment. I have been blamed for ‘repeating exploded fallacies’ when 
I say that his musical technique is amateurish compared with that 
of his prose. My own literary claims are entirely amateurish, and 
I accept the judgement of such an acknowledged master of litera- 
ture as W. E. Henley when he hails Berlioz as a fellow craftsman 
in prose. My judgement of Berlioz’s technique is not based on the 
exploded fallacies of the musical critics of his day. Matthew 
Arnold thought that an institution such as the Academie Fransaise 
was a safeguard against the weedy growth of jugements saugrenus 
and of projects that ought never to have been undertaken. Unfor- 
tunately French musical academicism is responsible for almost all 
that is most saugrenu in French music; and when it rises above 
that, it achieves the kind of perky slickness which deprives me of 
the last remains of my sense of fair play. So far, then, my sym- 
pathies are entirely with Berlioz. But I refuse to be bound by a 
statute of limitations which licenses me to tell brutal truths about 
the amateurishness of Gluck because he died in 1787, and forbids 
me to criticize Berlioz because he died in 1869 and is about to be 
canonized at his centenary. The canonizers (including the cleverest 
of all French academicians, Saint- Saens) seem almost to wish to in- 
stitute Berlioz’s harmonic weaknesses into doctrines for the future. 



BERLIOZ. ‘SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE’ , OP. 14 45 

But these weaknesses coincide suspiciously nearly with the com- 
monest mistakes of a student with a defective ear for counterpoint. 
Schumann, the first and on the whole the most broadly and deeply 
sympathetic of Berlioz’s early champions, pointed out that when- 
ever Berlioz makes what seems manifestly a mistake every attempt 
to correct it substitutes for something characteristic something 
impossibly banal. I have never yet found a mistake in a student’s 
composition of which this is not true. In a work of imagination 
every mistake (other than mere clerical errors or oversights) repre- 
sents either a confusion of thought or an essentially impossible 
project. Hence any correction of it means abandoning at least half 
the thought or the whole essence of the project. Technical training 
consists mainly in the modest attempt to teach students to recog- 
nize and tackle the possibilities. One of the standard riddles of my 
class-room runs as follows : 

Q . What is it which we all wish to learn from the Great Masters, 
and why can we never learn it ? 

A . How to get out of a hole: because they never get into one. 

There is not sufficient reason for believing that the most pro- 
mising student is the one who never gets into a hole ; but there is 
still less reason for supposing that every student who spends all 
his time getting into holes is a Berlioz. It has been suggested 
that it was a pity Cherubini did not grant Berlioz’s wish for the 
professorship of harmony. Cherubini’s own academicism was bad 
enough in all conscience; but a traditional academic tyranny would . 
be freedom itself compared with that of a composer who pro- 
claimed a crusade against appoggiaturas (which is like proclaiming 
a crusade against all figures of speech), and who professed an utter 
detestation of all sixteenth-century polyphony, all Bach, all poly- 
phonic organ music, and, in fact, everything that he would not 
have written himself. Berlioz’s most violent aversion was Wagner. 
Whatever may be said of his harmonic theories, they were any- 
thing but advanced. 

Grammatical rules can be very silly; perhaps sillier in music 
than in literature, because in spoken languages they are demon- 
strable questions of usage, whereas in music they are questions of 
sound, and hence of taste. It is possible that a split infinitive may 
be less illiterate than the only circumlocution that can be devised 
to avoid it; and it is possible that an incorrect doubled leading- 
note may not ‘tickle like cake-crumbs in bed’. But the least pedan- 
tic of critics will agree with Mr. Punch that the English infinitive 
was racked beyond human endurance by the sonnet which began 
To with the lark and with the sun arise — 

And so perhaps it is as well that Berlioz gave waning in the very 



46 BERLIOZ. ‘SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUB\ OP. 14 
first two bars of the Symphonie Fantastique that he did not feel 
doubled leading-notes as the Real Princess in the fairy-tale felt the 
pea under a mountain of bed-clothes. 

The Symphonie Fantastique has the advantage, rare in Berlioz’s 
greater works, of illustrating a programme of his own invention. 
We are thus not vexed by the effort to trace any evidence of his 
attention to Shakespeare (as in Romeo et Juliet , avec le denouement 
de Garrick) or to Byron, as in Harold en Italie, which consists 
exclusively of scenes not described by Byron:, nor need we specu- 
late, as in the case of his Grande Messe des Morts and Te Deum , 
about his attitude to religion, or about any other things which he 
had the statesmanship to keep to himself. 

Here is his own account of the Symphonie Fantastique , inter- 
spersed with the few musical quotations and supplementary re- 
marks necessary or provocative. 

NOTICE 

The following programme should be distributed among the audience 
whenever the Symphonie Fantastique is performed dramatically, that 
is to say, followed by the Monodrama of Lilio , which ends it and 
completes the Episode de la vie d’un artiste . In that case the orchestra 
is invisible and placed on the stage of a theatre with lowered curtain. 

Nothing will induce me to expose Berlioz by any such scheme, 
nor will I discount, by any description of Lelio y the effect the 
Symphonie Fantastique ought to produce. There are good things 
in Lilio , but its scheme is supremely absurd and its final fantasia 
on Shakespeare’s Tempest is beyond redemption by the canonizers 
of Berlioz. 

When the Symphony is played alone in a concert this arrangement 
is unnecessary: indeed, even the distribution of the programme is not 
absolutely essential so long as the titles of the five movements are 
set forth; for the author hopes that the Symphony can provide its 
own musical interest independently of any dramatic intention. 

A very just claim, sometimes ignored by the canonizers of 
Berlioz. Nevertheless, his ‘programme’ is here a very considerable 
help to the understanding of his music, and no analysis, nor any 
score, however miniature, should omit it. 


PROGRAMME OF THE SYMPHONY 

A young musician of morbid sensibility and ardent imagination is 
in love, and has poisoned himself with opium in a fit of desperation. 
Not having taken a lethal dose, he falls into a long sleep in which he 
has the strangest dreams, wherein his feelings, sentiments, and memo- 



BERLIOZ. ‘SYMPIIONIE FANTASTIQUE*, OP. 14 47 

ries are translated by his sick brain into musical ideas and figures. 
The beloved woman herself has become a melody which he finds and 
hears everywhere as an Idee fixe . 


First Movement . Reveries, Passions. 

First he remembers the uneasiness of mind, the aimless passions, 
the baseless depressions and elations which he felt — 



then the volcanic love which she instantly inspired in him, his deliri- 
ous agonies, his jealous rages, his recovered love, his consolations of 
religion. 

Ex. 2 gives the whole of the Idie fixe . Other details and phases 
are easily followed without too meticulous an attention to the 
‘programme’. The quiet end represents the consolations of reli- 
gion, by several kinds of ‘amen’ chords. ♦ 


48 BERLIOZ. ‘SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE*, OP# 14 


Second Movement . A Ball. 



He meets his beloved at a ball in the midst of the tumult of a 
brilliant festival. 

The Idie fixe enters as a middle episode, and reappears as a 
lingering farewell in a quiet passage in the coda. 


Third Movement . Pastoral Scene. 


On a summer evening in the country he hears two shepherds 
[presumably a lad and a lass] playing a Ranz des Vaches in dialogue. 



This pastoral duet, the place, the gentle sound of wind in the trees, 

a few recently conceived grounds of hope, all tend to give a new calm 

to his heart and a brighter colour to his thoughts. 



Ex. 6. 



But She [the Idie fixe] appears again. His heart misses a beat; he is 
troubled by grievous forebodings. What if she should deceive him ? . . . 

One of the shepherds resumes his simple lay; the other does not 
answer. The sun sets. Distant thunder. Solitude. Silence. 

Fourth Movement . March to Execution. 

He dreams that he has killed his beloved ; that he is condemned to 
death, and led to the place of execution. The procession moves to a 
march, now gloomy and wild — 


BERLIOZ. ‘SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE*, OP. 14. 49 




— now brilliant and grand — 
Ex. 8. 



during which the dull sound of heavy footsteps follows abruptly upon 
the noisiest outbursts. 


Berlioz’s prize modulation, which he implores the orchestral 
players not to ‘correct*, is the following juxtaposition of the chords 
of D flat and G minor. 


Ex. Q. 

B 

m 

mm »- 


l« 


BBTBysi 

K[<i 

s 

11 



--j 5 



At last the I die fixe reappears for a moment, as a last thought of 
love, cut short by the stroke of death. 

Fifth Movement . Dream of a Witches’ Sabbath. 

[Elsewhere described by Berlioz as the dream of a cut-off head.] 

He finds himself in a Witches* Sabbath, in the midst of a frightful, 
crowd of ghosts, sorcerers, and all manner of monsters assisting at 
his entombment. Weird noises, groans, bursts of laughter, distant 
cries echoed by others. The Beloved Melody enters again, but it has 
lost its noble modesty; it has become a vulgar dance-tune, trivial and 
grotesque. SHE has come to the Witches* Sabbath. 

The Idee fixe on an E flat clarinet (or broomstick). 



whole extent of Ex. a. 

Roars of joy at her arrival. She joins in the devilish orgies. Funeral 
bells, parody of the Dies Irae [one of the grandest of all plain-chants]. 

Ex. 11. 

Dies Irae . 




repeated in quicker notes until it becomes a jig. 

B 


VI 



SO BERLIOZ. ‘SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE’, OP. 14 
Round-dance of the witches. 

Ex. 12. jf 



La Ronde du Sabbat et la Dies Irae ensemble. 



And so Berlioz, for all his hatred of what the academic musicians 
taught him, really lets himself go and best displays his freedom 
as a composer when he is building up long rounds as in the Scene 
aux champs (Ex. 5) and fugues, as upon Ex. 12, which swings along 
spendidly; and his proudest climaxes are wholesale combinations 
which he naively advertises as such. He is big enough to stand our 
poking a little fun at him; and I am sorry if the out-and-out 
Berliozians are not. 


CCXXXVII. OVERTURE, *LE CORSAIR* 

Berlioz has been officially pronounced by himself and others to 
be an inveterate writer of programme music. Every instrumental 
piece paints a picture, and every picture tells a story; and the 
greatest story-teller is Berlioz himself. When we turn to the 
alleged sources of his inspiration, the educational value in his 
propaganda is revealed as a stimulus to the study of literature for 
literature’s sake. We need not trouble to assume that Berlioz’s 
Corsair can be any other than Byron’s. Byron is out of fashion 
nowadays, and I seldom read poetry, because I find that poetry 
must be read aloud, and that I cannot long continue to read aloud 
in a room whence all but I have fled. Berlioz has now twice in- 
duced me to read works of Byron — viz. Childe Harold* s Pilgrimage 
and The Corsair — which otherwise I might have failed to read; 
and I can proudly claim now to have read them for their own sake, 
since the light they throw upon Berlioz’s music is nil. Byron’s 
Corsair is, of course, Byron himself, mythically wicked, sinister, 
and diabolically noble. Berlioz himself is a Brocken spectre mas- 



BERLIOZ. *LE CORSAIR 1 OVERTURE 51 

querading as Byron upon a cloud-scape of abstract orchestration 
which is for him the one solid reality among the illusions of what 
Kipling has somewhere described as the child that has hit its head 
against the bad, wicked table. Gigantic as the Brocken spectre is, 
Berlioz himself is greater than Byron. He is not, perhaps, as great 
as Cervantes, but he is as great as Don Quixote. Only very silly 
people will take him seriously, but they are not as silly as the people 
who don’t. 

The Overture to Le Corsair is as salt a sea-piece as has ever been 
written. Wagner, we are told, was a good enough sailor to derive 
inspiration by experience for his Overture to 'The Flying Dutchman . 
Turner, we are told, lashed himself to the mast of a fishing vessel 
in order to make sketches at sea during a storm. I believe Berlioz 
tells some similar story about himself. If not, he ought to have done 
so. The duty of the analysis writer will have been done if these hints 
will project the imagination of the audience into the composite 
mind of Berlioz-Wagner-Turner-Byron lashed to the broken mast 
of a fishing vessel foundering in a gale while we listen in comfort to 
this saline music. Of the parting of Conrad and Medora, Francis 
Jeffrey has said : ‘We do not know anything in poetry more beautiful 
or touching than this picture’; and my childhood memories 
are dominated by an engraving of this subject in which the 
figures of Conrad and Medora are hardly noticeable in a vast 
Elysian landscape by John Martin, in whose heyday Turner was 
as invisible as Wagner in the glare of Meyerbeer, but whose more^ 
favourite subjects were the destruction of towered cities by the* 
letter Z descending from lurid skies. There can be little doubt 
that the slow theme in A flat near the beginning of Berlioz’s Over- 
ture is inspired by the parting of Conrad and Medora. It ‘registers’ 
feminine chastity and tenderness, in much the same universal 
formulas as the first feminine theme in Berlioz’s Romeo et Juliette. 


Ex. z. 



Sea breezes and sea foam are suggested to me and other naive 
listeners by the impetuous opening, which I do not quote. I can- 
not identify anything else in the overture with any special features 
in Byron’s Corsair . Byron has one other feminine character, Gul- 
nare, chief jewel of the Harem of the Pacha Seyd, from whose 
fetters she heroically rescues the captive Conrad, whose constancy 
to his Medora is confirmed by his horror at discovering that Gul- 
nare has slain her detestable lord and master as part of the proce- 
dure of his rescue. His own countless murders in the sacred cause 



52 BERLIOZ. *LE CORSAIR* OVERTURE 

of piracy write no wrinkle on his azure brow. Eventually he finds 
his Medora dead and her castle in ruins. I cannot trace any of 
these events in Berlioz’s entirely brilliant overture, and have not 
the slightest idea of what Byronic subjects, other than generalized 
brilliance, are represented by the main theme into which the 
breezy elements settle. 


Ex. a. 




Eminent critics (the epithet is as essential as ‘indefatigable’ to 
secretaries) are warned against imputing to deficiency of ensemble 
Berlioz’s discovery that this theme, like any theme that will kindly 
stay long enough on one arpeggio, goes into canon at one beat’s 
distance. Like most of his latest works, such as the Harold Sym- 
phony, the Corsair Overture was revised from things drafted in his 
Conservatoire days, when human nature revolted against the crass 
stupidity of his counterpoint masters, and at the same time 
snatched at every opportunity of displaying the canonic accom- 
plishments they purported to teach. Ex. 2 eventually appears 
jauntily in the dominant as a soprano melody. But I cannot find 
any feminine element to correspond to the heroic Gulnare. Per- 
haps she shocked Berlioz even more than she shocked the pirate 
and Byron. 

The processes that may be academically described as develop- 
ment are dominated by Ex. 1, thus giving the pirate credit for his 
constancy to Medora. But, on the whole, it is dangerous to accuse 
Berlioz of attention to his programme. 

I do not know why Le Corsair is not more often played. To me 
it is one of Berlioz’s most attractive works. Like all of them, it 
arouses my irreverence, and my fiercest resentment against any 
one who dares to say a word against it. Berlioz must have been 
even more than usually proud of the harmonic originality of his 
final cadence — 


Ex. 3* 



and here he commands the complete sympathy of any one who can 
appreciate good harmony. 



(S3) 

CCXXXVIII. OVERTURE, ‘BEATRICE ET b£n£dICT > 

Berlioz’s Beatrice et Benedict consists of Much Ado about Nothing 
without the Ado. 

Hero and Claudio are the serious lovers; and they both display 
a decorous melancholy without being troubled by the Don John 
plot. This is to the advantage of Claudio, of whom Berlioz lets us 
know nothing worse than that he is a lovesick hero returned safely 
from a singularly bloodless war. As for Hero, somebody has got 
to be serious, to give the opera a chance for slow tempi. The main 
concern of the opera is the cat-and-dog bickerings of Beatrice and 
Benedick (it would be pedantry to expect a Parisian, to say nothing 
of a Gascon, to distinguish between Benedick and Benedict, when 
no Parisian ever got nearer to the name of Franz Liszt than 
‘Monsieur Lits’), and the sudden conversion of the two into lovers 
when certain minor characters arrange that they shall overhear 
conversations about the evidently true state of their affections. 

As this does not give enough material for a two-act opera, 
Berlioz has not only a number of Sicilian dances and choruses as 
divertissements , but introduces a maestro , of the appropriate name 
of Somarone, who in honour of Claudio and Hero rehearses an 
asinine epithalamium in a form which Berlioz’s training at the 
Paris Conservatoire led him to believe was a possible parody of a 
sixteenth-century madrigal. Maestro Somarone, finding that the 
composition lacks unction as it stands, sketches with masterly 
rapidity an extra oboe obbligato which worms and warbles its way- 
through the final performance with the intended comic effect. The 
text of the madrigal begins appropriately with Mourez t tendresipoux , 
which causes the dear old Duke to inquire why the happy couple 
should die just yet. He is duly informed that this is an expression 
characteristic of the higher orders of poetry, and the public is in- 
formed in an aside that His Highness is a Philistine and a bourgeois. 

Berlioz, having thus spent twenty minutes in venting his nasty 
temper on the subject of all that he had been taught at the Paris 
Conservatoire by poor old curmudgeon Cherubini, and inciden- 
tally in revealing that master’s dismal lack of genuine sixteenth- 
century culture, is free to devote the rest of his opera to very pretty 
music, of which the overture is an excellent example. It has three 
contrasted themes, of which the first is stated in triple time in 
what proves to be an introduction. 

Ex. x. 



54 BERLIOZ. ‘BEATRICE ET b£n£dICT’ OVERTURE 

The exposition of this is interrupted by an excerpt from the aria 
in which Beatrice finds herself in love. 



Then the main movement of the overture begins. It is in com- 
pact sonata form with Ex. i turned into allabreve time as its main 
theme, a brassy transition-theme — 



and a short second group in the dominant consisting chiefly of a 
theme in minims — 



which I am not able to associate with anything particular in the 
opera, though there are passages more or less resembling it. 

I do not know why this Overture is not more often played; nor, 
indeed, why the whole opera is not better known. Perhaps it is 
because Berlioz, like Liszt, took pains to give himself a reputation 
as a devil-worshipper. Most of his contemporaries had already 
come to think that the main purposes of a Black Mass were those 
of sensational fiction; but it was long before they came to realize 
that the writers of sensational fiction are for the most part the 
most respectable and amiable of persons. Dulce est desipere in loco , 
and the Overture to Beatrice et Benedict is excellent fooling, and 
neither more nor less scholarly than the fooling of the persons it 
describes 



( 55 ) 


CCXXXIX. A FURTHER NOTE ON BRAHMS’S TRAGIC 
OVERTURE (OP. 8l) 

It is some time since Brahms has definitely come into his own and 
escaped from the dangerous championship of the anti-Wagnerian 
Brahmsian, as well as from the helpless fulminations of the people 
whose only approach to music is through the theatre and literature. 
But certain features of Brahms’s style still seem to lie beyond the 
range of current criticism. In recent judgements of the Tragic 
Overture, I cannot trace the slightest progress in intelligence since 
the days when it was a new work. My analysis of it, as issued by me 
at Reid Concerts, and as now published by the Oxford University 
Press (Essays in Musical Analysis , Vol. II, p.151), began with a dis- 
cussion of the meaning of tragedy in music and literature. This 
was rash. I was as helpless as Huckleberry Finn arguing with 
Jim the nigger. Cats have a right to talk like cats ; but Frenchmen, 
being men, ought to talk like other people. And so Brahms ought 
to write Russian music. Let ’s begin again on a clean slate. 



The main difficulty in appreciating Brahms’s right to call this 
greatest of his orchestral movements tragic seems to me to lie in 
current ignorance of the meaning of his language. In Ex. 1, the 
two figures marked (e) and (/) are the real stumbling-blocks to 
most critics and many conductors. They are lively figures, and the 
treatment of fig. (e) in the piu moderato development is child-like. 
In Coriolanus , the boy Marcus makes us laugh at one of the tensest 
moments of the drama. We have enough faith in Shakespeare to 
believe that this is not an oversight, and we do not insist upon 
having the boy represented with a Roman nose as developed as 
that of his father. Current notions of tragic values in music are 
less advanced. 

The other unappreciated aspect of Brahms’s style concerns his 
most characteristic ruminating passages: such things as the de- 
velopment of the finale of the Second Symphony, and almost the 


56 BRAHMS. OP. 8l 

whole of the finale of the C minor Pianoforte Quartet. There was 
a time when, under the guidance of John Hullah, Bach was re- 
garded as a monumental composer with a style entirely devoid of 
expression, but ‘unique*, as Hullah said, ‘like the Pyramids, in the 
quality of being satisfactory*. Many of us can recollect with 
affection some dutiful and venerable music-lover who, at the pros- 
pect of listening to Bach, would say ‘Yes, Bach is so satisfactory* 
before closing her eyes. It is an unfortunate fact that Brahms’s 
profoundest ruminating developments and episodes are inevitably 
woven in a close contrapuntal texture which is very interesting to 
analyse and very much like the most elaborate textures of Bach. 
Experience has taught me simply to withhold the analysis of 
such passages altogether so long as the view prevails that all 
such things are inherently pedantic. It is, of course, foolish to 
suppose ingenuity to be more than a practical necessity for the 
construction of such passages. But it is worse than childish to 
suppose that the necessary ingenuity is a sign of pedantry. 

This prejudice has now attained such a vogue that it has become 
worse than the silliness of the listener and critic who can under- 
stand music only in terms of literary and pictorial illustration. All 
good musicians hate the practice of illustrating purely instrumental 
music by other objects, and we musicians have even acquired an 
habitual resentment against any tendency to lay stress upon the 
musical illustration of words, even when the words or dramatic 
actions are essential to the very existence of the music. I have often 
protested against the habit of digesting Beethoven with the aid of a 
diet of Carlyle’s French Revolution relieved by doses of The Scarlet 
Pimpernel ; but there comes a point when the persistent decrying of 
such a work as Brahms’s Tragic Overture must be met by propa- 
ganda more popular than an attempt to explain pure music to 
people who greatly prefer it impure. I find that the middle part of 
the overture is considered unintelligibly dry, and that many con- 
ductors have grave doubts as to whether Brahms can possibly have 
meant it to be taken twice as slow as the rest. Perhaps listeners so 
prejudiced may get some idea of what I take to be Brahms’s 
intention if they will remind themselves of the character of Grizel 
in Sentimental Tommy , with particular reference to the passages 
where she is described as persistently prying upon the laying-out 
of a corpse because she knows that her outcast mother, the ‘painted 
lady’, is dying, and that she herself had better practise betimes a 
task in which she does not wish for the help of the scornful. I had 
not read Sentimental Tommy when I had the good fortune to get 
my first impressions of the Tragic Overture from a perfect per- 
formance under Steinbach at Meiningen in 1899; but I was then 
deeply impressed by the mysterious purposefulness of its quiet 



BRAHMS. OP. 8l 57 

development and the overpowering pathos of its musical con- 
sequences in the recapitulation. Joachim had all the absolute 
musician’s horror of gratuitous literary illustration, but Brahms did 
not snub him for comparing the finale of the Third Symphony with 
the story of Hero and Leander; and I do not think, if I had been 
able to show Brahms this passage in Sentimental Tommy , that he 
would have snubbed me. I had forgotten all about it when I 
wrote of the frightened child whose thought was ‘what ought 
I to do?’ 


VERDI 

CCXL. ‘STABAT MATER’, FOR CHORUS AND ORCHESTRA 

Of the Four Sacred Pieces which constitute Verdi’s last work, the 
Stabat Mater is the most important and the most perfect. The Te 
Deum is a little more voluminous, but does not achieve the con- 
sistency of style shown in the Stabat Mater , nor is it so unques- 
tionably beautiful in conception, though it is very impressive. To 
complain that either work is theatrical or unecclesiastical is as 
relevant as the discovery that it is not only foreign but positively 
un-English. Verdi at eighty was no more aware than Verdi at 
thirty that music could be anything but theatrical. He was hardly 
aware that it could be theatrical. In Italy an Englishman, and a m 
fortiori a Scot, may be known by his tendency to remark that ‘it is 
a fine day*. This puzzles the native, who gets his bad weather in 
very effective doses when it does come, but whose fine days are 
just ‘days’. The strangest thing about the inveterately theatrical 
Verdi is that he had a profound love of Palestrina; and the stran- 
gest thing about Verdi’s Stabat Mater is that in spirit and also in 
form it resembles Palestrina’s Stabat Mater more than any other 
setting of that poem, though the more you study it the more 
its at first sight glaring difference from the Verdi of Trovatore 
vanishes. 

The spirit of the work is not a matter of language. The style of 
the stage is not ecclesiastical. The Latin of St. Jacopo di Todi is 
not classical. And there we may leave the stylistic criticism of 
words and music. Questions of form and method are less jejune. 
The poem falls into two parts, a meditation and a prayer. The 
meditation is a series of the simplest possible mental pictures of the 
Virgin Mother standing by the Cross; the prayer is for a share in 
her sorrows, with the hope of Paradise after death. Tolstoy’s three 
staretsi hardly attained a more simple saintliness. But the 
simplicity itself is mystical, though the substance is concrete and 



58 VERDI, ‘STABAT MATER* 

emotional, with none of the close-packed parables and metaphors 
of the Pattge lingua . Palestrina’s setting is one of the simplest 
compositions in the world, as simple as Bach’s Chromatic Fantasia, 
the purest cloud-scape in the world of harmony, without even a 
flight of birds to show the scale of its mighty perspective. The 
rhythm is that of the quantities of the words; there is no polyphony 
and no themes. Translate the tonality from free Dorian to modern 
minor and major with unlimited range of key; add a full Italian 
orchestra with Italian traditions of scoring, grandiose and whole- 
sale in method, yet refined by the experience of an octogenarian; 
and the analysis of Palestrina’s Stabat Mater will fit Verdi’s better 
than you might expect. Palestrina’s Dorian mode keeps his strange 
harmonies together. Verdi’s modulations are instinctively balanced 
around the G minor of his beginning and end. His last notes are 
those to which the three words ‘Stabat Mater dolorosa’ are set at 
the beginning; otherwise there is no theme to hold the work to- 
gether. His enormous talent for composition enabled him in his 
earlier works to give life to the crudest schemes of rhythm and 
phrasing; and now it enables him to make the lines of the poem 
roll on in their groups of three like a planet in its orbit. He does 
not overburden his declamation with grammatical analysis; for 
example, he is content to set ‘Me sentire vim doloris’ as a complete 
line without running on to the word ‘fac*, which is needed to com- 
plete the sense; but he does not, like Pergolese, make it impossible 
to understand by repeating the line again and again and then set- 
ting ‘fac ut tecum lugeam’ as an entirely separate proposition. In 
short, he is neither conventional nor pedantic: he knows how 
words actually are spoken and does not argue, like Dr. Johnson, 
that a negative commandment such as ‘Thou shalt not steal’ 
should stress the word ‘not’, in defiance of the plain fact that in 
common speech ‘shalt not’ has become ‘shan’t’. 


TCHAIKOVSKY 

CCXLI. SYMPHONY IN E MINOR, NO. 5, OP. 64 

i Andante y leading to Allegro con anima. 2 Andante cantabile , con alcuna 
licenza. 3 Valse. Allegro moderato. 4 Finale. Andante maestoso, leading to 

Allegro vivace . 

It cannot be too often pointed out that the duty of the writer of 
programme notes is that of counsel for the defence. Whatever the 
discerning critic may find to say against a composition, the pro- 
gramme writer has no business to say anything that interferes with 



TCHAIKOVSKY. OP. 64 59 

the listener’s enjoyment of the music; but he may be guided by 
times and seasons. When the work is so new and strange that 
responsible opinions may differ as to its strong and weak points, the 
analyst is justified in taking the strongest defensive line, limited only 
by carefully avoiding any attack upon music of other tendencies. 

At the time of Brahms’s death in 1897, Tchaikovsky was at the 
height of his popularity, and his own recent death was shrouded 
in tragic mystery. Even the ‘Brahminen’ were remarkably timid 
in their obituary estimate of Brahms, and it was the correct thing 
to say that his symphonies were eclipsed by Tchaikovsky’s. Of 
course they were, for they were not light music; and with this 
awful statement I have perhaps more than redressed the balance 
that I find myself to have disturbed by my high and sincere praise 
of Tchaikovsky’s Pathetic Symphony. Now that my analyses have 
been collected in book form, the limitations of a counsel for the 
defence become manifest. The reader, no longer so conscious of 
the needs of the concert-goer, is apt to assume that I am still talk- 
ing of the highest classical values, when I am merely stating the 
legitimate case for other music which is conspicuously the best of 
its kind. I have said nothing in praise of the Pathetic Symphony 
which I wish to retract. Nor have I given any grounds for sup- 
posing that I think its forms more than successful according to 
their lights. But I should not have helped the listener by intro- 
ducing what I take to be Tchaikovsky’s best work with an air of 
damaging patronage. If in 1907 a programme writer had dared t<\ 
insinuate that Tchaikovsky was primarily a writer of light music 
and that his tragedy was melodrama, the only effect would have 
been to excite the exultant fury of the ‘Brahminen’ against the 
numerically overwhelming opposition of all more persuasive and 
popular critics. The controversy would have soared to the Empy- 
rean of that region which the Germans have somehow failed to 
designate by the name of Heibrau , and everybody would have been 
made uncomfortable ; though not nearly so uncomfortable asBrahm 9 
and Tchaikovsky would have been in the presence of each other. 

To-day the situation is different. The Heibrauen do not seem 
clear as to the distinction between a writer of deservedly popular 
music and a humbug. At all events, the distinction becomes easier 
to appreciate when the music is at least a hundred years old. No 
sensible person is nowadays distressed at seeing a case made out 
for Weber; and no responsible person at this time of day wants to 
make out a case for Meyerbeer, though his arch-enemy, Wagner, 
qualified his fiercest denunciations by a most generous praise of 
the end of the fourth act of Les Huguenots. A clear distinction 
between good music and bad ought to be absolqte for responsible 
persons. The distinction between bad good music and good bad 



60 TCHAIKOVSKY. OP. 64 

music is an excellent conversational topic for talkers who can keep 
their tempers, but I have never ventured to prescribe it as a subject 
for students* essays. Nor do my duties as counsel for defence 
compel me to say anything further that can interfere with the 
listener’s enjoyment of Tchaikovsky’s Fifth Symphony. I hope 
all listeners will be able to enjoy the whole of it. Confession and 
avoidance, however, can remove a serious obstacle to their enjoy- 
ment of the finale. I have said of the Pathetic Symphony that its 
slow finale ‘is a stroke of genius which solves all the artistic pro- 
blems that have proved most baffling to symphonic writers since 
Beethoven*. The statement has shocked some people almost as 
much as if I had said that it was the greatest finale since Beethoven ; 
but the problems I refer to are simply the problems of getting up 
any sense of movement in a finale at all ; and I am afraid that my 
locus classicus for impotence in that matter is the finale of Tchai- 
kovsky’s Fifth Symphony. If the composer had intended to 
produce the nightmare sensation, or the Alice-and-Red-Queen 
sensation, of running faster and faster while remaining rooted to 
the spot, he might have been said to have achieved his aim here ; 
but the melancholy fact remains that this finale resembles all other 
compositions in which the vitally necessary problem of movement 
has simply not occurred to the composer at all. I have been 
generously praised for my defence of Bruckner, whose popularity, 
now at best-seller height in Germany and Austria, has not yet 
begun in England; and, that being so, nobody has objected to my 
saying frankly that you must not expect Bruckner to make a finale 
‘go*. But the popular Tchaikovsky is in worse case than Bruckner, 
for he evidently expects his finales to ‘go*, and neither the naive 
listener, nor the still more naive Heibrau> can at this time of day 
be helped by an analysis that leaves it to him to discover the fact 
that Tchaikovsky’s finale wants to go and cannot. 

One sometimes encounters the view that Tchaikovsky’s Fifth 
Symphony is finer than the Pathitique , on the ground that it has 
fewer ‘tricks*. Tchaikovsky’s orchestration is undoubtedly vivid, 
and the salient features of the Pathetic Symphony are specially 
ingenious. I don’t know if anything else in the Pathetic Symphony 
is to be called ‘tricks’ ; but if tricks are good tricks, I prefer to have 
as many of them as possible, and I am not disinclined to call them 
ideas. So now let us see how many ideas we can find in this Fifth 
Symphony, and let no Heibrau persuade us to throw the baby out 
with the bath-water. 

The introduction sets forth a dour melody which I leave 
to musical folk-lorists to put into the right pigeon-hole among 
their Russian folk-songs, premising only that Tchaikovsky was 
abundantly capable of inventing it himself. 




which builds up by a crescendo of repetitions to a big tutti which 
eventually effects a transition to dramatic action. Great harmonic 
distinction is given to this theme by its first note. Those who 
misremember it as B will learn a useful lesson in style when they 
come to notice that this note is C and not B. 

From this tune the music rouses itself to fluent dramatic action, 
in the course of which a new incident — 





62 TCHAIKOVSKY. OP. 64 

is remarkable for the colour of the wind chords, while the 

second — 

introduces a melting cantabile in a Brahmsish cross-rhythm. The 
direction ‘molto piu tranquillo* has led to a tradition that pulls 
this passage entirely out of relation to the main tempo, but Tchai- 
kovsky adds a metronome mark (J . = 92) which leaves it well in 
touch with the rest. His exaggerated markings indicate nerves 
rasped by the inattention of conductors and players to ordinary 
nuances. Like most of such nervous reactions they defeat their 
object; and later editors make matters worse by adding more 
marks. Ex. 6 leads to a passionate climax in which the figure of 
Ex. 2 appears, after which Ex. 5 brings the exposition to a trium- 
phant end. 

The sounds of triumph fade away and pass into a contrapuntal 
development of the figures of Exx. 1 and 5, modulating through 
dark keys. Suddenly a storm bursts out on the transition theme 
(Ex. 3). Then Ex. 4 is developed in combination with other figures. 
At no immoderate length another climax is reached, and a return is 
made, through an outlying region of G minor, into the home tonic 
with a very impressive sudden diminuendo. The bassoon, an 
instrument much honoured and sometimes sorely tried in this 
symphony, brings back the main theme (Ex. 2) at exactly the right 
moment. 

The recapitulation is quite regular, B minor being replaced by 
C sharp minor, which leads to the home tonic. 

The coda works up Ex. 2 in a lively crescendo, the climax of 
which initiates a basso ostinato on the notes E, D, C, B, which 
persists for 28 repetitions to within 8 bars of the end, while Ex. 2 
is almost as obstinate in the treble. The diminuendo reaches a 
darkness almost as Cimmerian as those in the Pathetic Symphony. 
But it would be a mistake to impute any deep psychic gloom to 
this excellent and pleasantly sardonic first movement, or indeed 
to any part of this symphony. 

The andante begins with 8 bars of hymn-like chords which, 
starting as if in B minor, swing round to D major, the key of the 
second group in the first movement. These chords might well 
have become an important theme, or at least a canto fermo; but 
they are not heard again, their sole function being this swing from 
B minor to D. They drift into an accompaniment to a broad 
melody given out by the first horn. 


TCHAIKOVSKY. OP. 64 63 


Ex. 7. 



From this arises an auxiliary theme in the bright key of F sharp 
major. 


Ex. 8. 



This is the chief topic of the most impassioned climaxes in this 
movement. 

A middle episode, ‘moderato con anima’, modulating widely, 
begins in F sharp minor with the following theme — 



At its climax the home dominant is reached, and the motto theme 
(Ex. 1) appears with great emphasis in a significant new position. 

One of the most famous of all Tchaikovsky’s rhetorical strokes^ 
is the short pause and swinging pizzicato chords which follow this 
by way of return to the main theme (Ex. 7), which is now 
adorned by rhythmic imitations in the oboe and other wind instru- 
ments. 

The final climax of the movement concerns itself chiefly with 
Ex. 8. Towards the end the fateful motto theme intervenes thun- 
derously in a new position. After this the rest of the movement is 
an impressive dying away on the topic of Ex. 7. 

The graceful valse which does duty for scherzo can be enjoyed 
without the aid of quotations. A notorious passage for the bassoon 
owes most of its atrocious difficulty to the assumption that 
Tchaikovsky intends it to be brilliant. I see no reason to doubt 
that his intention is rather that it should be the one note of passion 
in an otherwise indolently graceful movement; and, in particular, 
that it should thus enhance the contrast afforded by the lively trio 
with its spiccato runs. In the coda the ghost of Ex. 1 appears 
dimly. 

By way of introduction to the finale, Ex. 1 presents itself very 
much in the flesh and in majestic tonic major. It alternates with a 
new chord theme — * 




TCHAIKOVSKY. OP. 64 




which introduces darker keys (G major in relation to E minor), 
and eventually causes the bass to settle upon G, and to remain 
there not only while the introduction dies away, but also while the 
following self-repeating theme of an allegro vivace breaks 
th 


I have already expressed my doubt as to whether Tchaikovsky 
intends his finale to give an impression of struggling vainly to 
achieve flight, but perhaps the listener will enjoy it best if he 
assumes that to be the composer’s intention. New figures, such 




# 57 - ^ T 


When at last a new cantabile appears as the chief member of the 
second group, it enters over an ostinato that has already persisted 
for a long time, and is going to persist much longer. Again we find 
ourselves in the D major characteristic of the work. 


Ex. 14. 

8 va. 



TCHAIKOVSKY. OP. 64 65 

By way of change of movement, the motto theme (Ex. 1) bursts 
out in full majesty without slackening the tempo, and its second 
figure is ingeniously paraphrased in terms of Ex. 1 1, thus initiating 
a development in which Ex. 13 stalks on its way, sometimes below, 
and sometimes above, the ostinato figure derived from the first 
notes of Ex. 1 1 . 

At last an impressive diminuendo with fine modulations reduces 
fig. (6) to repeated chords, while the other ostinato, fig. (a), dis- 
covers that it has been representing the home tonic for a long 
time. Then a recapitulation begins, Ex. 1 1 bursting out suddenly 
as bass to a new theme. The other materials follow in more or 
less their original sequence, the second group answering its former 
D major by the new and bold colour of F sharp major. This is 
brought round to the home dominant, on which the rhythm, but 
not at first the actual theme, of Ex. 1 asserts itself. Its actual 
appearance as a theme is carefully deferred until a grand climax 
of themeless chords has duly prepared us for a triumphal march 
(‘moderato assai e molto maestoso*) in the major. As such, with 
new counter-points, Ex. 1 now displays itself at leisure, with 
accompaniments of increasing brilliancy. Then there is a return to 
presto, where a further coda deals with Exx. 12 and 13. 

But the last word of the symphony is concerned with neither the 
issues of the finale nor the motto theme, but with the main theme 
of the first movement (Ex. 2) in grandiose major and unqualified 
cheerfulness. 

My own conclusion about Tchaikovsky’s Fifth Symphony is* 
that great injustice to its intentions results from regarding it as in 
any way foreshadowing the Pathetic Symphony. Like all Tchai- 
kovsky’s works, it is highly coloured ; and a critic who should call 
it restrained would be in evident medical need of restraint himself; 
but the first three movements are in well-proportioned orthodox 
form, and my general impression of this symphony is that from 
first to last Tchaikovsky, though I have never been able to impute 
to him a sense of humour, is thoroughly enjoying himself. And I 
don’t see why we shouldn’t enioy him too. 


REGER 

CCXLII. SERENADE IN G MAJOR, FOR ORCHESTRA, OP. 95 

i Allegro moderato . 2 Vivace a Burlesca. 3 Andante semplice. 4 Allegro 

con spirito. 

The Orchestral Serenade, opus 95, ought to be the work by which 
the public has learnt to enjoy Reger. Yet it seeftis to have fallen 
vi F 



66 REGER. OP. 95 

into neglect. There is no reason why the most esoteric disciple 
of Reger should wish it to be neglected, for it is intensely charac- 
teristic of him and in no way superficial or misrepresentative of 
his message to the world. Yet it has a surface beauty so extra- 
ordinary and so directly convincing, that it was one of the very 
few modern works which Joachim in the last years of his life was 
able to enjoy. Any fool could, and many fools did, gibe at Joa- 
chim’s inability in old age to enjoy new music. But only wise and 
unselfish people are capable of the great and constant efforts that 
Joachim made to appreciate new works up to the end of his life, 
and, to those who knew him well enough to see how great these 
efforts were, it was a touching and historic moment when he intro- 
duced this Serenade to the students of the Hochschule at Berlin, 
as a work unquestionably of the highest importance, though repre- 
senting tendencies which he did not profess to follow. It was 
produced almost immediately after Max Reger’s most notorious 
work, his Sinfonietta, a work which begins as naively as that famous 
line, ‘Who wills may hear Sordello’s story told’, and continues as 
much to the bewilderment of every one whose will has failed to 
carry him through that story. Of the first performance of the 
Sinfonietta it is recorded that the eminent and witty conductor 
Siegfried Ochs, on leaving the concert-room, gave a pat on the 
back to the notorious composer of Ein Heldenleben and the Sinfonia 
Domestic a, saying: ‘H’m, h’m, I come back to my dear old Strauss.* 
The Sinfonietta is not markedly different from Reger’s other works, 
except in the very dangerous defect that its orchestration, if taken 
in strict accordance with the over-numerous directions of the com- 
poser, is very thick and extremely shrill. In spite of its already 
being his 90th opus, it shows the inexperience of a scholar who 
has developed rule-of-thumb procedures with an intensity that 
entirely defeats their object; the typical work, in fact, of a pupil 
of Hugo Riemann, whose editions of the musical classics are so 
instructive that I find I need a quarter of an hour to practise the 
subject of a two-part fugue of Bach in accordance with the 
instructions, and that the simultaneous playing of the two voices 
when the answer arrives is definitely beyond my capacity. But 
Reger was an artist who learnt quickly from experience and whose 
talent for composition was irrepressible, even beneath the weight 
of the Riemannian steam-roller. Between opus 90 and opus 95, that 
is to say between the Sinfonietta and this serenade, Reger somehow 
contrived to clear up his orchestration so far that even a rough 
first rehearsal of the Serenade produces an astonishingly beautiful 
texture. And a naive listener may for some time be satisfied to 
leave it at that. It is an utter mistake to regard Reger as continuing 
either the tradition of Brahms or any other classical tradition. 



REGER. OP. 95 67 

The enormous apparent complexity of his music is merely a widely 
diffused complexity of texture. Even as such it has its psycho- 
logically well-timed changes and moments of relief. You cannot 
improvise on a keyboard in such a texture, but Reger could and 
did improvise on paper. 

The fact that a large proportion of his works is in sonata form 
is frankly and literally neither here nor there, at all events in the 
classical sense of sonata style. The sonata style will never be 
understood by people who do not realize that it is primarily and 
intensely dramatic. Mozart is the one triumphant exception to the 
rule that the writers of absolute music are not writers for the stage; 
and the reason for this exception is partly that Mozart's talent 
was universal, but also that that talent came into the world at 
exactly the right moment for simultaneously dramatizing the sonata 
style and giving perfect musical form to the treatment of situations 
on the stage. It is difficult to say what Reger would have done with 
an opera. His temperament goes with an abhorrence of staginess 
which would exclude that quality from the stage itself if it could. 
What is quite certain is that his mastery of the external forms 
of classical music was completely irrelevant to music drama. 
But my own opinion is that it was equally irrelevant to his own 
music, and that it did it neither good nor harm. He set up the 
proportions of sonata forms a priori and filled them out with his 
music. 

One of the greatest masters of the art of extemporizing, living, 
here in Edinburgh, was overheard by me, after the conclusion of 
one of his unrecorded symphonic poems, to answer an indiscreet 
question of an admirer: ‘No, my fugue wouldn't bear analysis.' 
But it would very well have borne hearing again, if one could 
recapture it; and I am not much interested in the kind of analysis 
that such music will not bear. Reger's music will, no doubt, bear 
that kind of analysis, as well as the analysis that I believe in. His 
classical forms are according to the definitions in Riemann's 
dictionary. But to identify them as such will not help the listener. 
My own belief is that it does not help with classical music; for I 
find that, if I have to analyse a great classic with any efficiency, I 
must go from phrase to phrase as if there was no a priori definable 
form at all. I call the result a classical form when this process of 
detailed analysis convinces me that the form is the inevitable result 
of the material, and that the question which came first is a merely 
practical matter of no aesthetic importance. In the case of highly 
dramatic works, close attention may be needed for minute details 
which the further course of the work may show to be as enor- 
mous in their consequences as the depth into \yhich the parsley 
sank into the butter on a hot day in one of Sherlock Holmes's 



68 REGER. OP. 95 

unrecorded cases. When such a story is well told, these fatal details 
are put clearly enough in the first instance for an attentive memory 
to recognize their importance without undue length of recapitula- 
tion when the time comes for explanations. Now far be it from me 
to insinuate that the listener who misses any of Reger’s fine detail 
has not missed something of importance. But I can assure him 
that what he will miss will be such matters of proportion as are 
never appreciated until you have known your music by heart for 
years, and that, for all the extraordinary elaboration of Reger’s 
scores, that composer is as inveterate an extemporizer as Handel; 
though, unlike Handel, his texture is never either simple or 
thin, and every scrap of his extemporization has been most meti- 
culously written down. His adherence to the externals of sonata 
form is, in this serenade as in all his chamber-music, so strict 
that the old-fashioned terminology will do for every stage of the 
work. 

The main themes of the first movement of this serenade are so 
attractive and so nearly normal in their phrasing that the first 
impression of that movement ought to suffice to carry the listener 
through the whole of the rest, however unfamiliar Reger’s style 
may be to him. It is not often that Reger gives his melodies so much 
time to explain themselves as is the case with Exx. i and 3. It is 
part of his view of musical history that modern progress has made 
the building of square-cut melodies an anachronism; and the 
avoidance of. squareness is a restriction which Reger has con- 
sciously laid upon his methods of extemporizing. You may take 
it, therefore, that the quotations I have thought necessary to give, 
though they are far from representing every theme in his Serenade, 
do as a matter of fact represent all there is of each theme. How 
far Reger is a composer of large paragraphs I cannot show in a 
short analysis. I have never yet found him at a loss. His sentences 
are as infallible as Gladstone’s, who is said never to have required 
correction in Hansard, though he could do without a full stop 
for pages together. 

The listener who is not familiar with Reger’s style will, then, 
need reassurance on these points: first, that his attention may be 
safely concentrated on what is in fact the rule of safety for all 
music — listen from one moment to the next and, if the texture is 
rich, enjoy it as such. Secondly, do not be bewildered by Reger’s 
constant changes of key. This hardly applies to the present work, 
though opening themes in G major do not usually make their 
first modulation to F sharp major. If the poet tells you that ‘he 
thought that he saw a rattlesnake which questioned him in Greek, 
And when he looked again it was the middle of next week’, you 
had better listen for the continuation in a calmly receptive mood 



REGER. OP. 95 69 

before you tiy to summarize the poet’s philosophy. He may be 
intending to give simple pleasure without any purpose of incul- 
cating philosophy. As a matter of fact, the modulations in this 
Serenade are not very confusing, and its only non-classical feature 
of tonality is the key of the slow movement, A major, which 
Brahms would never have dreamt of choosing as an element in a 
work in G. 

The scoring of the Serenade divides the string band into two 
complete groups, one muted and the other unmuted. In a footnote 
the composer requests that the unmuted orchestra be placed as 
far as possible to the conductors left and the muted orchestra to 
his right. I came to my first rehearsal of the work full of zeal to 
carry out this direction, which I found placed beyond all human 
ingenuity by the fact that each muted part was printed on the 
same pages as the corresponding unmuted part in order that both 
might be played by the players at one desk. It seems that before 
the parts were printed Reger had already found that the muted 
band was quite enough handicapped by its mutes without the 
additional disadvantage of sitting in the position of second violins 
with instruments turned away from the audience. In his next 
important work, opus 100, Variations on a Theme by Adam Hiller, 
he uses this division of the orchestra in passages here and there. 
Obviously there is no time in such a case to play a game of musical 
chairs while the orchestra rearranges itself, and Reger evidently 
found that the antiphonal effect of a change of position was not 
worth the trouble. 

The listener will find already in the course of Ex. 1 that the 
change of colour with the third bar is an experience unlike any- 
thing in earlier music and quite thrilling enough to set the standard 
for his enjoyment of the whole work. In spite of an apparent 
inability to resist the temptation to indulge in such luxuries as 
harp-harmonics on every convenient occasion, Reger’s profound 
rhetorical instinct always keeps his music on the alert. You will 
find no difficulty in following it if you will only abandon your 
mind to it and refuse to be misled by its outward conformity to the 
rules of sonata music. I do not quote anything like the complete 
stock of Reger’s themes, and I have very little curiosity as to how 
far the themes which I do quote may be discovered to be derived 
from each other. ‘Let go your hands and your feet and you’ll 
come down by yourself,’ as the steward of the Clyde steamer said 
to the testy passenger who asked how he was to negotiate the 
saloon stairs. 

Here are three themes from the first movement; the main theme, 
which haunts not only the listener’s memory, bpt the last bars of 
each of the other movements — 




The development begins with a dramatic and impressive aug- 
mentation of the figures of Ex. i. Though its course comprises 
a vigorous fugue on derivative themes it is not inordinately long. 
The return is effected quietly but dramatically after Reger has 
combined Exx. i and 3 simultaneously. At the beginning of the 
recapitulation a new figure — 


Ex. 4 a. 



is combined with Ex. 1. Its whimsical purpose will appear later. 
When the recapitulation has reached Ex. 4 a typical short Reger 
coda follows, consisting of a ritardando that, with a plunge into 


REGER. OP. 95 71 

the warm dark key of B flat, loses the original tempo altogether 
and re-establishes the home tonic in an ever-slackening adagio. 
Such an obliteration of tempo is quite outside all precedent in 
recorded classical art-forms, but is very familiar to the church 
organist, who has to continue his extemporization until the clergy 
and choir are ready to begin the service. As successor to a certain 
J. S. Bach in the Cantorship of St. Thomas at Leipzig, Reger is 
familiar with all the devices of church organists ; and any musician 
who is so snobbish as to object to such devices a priori, deserves 
the snub of the grim old lady in the omnibus who said to the 
young person who was afraid of being taken for a shop-girl: T 
hope, my dear, that you will never be taken for anything less re- 
spectable.’ These organist’s ‘trailers’ of Reger’s are among the 
most beautiful things in the music of the early twentieth century. 

The tiny little scherzo has no trio, though it has more themes 
than the contrasted couple which I quote. 


Ex. 5. 



It soon surprises us by a sudden loss of momentum, and ends by 
slackening to an adagio close in which Ex. 1 appears as a penulti-* 
mate flat supertonic. 

The slow movement, in the entirely unorthodox key of A major, 
is a rondo, inasmuch as its main theme — 


Er.7. 



though not built into any too square-cut a melody for Reger’s 
taste, alternates with two distinct episodes, recurring several times 
and giving a full sonata-like recapitulation of the first episode in 
the tonic. A transition-theme — 



leads to the first episode, which is in the dominant. I give the 
whole theme of the episode, to show that Reger is by no means 
afraid of giving a long melody to the first violins,without breaking 




72 REGER. OP. 95 

it up. Figure x, from the first movement, will surprise the atten- 
tive listener by appearing here among the accessory counterpoints. 

Ex. 9. _ 




This leads to considerable development of the previous material. 
In due time the main theme (Ex. 7) returns with very gorgeous 
scoring and is followed by a recapitulation, full but free, of the 
transition and first episode in the tonic. Slow as is the tempo, the 
coda again gives us an organist’s ritardando, and the enormous 
last bar contains two distinct allusions to Ex. 1. 

The finale is spirited and energetic, with a typical crowd of 
Reger themes all as pretty as the stories in the dictionary and all 
as ‘unco short*. 

I select, with no very strong case for preference, two from the 
first group in the tonic — 






73 


REGER. OP. 95 

and the main theme of the second group — 



The movement is in full sonata form. The course of the develop- 
ment is deflected by an episode in double fugue which obviously 
owes one of its figures to the semiquavers in Ex. 12 — 



After a triumphant return and full recapitulation the coda turns 
into a mood of Prospero-like reflection and solemn peace, recalling 
and developing the figures of Ex. 1 in a slow climax of euphony 
that gloriously crowns the work. Figure x also gives its blessing 
to the coda. 


MAHLER 

CCXLIII. SYMPHONY IN G MAJOR, NO. 4 

f Bedachtig . ( Moderato .) 2 In gemdchlicher Bewegung. Ohne Hast. (At a 
deliberate pace; unhurried.) 3 Ruhevoll. (Calm.) 4 Sehr behaglich. (Very 

comfortably.) 

Mahler was born in i860, and died in 1911. He earned his reputa- 
tion as one of the world's greatest conductors. As a composer he 
fascinated a few musicians, but infuriated almost all the rest. 
The fury that he aroused was not partisan like that aroused by the 
compositions of Liszt. Even at the present day people who dislike 
Liszt are repelled, as Ruskin would have been repelled, by qualities 
to which they impute a sinister ethical significance. This is not 
altogether to Liszt's disadvantage. People who believe in the devil 
are either too much horrified by their belief to tolerate the slightest 
mention of him, or they find a naughty thrill in playing w T ith their 
superstition. On the whole, a belief in the devil is a superstition 
which is likely to survive, and even to flourish when all other 
capacity for belief is exhausted. It is so very 4 asy to live up to. 





74 MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 

And it supplies ready-made every conceivable gradation of con- 
trast, and can give to the most facile pathos the apparent strength 
of sardonic humour. In the time of Ruskin and Clara Schumann 
it was impossible not to be angry when the devil interfered in 
aesthetic questions, as he always did. 

The opposition to Mahler is angrier, less serious, and more 
damaging. In Holland Mahler has for the last fifteen years or so 
been as nearly deified as any composer in history. This is odd, 
because there is perhaps no country in which musical criticism is 
more blast towards older music. A great artist not long ago ven- 
tured to play in Holland Joachim’s Hungarian Concerto, which I 
personally regard as a work not only of immense historical impor- 
tance, but a monumental accumulation of beautiful musical thoughts 
second only to the greatest classics, and of a quality which none 
of the greatest masters could afford to despise. The most eminent 
Dutch critics were agreed in wondering that such stuff had ever 
been published at all. No great insight is needed to discover a 
certain stiffness in Joachim’s style as a composer. And as for its 
relation to earlier classical music, no listener need be a listener at 
all to discover its derivation. We have been told all about that. 
Let us hope that the vogue of Mahler in Holland is already a sign 
that anti-classical snobbery is becoming out of fashion. For the 
infuriating quality of Mahler’s music is particularly antiseptic 
against snobs, though perhaps it cannot prevent the rise of Mah- 
lerite snobs. There is no class of composer, diabolist or purist, 
for whom a first impression of Mahler will not cause pangs of 
jealousy. Mahler is no Shakespeare, and few, if any of us, are 
Coleridges; but we could all write like that 'if we had the mind’. 
He has no inhibitions. The experienced composer, academic, 
revolutionary, self-centred in Delian or Debussian circles ever 
narrowing, or eclectic in an expanding Straussian universe, en- 
counters the style and achievements of Mahler with something of 
the horror which we are told that Dr. ‘Froyd’ evinced when the 
blonde lady revealed to him that she had neither dreams nor 
inhibitions, and that she never did not do anything ‘vialent’ that 
she wanted to do, though ‘the bullet only went into Mr. Jenning’s 
lung and came out again’. 

My own belief is that a vogue for Mahler has already Deen of 
great benefit to musical culture all over the world, and will con- 
tinue to be useful for a longer time than I can estimate. There is 
a fundamental inaccuracy in saying that an artist has too much 
facility, unless we make it quite clear that we mean by ‘facility’ the 
condition in which the artist’s thoughts have no chance of maturing. 
A tree that needs pruning may be said to have too much facility in 
producing leaves, but its trouble is that until it is pruned it has very 



MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 75 

little facility for producing fruit. The stream which spreads itself 
into an unwholesome marsh instead of developing into a mighty 
river is not suffering from too much facility or too much water. 
It has simply not been helped by nature or art to dig a proper 
channel in which its waters can accumulate. 

In the last resort, every artist needs all the facility he can get. 
What we composers find so disconcerting about Mahler is that 
every aspect of his work shows all the advantages of an unchecked 
facility and none of the disadvantages. It has us beaten at every 
point, and leaves us no resource but to sit upright in our dignity 
as men of taste and say, ‘This will never do/ We cannot fall 
back upon the device of classifying Mahler as one of the conductor- 
composers who have drifted into composition through the urge to 
display their vast memories as experienced conductors. Mahler 
was only twenty when he produced his first important work, Das 
Klagende Lied. We cannot say that his music is reminiscent, for 
our chief objection to it is that no other composer has had the 
effrontery to proceed further with the ideas that give Mahler his 
simple pleasures. The very first note of his First Symphony is a 
sustained A eight octaves deep. I do not suppose that I was the 
only eleven-year-old child to whom it occurred to strike, with the 
aid of two other children, all the eight A’s on the pianoforte. Weber 
thought Beethoven ripe for the madhouse when Beethoven in the 
coda of the first movement of his Seventh Symphony held a 
sustained E five octaves deep. But that was in a passage with a 
long history of highly organized development behind it; and it is* 
curious that Weber did not rather select the five-octave B flat at 
the very beginning of Beethoven’s Fourth Symphony, though he 
had already cited that introduction with scorn as an instance of the 
bluff of spreading a dozen notes over a quarter of an hour. 

These illustrations will give the devout Mahlerite his cue for 
claiming that history is repeating itself by displaying exactly the 
same opposition to Mahler as was shown to Beethoven in his day. 
We need not trouble to discuss the inference that Mahler is another 
Beethoven; and, though history repeats itself, its variations are 
extremely difficult to analyse. But we can say with certainty that 
Mahler’s example has set modern composers free from inhibitions 
which were for the most part harmful and snobbish. He has been 
a greater liberator in this way than Richard Strauss, for Strauss 
indulges his vein of naive melody under the pretext of caricature. 
Till Eulenspiegel and Don Quixote are his heroes. The element 
of caricature is present in Mahler, but he is terrified lest it should 
be suspected where he is as unconscious of it as Dickens in his 
most conscientiously pathetic passages. Nothing can lend itself 
more to caricature than the grotesque folk-pastofal poem from Des 



76 MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 

Knaben Wunderhorn , but Mahler’s direction to the singer is: ‘The 
voice with an expression of childlike cheerfulness without the 
slightest suspicion of parody.’ In the twentieth century it is 
impossible for an artist to indulge himself with simple forms and 
simple melodies without feeling conscious of the dangers of affecta- 
tion or caricature. Mahler is so enormously rich in every technical 
resource that, as Rontgen used to say, one cannot trust his sim- 
plicity. This pastoral style is d la c amp ague > and Marie Antoinette 
could be d la campagne at the Trianons. 

On the other hand, the most devout Mahlerite will hardly claim 
that the master’s style is aristocratic, either by nature or by affecta- 
tion. On the whole, we composers and men of taste will be well 
advised to abandon our opposition, for if we persist in it there is 
no point on which we can clear ourselves from the suspicion of 
being jealous. Mahler did not care two hoots for popularity. He 
was extremely exacting as a conductor, and was sometimes in bodily 
peril from the anger roused by his ruthless efforts in raising the 
standard of the Vienna Opera House to its supreme height. In 
point of style he might be called a musical Dickens born out of 
season. In every technical direction — form, counterpoint, and 
instrumentation — his musical facility is so enormous that we can- 
not compare him to any of the other monstr' -inform' -ingent'- 
horrendi masters that otherwise resemble him, and who become 
objects of fanatical worship at the expense of the more orthodox 
classics. And so the opposition to Mahler deprives him even of 
the martyr’s crown. We do not wish it generally known, but we 
would all like to write like Mahler if we dared ; and we all think 
that we could. The martyr whom he most nearly resembles is 
Bruckner, but Mahler is anything but helpless, and rouses none of 
the sympathy of a naive artist struggling for self-expression. Far 
from it. We find his facility deadly. His Third Symphony is 
a musical phantasmagoria in which all the elements that have ever 
been put into a symphony before are conglomerated with all the 
musical equivalents of a picaresque novel and a Christmas panto- 
mime. It was intelligently anticipated by Aristophanes in a word 
beginning lepado-temacho . • . and filling six or seven lines in 
Liddell and Scott’s Lexicon. On internal evidence it was written 
during a holiday at Llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwymdrobwll- 
llantysiliogogogoch. Yet the history of this Third Symphony 
shows that Mahler could exercise artistic restraint; for he so 
compressed its plan that he extruded one of its items, which he 
preserved for a more conspicuous existence as the finale of his 
Fourth Symphony. 

The musical culture of Great Britain will probably be the better 
for the rise of a vogue for Bruckner and Mahler; and perhaps 



MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 77 

Mahler will do us more good than Bruckner, because his mastery 
will discourage the cult of amateurishness, which keeps us con- 
tented with ignorance and ready to believe that ineptitude is noble 
in itself; and the good taste which is ready to take offence at 
Mahler’s sentimentality will be all the better for being shocked. 
It will find itself compelled to recognize that the difference between 
good and bad is not a matter of fashion; though, with all respect to 
Horace, it can never cease to be a matter of dispute. For my own 
part, I flatly refuse to class Mahler with either Liszt or Meyerbeer. 
Liszt is for me a composer whose art has a definite taint which 
ruins my enjoyment of much that would otherwise fascinate me. 
Meyerbeer is a very clever, and sometimes very inventive, com- 
poser who is such a thorough humbug that I cannot regard him 
as a real person at all, and cannot be bothered to argue with people 
who can. There will be reservations with all such matters; and I 
am entirely in agreement with Wagner, who had the courage to 
scandalize all his friends by praising in the highest terms the duet 
at the end of the fourth act of Les Huguenots ; but one decent mo- 
ment will not make Meyerbeer into a good artist, and all the bad 
taste of Dickens, Victor Hugo, Byron, and Berlioz will not make 
Mahler a bad composer. 

Mahler’s Fourth Symphony is pastoral throughout. The orches- 
tra pretends to be small, inasmuch as it has no trombones and 
only four horns. On the other hand, it is very expensive in extra 
wood-wind, and denies itself nothing in what is known as the 
‘kitchen department’, such as sleighbells and gongs. The first* 
movement begins with farm-yard noises — 



I quote scarcely half the large number of themes that Mahler 
pours out and adorns with instrumentation and counterpoint of 
infallible mastery and clearness. The counterstatement of Ex. 2 


78 MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 

is in free canon, combined in the third bar with a casual counter- 
point which afterwards becomes an important theme. 


Ex. 2 a. 



Another pair of yokels in double counterpoint — 



leads to the dominant, upon which, with the abruptness of Mozart’s 
most perfunctory style, the ‘second subject* radiates expression 
from every pore of its infant complexion. 



But under this burlesque simplicity the discerning composer may 
espy the cloven hoof, indicated by dropped and added beats which 
betray that Mahler’s phrase-rhythms are as supple and subtle as 
his scoring. 

I may as well quote one more theme, which brings new elements 
and leads to the end of the exposition. 



Its opening figure eventually dies away into the chord of B minor, 
and the initial farm-yard sounds (Ex. 1) are resumed, leading back 
to Ex. 2. 

The movement now proceeds to shape itself more or less like 
a rondo, instead of going into a development section. Ex. 2 (a) 
is expanded into a peaceful tonic-and-dominant die-away, coming 
to a long-drawn full-close. Then the farm-yard sounds are re- 
sumed, and something like a development arises. It develops 
what it likes, and settles where it likes. It soon makes up its mind 
that A major is a proper key in which the three repeated notes of 
Ex. 4 may become a long-drawn ‘Cheer, boys, cheer* over rumina- 
tions of the figure of Ex. 2 (a). For twenty-three bars this com- 
plex, or simplex, refuses to be dislodged from A as its bass-note. 



MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 79 

It then strides casually into the middle of next week, which you 
may call E flat minor if you like ; and the other figures of the exposi- 
tion enter into discussion with each other, modulating rapidly, 
and sometimes settling to episodic sections in this or that key, 
always with plenty of variety and quite clear sequence. At last a 
tremendous climax is reached in C major, with triumphant shouts 
of the upper theme of Ex. 3. The decline from this leads to the 
return of the main theme (Ex. 2), but, very cunningly, not to its 
opening, but to its third bar; as if the theme, after having travelled 
round the world, were to walk in to breakfast unannounced, re- 
marking, ‘As I was saying . . .* It drifts into a recapitulation which 
is disguised by the fact that much of the matter is now given to the 
bass with new counterpoint above. The transition theme (Ex. 3) 
enters in the bass with something of the excitement of the C major 
climax of the development, and Mahler puts as a mark of expres- 
sion the word wild (ferocious). The ‘Cheer-boys-cheer* simplex 
(Ex. 4) is given with grandiose full tone, which subsides only at 
the cadence group (Ex. 5). When this has died away the farm-yard 
sounds are resumed, and the unquoted sequels of Ex. 2 are worked 
up into a full-sized coda, which eventually settles to a passage of 
sustained calm developed from Ex. 2 (a) and dying away into a 
very slow allusion to Ex. 2, which quickly hastens its pace and 
ends the movement in high spirits with a derivative of both mem- 
bers of Ex. 3 compressed like one of Humpty-Dumpty’s portman- 
teau words. 

The enemy dare not blaspheme at the themes of the first move-* 
ment, for to question their originality and distinction is to expose 
oneself to the charge of not seeing a joke. The themes of the scherzo 
will hardly give the enemy occasion to blaspheme, whether he 
likes them or not, for they are unquestionably original; and, if 
their spice has a smell of garlic, this is at all events a rural smell. 
The key of the movement is C minor, but it arises from an intro- 
duction in an outlying region. 


tr~* 



A solo violin enters aggressively (sehr zufahrend ), and wrenches 
the harmony round to C minor with the following sour theme — 


8o MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 

You will notice that the tone of the instrument is not exactly that 
of a Stradivarius played by Joachim. Mahler’s direction is wie ein 
Fiedel , which may be rendered ‘like a kit*, or ‘fiddle’ if you like; 
and the long-suffering player has to play upon a violin that has 
endured the indignity of being tuned a tone higher. 

The movement trips its leisurely way through a free rondo form 
to which the episodes might give the impression of a scherzo with 
two trios — 


Ex. 8. 



Ex. 0 . 



but for the fact that they return at once to the main theme before 
they round themselves off. The form assumes a more important 
aspect after the second return of the main theme, for then the 
material of both trios is elaborated in a spacious development, 
which goes through many keys before finally settling down in C 
major in a coda in which all the figures of scherzo and trios are 
discussed in dialogue. 

The third Movement is in a kind of variation form to which the 
nearest parallel may be found in the middle movement of Sibelius’s 
Fifth Symphony. The theme is no fixture, either as bass, melody 
or scheme of harmonies. Its constant element is a type of bass, the 
course of which follows the convenience of the moment; and over 
this bass long-drawn melodies and counterpoints ruminate at 
leisure. 



Thus it is impossible to limit the theme or to count the variations. 
After sixty bars Mahler makes a definite change of key to E minor, 
where, in a much slower tempo, an oboe sings a dirge over a 
version of the bass figure which is diminished from crotchets to 
quavers. The dirge, taken up by other instruments, develops 
with great passion, and a return is gradually made to the home 
tonic. The effect of a ritardando followed by a change to a tempo 
twice as fast makes it impossible to distinguish the diminished 


MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 8l 

version from the original version of the bass. In a footnote, 
Mahler now admits that he is writing a variation. The new counter- 
points are richer, and the pace accelerates. Like the first variation- 
group, this one dies away, and the dirge complex is resumed, 
starting in G minor and passing soon into the remote key of C sharp 
minor. After an impassioned climax in this key, it subsides into 
a new group of variations passing one into another with absolutely 
abrupt changes of tempo: first andante 3/4 time, then allegretto 
3/8, and then in E major allegro 2/4, quickening to allegro 
molto and suddenly falling back to andante. Upon this there is 
a long-drawn coda, which is dying away peacefully in G major 
when suddenly there is a tremendous burst of glory in E major, 
a key for which the E minor of the dirge has not prepared us. The 
glory dies away in a haze of light, passing back into G major and 
expiring very slowly on its dominant. 

The discerning listener rnay perhaps have heard a figure for 
four horns before the expiry of the outburst in E major which 
surprised us so at the end of the slow movement. I have not 
quoted this figure, because Mahler has taken more trouble to bring 
out another shrill motive in the trumpets. But from this figure 
arise the first notes of the soprano song with which the symphony 
ends. 


Ex. zz. 



The words are a poem from the famous anthology of folk poetry, 
Des Knaben Wunderhom. The orchestra supplies preludes and 
interludes and an extremely delicate and highly coloured accom- 
paniment. I forbear to transcribe or translate the poem word by 
word. No reasonable person will be shocked at its innocent pro- 
fanity; but until we have all learned to accept Mahler as a classic, 
we had better not expose him to the blasphemy of the enemy who 
would cast doubts upon the composer’s reverence for sacred 
subjects. Lewis Carroll, in his alter ego as the Rev. C. L. Dodgson, 
was severe in his condemnation of those who quoted the innocent 
profanities of children and then pleaded the innocence of the child 
as if it was their own innocence. He did not consider the possibility 
that one might quote innocent blasphemies with something like 
reverence for the innocence. Certainly it is difficult to imagine that 
anybody would quote them, as Dodgson implied, for the jejune 
purpose of blaspheming. 

I have already remarked on Mahler’s emphatic forbidding of 
any touch of parody in the performance of this finale. The poem 

VI Q 


82 MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 

describes the pleasures of a simple soul in Heaven, far from the 
strife of the world, which exists only in order that Weltgetiimmel 
may rhyme with Himmel , as it does in Bach’s most solemn cantatas. 
We live an angelic life and dance and skip while St. Peter in 
Heaven looks on. 


Ex. za. 





Sankt Pe - ter im Him - mel sieht zu! 


The next stanza brings back and develops the farm-yard sounds 
of the first movement. A certain savagery in the tone is accounted 
for by the fact that Herod is the accepted Family Butcher in this 
unorthodox heaven, and that St. John and St. Luke allow him a 
free hand. St. Luke kills his ox, the wine of the heavenly cellars 
costs nothing, and the angels bake the bread. 

The third stanza describes the heavenly vegetable gardens, with 
gardeners who, contrary to the severe baronial Scottish tradition, 
will let you have everything. Game of all sorts runs towards you, 
and all manner of fish swim into St. Peter’s net. 

With one more short farm-yard interlude from Ex. 1, the music 
subsides into E major, thus accounting for the outburst in that 
key at the end of the slow movement. Mahler’s harmony is the 
most diatonic that has been heard since classical times, though 
it has no inhibitions whatever. His classical keys and his other 
ancient and modern modes are always perfectly clear; but he does 
not feel any obligation to end a symphony or a movement in the 
key in which it began, and so his Fourth Symphony, after having 
been as firmly centred round G major as any symphony of Haydn, 
calmly subsides into E major for the last stanza of its final song, 
which describes the music of Heaven, with St. Ursula smiling 
upon her eleven thousand virgin dancers, and St. Cecilia and all 
her relations as the most excellent of court musicians. 

After all, we have the authority of Dante in more than one of the 
sublimest passages of the Paradiso for supposing that, though 
Heaven is not confined to what any mortal can understand, it 
includes all that we can understand. Bruckner understood con- 
siderably less of most things than Mahler. He would probably 
have been horrified at the notion of setting this poem. I, for my 
part, would be horrified at the idea of Meyerbeer setting it. Mahler 
I suspect of having wept as copiously over it as Dickens over 
Little Nell or Macaulay over the end of the Iliad . Such a temper 
has its dangers for judges and dictators; but it is much more 
useful in the present state of music than tastes that are too refined 




MAHLER. SYMPHONY NO. 4 83 

for Beethoven, and it is positively antiseptic against many types 
of morbid art. For Mahler himself the safeguard lies in his enor- 
mous technique; and for students of all kinds of musical technique 
Mahler will be none the less use to them if they are shocked by 
him. 


ELGAR 

CCXLIV. CONCERT OVERTURE, ‘iN THE SOUTH* (ALASSIO), 

op. 50 

I have not been to Alassio, and so I cannot talk of Elgar’s special 
sources of inspiration for this brilliant and sunshiny overture. I 
only hope that, if I ever do go there, I may not find myself in the 
position of the old lady who said to Turner that she could not see 
in sunsets anything like his pictorial representations of them; to 
which, of course, he replied, ‘Don’t you wish you could?’ If she 
could, she would not have been able to find words for them; and 
if ever I can see at places like Alassio what Elgar saw as he saw it, 

I would much rather write a concert overture about it than an 
analytical programme. 

There is still a suspicion of faintness in praising a work for its 
orchestration, though the time has perhaps passed since nobility 
was thought to be inherent in clumsy scoring; but, so long as tastes 
differ as to a composer’s style, there is something to be said for . 
calling the listener’s attention to a merit which every competent 
judge must admit to be supreme, not only in its artistic results, 
but in its practical efficiency. I shall not easily forget my impres- 
sion when, on first attacking this overture with considerable fear 
and expectation of its being as difficult as it is brilliant, I found 
that it simply carried the orchestra away with it and seemed to 
play itself at the first rehearsal. On inquiry, I found that one 
single member of the orchestra was not reading it at sight. This 
exception, of course, accounted for the whole phenomenon, and I 
am far from claiming that the rehearsal was such as I should 
willingly accept in lieu of a performance. But I and my students 
have never had a more impressive demonstration of the enormous 
efficiency of Elgar’s scoring. In brilliance the nearest approach to 
it in other modern music is the scoring of Richard Strauss; and 
Elgar and Strauss have in common a panache which is popularly 
expressed in both the title and the substance of Elgar’s Pomp and 
Circumstance Marches, and mystically expressed in the best parts 
of Strauss’s Heldenleben. But the scores of Strauss bristle with 
technical abnormalities, and he drives through fys musical traffic 
like a road-hog, with a mastery that has merely overawed the police 



84 ELGAR. OP. 50 

without reforming the rules of the road. Some think that even 
Ein Heldenlebert is now wearing too thin to reward the labour of 
thirty rehearsals for the purpose of securing accuracy where the 
composer merely intends effrontery. 

To the Straussian panache Elgar adds the enormous sonority 
and cogency of a style which is meticulously pure. This is a matter 
of fact, and not of taste. Perhaps the word ‘meticulous* may be 
misleading, and ‘classical* might be a better epithet. But I think 
‘meticulous* is right. Whether you are carried away by Elgar*s 
style or whether you dislike it, there is no doubt that it is not the 
style of a man who is at ease in himself or in Zion. Neither in 
poetry nor in music is the atmosphere of The Dream of Gerontius 
that of a muscular Christian after Charles Kingsley’s heart; and 
those for whom Kipling’s sixth-form imperialism obliterates his 
art will not like Pomp and Circumstance . But I should be surprised 
if the most nervous of reasonable music-lovers could not enjoy In 
the South . When it appeared in 1904, any approach to mastery 
of instrumental form on the part of a British composer was still 
considered dangerous. I cannot remember whether In the South 
had a better reception than the Cockaigne Overture; but it is both 
a larger and a simpler work, of which the portion normally devoted 
to developments is occupied by two detachable episodes. When 
Steinbach conducted it at a concert of English music at Cologne 
in, I think, 1906, 1 was surprised to find that he thought it patchy. 
That impression probably arose from these episodes, but I am 
sure that it is a superficial impression, perhaps intensified by the 
comparative orthodoxy and greater concentration of the other 
works played on that occasion. In itself, Alassio is by no means a 
loose-knit work. It has more unity than the Enigma Variations, 
and far more coherence than Elgar*s First Symphony. Classical 
overtures, especially when they are preludes to operas, do not pro- 
fess to have the concentrated texture of symphonic movements, 
and my most beloved overtures of Weber are things of shreds and 
patches compared to Alassio . 

Elgar begins with a group of heroic themes swinging along at 
full speed from the outset. 



There are more of these than it is necessary to quote, but Ex. 1 
shows itself as a counterpoint to all the others. The initial impetus 


ELGAR. OP. 50 85 

is strong enough to survive a solemn climax marked by Elgar’s 
favourite direction, Nobilmente. 



Even in the tranquillity of Ex. 8, Ex. 1 intrudes as a counterpoint. 
Soon Exx. 5 and 6 bring about a gradual revival of energy and 
carry us into the current of a vigorous development. But this does 
not last long before we are confronted with a terrifically impressive 
structure. 






I shall be highly pleased with myself if any Roman bridge or 
viaduct, at Alassio or elsewhere, can make an impression on me 
that is not mainly dominated by my knowledge of this magnificent 
passage with its superbly proportioned repetitions, climax, and 
diminuendo. People differ greatly in the extent to which sounds 
suggest visual impressions. With me this happens very rarely, but 
then very intensely; and Ex. io gives me the strongest suggestion 
of a horizontal line of roadway immensely high up, with the piers 
descending from it into greater and greater depths along a precipi- 
tous hill-side. 

After the vision has become distant, the progress of development 
is resumed with a new bustling theme. 


Eventually Ex. i intervenes, and there is another glimpse of the 
bridge or viaduct before Ex. 1 1 is resumed. The incident quoted 
in Ex. 4 becomes important in an impressive diminuendo, typical 
of Elgar’s most mystic style; and eventually we have what has 
become known in a separate arrangement as a piece for small 
orchestra, Canto Popolare {In Moonlight). As a separate piece it is 
a very pretty thing, but in its context in this Overture it is as gravely 
and romantically beautiful as music can be. 

Es. ra. 

Viola solo. 



fee. 


Quiet and slow reminiscences of Ex. i intervene contrapuntally, and 
there are warnings of a revival of energy in allusions to Exx. 4 and 5. 


ELGAR* OP. SO 87 

The Canto Popolare dies away, and in the original key and 
tempo Ex. 1 returns pianissimo, but with a rapid crescendo which 
soon brings us into the full swing of a regular recapitulation of 
everything from Exx. 1 to 8 : the F major group from 6 to 7 being, 
of course, now in the home tonic. From the quiet end of this 
recapitulation arises Ex. 3, a fourth lower and in the tenderest 
pianissimo. It swells out and leads to fresh developments of the 
livelier themes in a noble coda which is one of the best of all Elgar’s 
perorations, its rhetoric entirely unspoilt by tub-thumping, and 
leaving us with a magnificent impression of punctuality in its end. 


CCXLV. INTRODUCTION AND ALLEGRO FOR STRINGS 
(quartet and orchestra), op. 47 

Comparisons of this important work with the concerto grosso of 
the early eighteenth century are misleading. In its form and tex- 
ture there is neither the antiquity of Wardour Streete Englisshe 
nor that of the genuine furniture that may be bought in that street 
by those who know. It is a piece of modern music, modern in the 
lasting sense of the term. That is to say, its date, 1905, is no 
more identifiable in 1937 than it will be in 2005. The kind of 
concerto form which it embodies is in line with Beethoven and 
Brahms, and definitely out of line with Handel and Bach. The 
sound of the strings, in both solo and tutti, will remind us of the. 
older masters, simply because the Concerti Grossi of Handel and 
his predecessors and the third Brandenburg Concerto of Bach are 
the only classical works for string orchestra that we ever hear, with 
the solitary exception of Mozart’s toy masterpiece, Eine Kleine 
Nachtmusik. But if it had ever occurred to Beethoven or Brahms 
to experiment with the problem of concerto form for an orchestra 
of strings alone, they would have produced something with the 
essential features of the present work. It is highly probable that, 
like Elgar, they would have treated the contrast between string 
quartet and string tutti as rather a matter of fine shades than of the 
intense dramatic opposition of solo and orchestra that inspired 
them when the orchestra was full. Also the fitness of the occasion 
for fugue-writing would not have escaped their notice, nor would 
they have been slow to take advantage of it. 

In the present work, as in others, Elgar’s form is his own; and 
doubtless Beethoven and Brahms would each have achieved a 
different and unique solution of its special problem. A long 
classical orchestral ritornello has another function besides that of 
giving scope to the full orchestra. It presents fhe main features 
of the movement in an introductory form. This introduction 



88 ELGAR. OP. 47 

naturally has a processional character when the ritornello is long; 
and only something highly dramatic can be justified in curtailing 
it. Hence nothing could be more appropriate than that, instead 
of the formal ritornello, the present work should have a grand 
introduction in which the themes appear at first as fragments in 
a highly dramatic dialogue between orchestra and quartet; the 
united forces propounding a sternly majestic question — 


Ex. x. 8itt 



to which the quartet adds another in wistful tones — 



After the dialogue has made some progress with the discussion the 
viola is allowed to give full lyric form to a new melody in E flat — 



which the quartet and orchestra take up with quiet enthusiasm. 
Ex. i intervenes again dramatically, bringing back the key of G 
minor. The lyric melody pathetically accepts the decision; but its 
dying fall, after a long pause, resolves in the cheerful and active 
daylight with which the allegro now begins. 

Nobody could have foreseen what the functions of these themes 
are now to be. Ex. 2, with its typically Elgaresque quick dactylic 
figure, becomes the main theme. A new three-bar theme, stated 
in a lower octave by the quartet and answered by the tutti — 



executes a broadly designed transition to the dominant, in which 
key the second group begins in triumph. The a-priori theorist 
expects it to consist of an enlargement of the lyric melody, Ex. 3. 
It proves, on the contrary, to consist of a grand tutti on Ex. 1, in 
terms of the utmost confidence and power, worked out in a 
brilliant paragraph, the close of which is reached through an 
allusion to Ex. 4. Suddenly, as the figure of Ex. 1 reverberates 
above, through and below the last chords, the beginning of the 


ELGAR. OP. 47 89 

lyric melody is faintly heard in a tremulous unison of the muted 
string quartet — a moment of romantic power worthy to be set by 
the Romanza in the Enigma Variations. A lively fugue in G minor 
has the function of the development-portion of the work. It exer- 
cises this function the more efficiently by being completely inde- 
pendent of previous themes. In all genuine concerto styles the 
exposition itself is compelled by circumstances to have many 
features more typical of development than of exposition; and thus 
only by means of episodic matter can the development-portion 
maintain a character of its own. 

Here is the new fugue-subject — 



The key-changes of fugues are necessarily drifting rather than 
sharply contrasted. In as far as a fugue can be dramatic it is a 
debate; and dramatic action will probably stop a debate alto- 
gether. Hence Elgar leaves us to discover only when this debate 
has reached its climax that we have been at home in the tonic all 
the time. (No two works could be less like each other than this 
allegro and the finale of Beethoven’s Sonata, op. 101, but you will 
find exactly the same phenomenon there, as a result of the same 
insight into the nature of music.) As the fugue dies away, allusions 
to the transition theme (Ex. 4) indicate that the most episodic 0/ 
developments can be organically connected with the exposition so 
long as there is a B in Both. 

A full and regular recapitulation brings symmetry into the 
design; but the symmetry extends beyond the allegro and includes 
the Introduction; for the lyric melody, Ex. 3, is now neither a far- 
off echo nor a gentle strain with a dying fall for the ear of Duke 
Orsino, but a solemn triumphal march of full Elgarian pomp. 

Throughout the whole work the instrumentation has all Elgar’s 
subtlety and consummate mastery, shown more obviously by the 
limited means here available, though not more perfectly than in 
works for full orchestra. 


SIBELIUS 

CCXLVI. SYMPHONY IN C MAJOR, NO. 7, OP. 105 

In spite of the violent objection which every self-respecting musi- 
cian must feel towards the use of good music as a background to 
talking and eating, I confess that I was thrilled when, in its New- 
Year’s-Eve review of 1933, the British Broadcasting Corporation 


90 SIBELIUS. OP. 105 

used a gramophone record of parts of Sibelius’s Seventh Sym- 
phony as ‘slow music’ during the recital of the flight over Mount 
Everest. Let this sentence do duty for all further efforts to describe 
in words the austere beauty and rare atmosphere of Sibelius’s 
mature style. Unlike mountain atmospheres, however, that of 
Sibelius is by no means lacking in oxygen. 

It is well that this symphony has met with something like proper 
appreciation while it is still new. That appreciation has not ex- 
aggerated its merits; but it has exaggerated one or two aspects, the 
report of which may alarm the naive listener. That versatile if 
Conservative critic, Mr. Punch, has already remarked that the 
word ‘bleak’ has been overworked by the exponents of Sibelius. 
That word might easily be overworked by admirers of Mount 
Everest or of the moon. For such things it is a jejune epithet, but 
we need not trouble to find a better. Only a real poet can afford to 
tell us that the sky is blue, and he probably will not need to call it 
azure. If the listener can put up with a good description of the 
flight over Mount Everest he need not be afraid of the bleakness 
of Sibelius. 

Reports of the length and difficulty of this one-movement sym- 
phony are more definitely alarming: it has been described as the 
longest single and continuous design as yet achieved in absolute 
music; and experts who have discovered the main theme, as given 
three times by the first trombone (near the beginning, towards the 
middle, and at the end), have announced that discovery as the 
result of a closer familiarity with a complex work. As to its length 
as a single design, it is not much longer than Leonora No. 3, or 
the first movement of Schubert’s G major Quartet, and not as long 
as Beethoven’s Grosse Fuge> which was intended to be the finale of 
a quartet in six movements, but which makes no allusion to the 
themes of the other five. As to its difficulty, far be it from me to 
underrate the technical difficulties of any work for which the rare 
(and, in this category, unoxygenated) musical-economic atmo- 
sphere of Modern Athens gives its orchestral players only six 
hours’ practice a week. Nothing is easy in such conditions; but 
Sibelius was a very experienced composer many years ago, and 
this is his opus 105. But the work has a reputation for complexity 
as well; and this is misleading. Subtlety is quite a different thing, 
and easily misunderstood; but nobody ever began to understand 
subtleties by suspecting complexities that do not exist. 

In any tolerably competent performance of a typical work of 
Sibelius, the listener may rest assured that if he finds that an im- 
portant melodic note has been in existence some time before he 
was aware of it, the composer has taken special trouble to conceal 
the beginning of that note. If the listener feels that unformed 



SIBELIUS. OP. 105 91 

fragments of melody loom out of a severely discordant fog of 
sound, that is what he is meant to feel. If he cannot tell when or 
where the tempo changes, that is because Sibelius has achieved 
the power of moving like aircraft, with the wind or against it. An 
aeronaut carried with the wind has no sense of movement at all; 
but Sibelius’s airships are roomy enough for the passengers to dance 
if they like : and the landscape, to say nothing of the sky-scape, is 
not always too remote for them to judge of the movement of 
the ship by external evidences. Sibelius has not only mastered 
but made a system of that kind of movement which Wagner 
established for music-drama, and which the composers of sym- 
phonic poems before Strauss have often failed to achieve and have 
not always realized as essential to their problem. Moreover, he 
achieves it in absolute music without appealing to any external 
programme. He moves in the air and can change his pace without 
breaking his movement. The tempi of this Seventh Symphony 
range from a genuine adagio to a genuine prestissimo. Time 
really moves slowly in the adagio, and the prestissimo arouses the 
listener’s feeling of muscular movement instead of remaining a 
slow affair written in the notation of a quick one. But nobody can 
tell how or when the pace, whether muscular or vehicular, has 
changed. 

An adequate analysis of this noble work would be too subtle to 
be readable; and the listener would probably find its points more 
evident in the music than in any words. The following five quota-, 
tions will, I believe, serve the reader’s purpose, though there 
should be at least ten themes to make a complete list. 

The beginning is in darkness, with adumbrations of more than 
one future theme. Dawn grows into daylight with a long-drawn 
passage beginning with violas and ’cellos and pervading the whole 
string-band in a kind of Mixolydian harmony, differing, like all 
Sibelius’s modal harmony, from Palestrina’s only in the boldness 
of its dissonances. The winds join towards the climax; and then 
the main theme is given out by the first trombone — 


Ex. i. 



Fragments of other themes, including figures of the introduction, 
follow; and the time quickens gradually, while one of the new 
figures gains ascendancy and eventually takes shape as a dance — 





The presto on the home dominant to which this acc umulati on 
leads proves to be the accompaniment of the final return of Ex. i 
in its proper solemn adagio. With this, and with some of the un- 
quoted introductory figures, the symphony ends in tones of noble 
pathos. 


( 93 ) 

CCXLVII. ‘tapiola’, symphonic poem 

FOR FULL ORCHESTRA, OP. I 12 

Tapiola is the god of the northern forests, and the following verses 
represent the ‘programme’ of this tone-poem — 

Wide-spread they stand, the Northland’s dusky forests, 

Ancient, mysterious, brooding savage dreams; 

Within them dwells the forest’s mighty God, 

And wood-sprites in the gloom weave magic secrets. 

The music is quintessential Sibelius, and is, perhaps, even more 
typically than most of his works, describable as a vast and slow 
crescendo to a climax, after which the descent into silence is short 
and solemn. 

I have attempted on other occasions to write of Sibelius’s 
peculiar methods and art forms, which have always struck me as 
triumphantly achieving what Bruckner might have achieved in a 
purely instrumental music on the Wagnerian time-scale, if only 
he had not encumbered himself with misconceived survivals of 
sonata form. Sibelius’s emancipation from such things is complete, 
and he is no less independent of the sense of duty which forces the 
construction of brand-new systems of harmony upon ninety-nine 
out of a hundred of the composers whose names strike terror into 
the hearts of simple souls who ‘do not like this modern music’. 
There is plenty of unorthodoxy in Sibelius’s harmony, and it has 
many strange modes, most of them ruthlessly diatonic. But there 
is no concession to fashion. 

Tapiola is a god who pervades a mighty forest; and a detailed 
analysis of his music will make it impossible for us to see the wood 
for trees. On the other hand, there is such a thing as having so 
nobly generalized an idea of the wood as not to be able to know a 
tree when you see it. Music, after all, must be heard from one 
moment to the next; and, while there is a strong family resemblance 
between Sibelius’s many short themes which reiterate themselves 
in emotional outbursts, the listener may find some help in a series 
of quotations showing roughly how one thing leads to another. 
The ingenious analysis of the connexion between one theme and 
another, either by transformation or by figures common to both, 
is quite beside the mark. More illumination might be obtained by 
a description of the orchestration, but this again is of use mainly 
for students who wish to know how to orchestrate, and for con- 
ductors who have to realize the composer’s intentions. For the 
listener, a much shorter way to appreciate Sibelius’s orchestra- 
tion is to listen to it. This is particularly easy in Tapiola , inasmuch 
as the orchestral colours not only do not change rapidly, but 
often show their changes against a background of extraordinary 



94 SIBELIUS. OP. I 12 

tone-colour which persists for an amazingly long time, as in the case 
of the vast passage which contains Exx. 2, 3, and 4. Here, then, is 
an incomplete, but fairly representative, series of the themes, or 
phases of themes, which will meet the listener as he wanders 
through this dark forest with due reverence for its presiding deity. 


Ex. x. 



A darker theme emerges in Sibelius’s characteristic way at an 
unexpected rhythmic point in a long note. 



In the course of an ominous crescendo it becomes associated 
with another new figure. 


and soon afterwards the tone-poem takes shape as a purely musical 
form by means of a definite recapitulation of the group of themes 
comprised between Exx. 2 and 3 with their strange background. 

At last a hurricane rises, which bends the tree-tops and threatens 
the giants of the forest. The last themes that are heard are a 
combination of Exx. 8 and 7. The tone-poem then closes with an 
Amen of slow, bright, major chords, which I give, to save space, 
in their ancient values of dotted breves and longs. 




( 96 ) 

HAVERGAL BRIAN 

CCXLVIII. FANTASTIC VARIATIONS ON AN OLD RHYME 

I hope that performances of such works as this may draw attention 
to a composer who has achieved things on a vast scale which may 
have to wait as long for recognition as usual. This composer will 
achieve more; but even for the recognition of his smaller works he 
is being made to wait longer than is good for any composer; and 
far longer than is good for any country whose musical reputation 
is worth praying for. 

The humour of these Fantastic Variations is dangerously evident. 
The composer has since written a fantastic opera to a libretto of 
his own, which shows that he is a satirist of very wide range, with 
whose deeper thoughts, musical and other, we shall have to reckon. 

I shall not dwell on the humour of these variations, nor shall I 
quote the theme. The listener will be well advised to take the 
whole composition seriously as a thing admirable in general design, 
full of contrasts, and rich in beautiful melodic ideas of the com- 
poser’s own. I see in it none of the commonplaces into which a 
facile writer would fall if his notion of musical humour were 
confined to the dressing up of a nursery rhyme in learned terms. 
It need not fear comparison with Dohndnyi’s masterpiece in the 
same kind. 

I quote the human feminine element in the saga : 



It seems, to judge from the later expansion of this melody, 
that the Muricide was of a nature to invite pursuit as well as to 
pursue. (In fact, the legend tells us that her victims pursued her.) 
I have not succeeded in identifying the Agriculturalist as an actor 
in this music-drama; and I have no reason to suppose that his 
jealousy introduced a human note into the tragedy. The final 
chorale is unquestionably a Requiem for the Three, and for no 
others. 


ADOLF BUSCH 

CCXLIX. CAPRICCIO FOR SMALL ORCHESTRA, OP. 46 

Some day I may attempt to give an account, at large and in detail, 
of what I know of the work, careers, and characters of the brothers 
Fritz and Adolf Busch. To me it has been profoundly interesting 
to see how two younger artists who never knew Joachim are 


ADOLF BUSCH. OP. 46 97 

spontaneously repeating, after an interval of some eighty years, 
many typical processes in that great man’s development. One is 
never quite sure of having attained a completely detached view of 
one’s own upbringing; and few thrills are more rejuvenating than 
the discovery that one’s loyalties have been given not only to cer- 
tain persons, but to the things those persons represented; that 
one’s own world has been no home of impossible loyalties and lost 
causes, but a climate of bracing reality for younger artists. 

Among modern composers the chief influences on Adolf Busch 
have been Reger, the dominating influence from his earliest days, 
and Busoni, the friend of his maturity. These composers differ 
widely from Joachim and from each other in racial type and general 
outlook, but all three have in common the most obvious feature of 
their style. This I believe the criticism of our day would call its 
‘intellectuality’ ; but I am not very sure of my capacity to under- 
stand contemporary criticism, and I have an uneasy suspicion that 
this term means something which the critic does not like. What is 
certain is that neither Reger nor Busoni suffered fools gladly. 
Joachim was more patient. No two people have the same sense of 
humour. I am not sure that Reger’s has much ground in common 
with Busoni’s; but I think I can see my way about Adolf Busch’s, 
which certainly can hold its ground independently of both the 
elder composers. This Capriccio could be analysed as a structure 
of classical counterpoint and harmony — and the analysis would be 
quite interesting to students, inasmuch as the counterpoint really 
is classical — that is to say, it is harmony. The harmony is produced 
by the counterpoint; a quite different process from that of playing 
several different themes simultaneously and calling the resulting 
casual misfits harmonic freedom. The disadvantage alleged against 
the classical procedure is that ‘you can’t hear it’ ; when the com- 
bination really harmonizes, the individual themes vanish, except 
for the topmost. But perhaps this is one of the real meanings of the 
adage about the art of concealing art. Anyhow it seems more defi- 
nite than to suppose that art is to artist as bone to dog, and that 
round Sirius there revolves some Platonic planet containing a 
garden where all the highest art lies concealed . 1 

And yet that supposition has attractions for me at the present 
moment. Readers of my notes, aware of my propensity to attach 
external ‘programmes’ to the most absolute music, will appreciate 
how much more readable I could make my analysis of Busch’s 
Capriccio if I were permitted to call the work A Dog-Fight in 

1 Some colour is given to this theory by the fact, revealed by recent 
astrophysics, that actually in the companion or satellite of Sirius matter is 
thousands of times more dense than anything known under terrestrial 
conditions. 

VI 


H 



98 ADOLF BUSCH. OP. 46 

Sirius and to display my knowledge of such events without further 
attention to the music. Whatever is not known of such events, it 
is at least certain that they are very funny, and they cannot be 
more difficult to describe than the humour of absolute music. 
However, dogmatism (the enharmonic modulation is uninten- 
tional) must suffice for my account of Busch’s Capriccio. There is 
extant an old German play-bill of a tragedy which gives notice that 
*Das Lachen ist verboten , da es eirt Trauer spiel is?. This capriccio 
is not a tragedy, and unless I am grievously mistaken, you are not 
forbidden to laugh in the right places. They are, of course, the 
places which make me laugh. But to point them out would be but 
a variant of the psychological error of the old play-bill. 

Nevertheless I shall take the precaution of remarking that there 
is nothing funny about the beauty of the mysterious introductory 
adagio. The beauty is, of course, the foundation of all the humour; 
and the humour is perfectly compatible with the return of the 
adagio in a passage near the end of the work. Another harmonious 
element in this return is the fact that the adagio is and remains 
mysterious: if it had been more concrete or formal its return might 
have had a tinge of sentimentality or tub-thumpery; and against 
either of these qualities the atmosphere of Busch’s art is the strong- 
est of antiseptics. 

The adagio announces a pair of themes — 

Ex. r. 



both of which will eventually take shape in the main body of the 
work. At present the key, F minor, is the harmonic antipodes of 
the B minor which is to become our tonic. Towards B minor the 
music drifts on a tide which is none the less cogent for its direction 
not being obvious; while the general tendency is that of a great 
crescendo. Of the two themes the more mobile, Ex. 2, soon com- 
bines contrapuntally with Ex. 1 over which it gradually gains the 
ascendancy. A tendency to accelerate becomes evident, but is 
checked, until with the imminence of the destined key of B minor, 
the restraint is removed. 

The presto gives Ex. 2 as its main theme, in two versions, a tirade — 



ADOLF BUSCH. OP. 46 


99 



and a more formal measure. 


Ex. 4. 



As my figures show, Ex. 4 at first appears at a different rhythmic 
angle from Ex. 3 ; but this displacement turns out to be only an 
illusion resulting from an odd bar. The listener will hear many 
more subtle displacements of this theme by half a bar or even by a 
single crotchet. The whole work is polyphonic, even when not 
actually in fugue, and there is no predicting how and when its 
several themes will combine. Soon Ex. 1 sails in, beginning in its 
original F minor, now infinitely remote but drifting with surprising 
ease to our B minor within the length of its own phrase. A new 
theme, in close fugato, shows some pugnacity — 



and with its development the Sirian warfare (if I may use my un- 
authorized analogy) is soon in full swing. But it collapses suddenly ; 
and more complex strategies ensue in conspiratorial whispers in 

which old themes are busy around the following new figures. 



The council of the conspirators is soon broken by sudden loud 
indiscretions, which lead to an outburst of Ex. 3, fortissimo in 
D major. This works up to a climax, from which there is another 
dramatic collapse into a quiet central episode beginning in C major. 
The tempo does not change, but the rhythm becomes so broad 



100 ADOLF BUSCH. OP. 46 

that I find the new melody best displayed by giving my quotation 

another time-signature so as to throw two bars into one. 



With this episode the underlying romantic depth of the work 
appears on the surface. Perhaps I ought not to use the word 
‘romantic*. Long before modern art had definitely revolted from 
it, a great French critic, quoted by Matthew Arnold, had roundly 
declared that ‘the romantic* was simply ‘le faux*. And I confess 
to a violent dislike both of the term and the thing when conceived 
as in opposition to ‘the classic*. But I have a not less violent objec- 
tion to ‘the classic’ as conceived in such opposition; and when I 
use the word ‘romantic* I beg to be understood as talking not 
history, but plain English. In plain English ‘romantic* is just what 
this episode is, and it consists of not less adamantine fact than 
the rude remarks from Ex. 6, which eventually dispel it and lead 
to the return of Ex. 4 in a triumphant tonic major. Further 
developments of this, the main theme, now seem to go abroad 
again, Ex. 1 intervening in its own remote F minor; but the general 
tendency of all the modulations and new devices proves to be 
that of a peroration or coda, and the tonic asserts itself more and 
more, even though the final cadence of the work is a joke on the 
flat-supertonic topic (C natural to B). The reappearance of the 
actual tempo and material of the introductory adagio is as rom- 
antic as moonshine and as cosmic as Einstein ; and the runaway end 
is as funny as the x-te Streich of the immortal creations of another 
Busch, Max and Moritz. 


zAdor 

CCL. RONDO FOR ORCHESTRA 

Eugen Zddor was born in 1895 at Bdtdszek, Hungary. He studied 
under Heuberger and Max Reger in Leipzig. Since 1922 he has 
been a Professor at the Conservatorium at Vienna. His works 
comprise songs, pianoforte works, chamber music, orchestral 
works of many kinds, operas, and ballets. 

The Rondo for Orchestra is one of his latest works, being written 


zAdor. rondo for orchestra ioi 

in 1933. It has been already performed in almost every country 
except Great Britain. It admirably represents the style of a master 
who, being versed in every form of classical technique, has devised 
a pleasantly humorous modus vivendi with every modern tendency 
that does not display a conscientious objection to mastery. 

The classical rondo form appears with crystal clarity in the 
alternations of the main theme — 


Ex. 1. 



with the two contrasted episodes — 


Ex. 2. 


IHK^bmBSbrai 

■mrnrnWm 



lg|j| 




the recapitulation of the first episode (Ex. 2) in the home tonic, 
and the final return of the main theme expanded into a coda. 

But the most essentially classical feature of the whole work is 
its freedom in matters of detail. Nothing can be more clearly 
recognizable than the return of the main theme, and its various 
developments by diminution and other devices; but the appear- 
ance of regularity is as deceptive as in the mature style of Haydn. 
Ex. 1 shows only the first statement of the theme. On each return, 
the theme swings in at a different angle and at a different position, 



102 zAdor. rondo for orchestra 

and is continued in some new and unpredictable way. Such facts 
should be mentioned, just because they do not at once strike the 
listener. Nor, indeed, is it necessary that they should; they are 
symptoms of a vitality that makes its own immediate impression, 
without displaying its mechanism. The quality upon which every 
listener will seize with avidity is the brilliant orchestration, in 
which ZAdor’s mastery is obvious even in an age and an environ- 
ment in which all musicians are supposed to orchestrate brilliantly. 
But, as my old friend John Farmer used to say, many of the finest 
things in music seem playable with two clothes-pegs and a tooth- 
pick. Such resources would perhaps be inadequate for the execu- 
tion of this Rondo. But on paper it presents a deceptive appearance 
of having been constructed out of the less ambitious of Czerny’s 
1,000,001 exercises. This the listener would not guess; and I do 
not advise him to believe in such appearances even when they 
are pointed out to him. 


ccli. WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM 

In the middle of the nineteenth century there was one main reason 
why the teaching of musical composition fell into bad ways. This 
was the delusion that musical art-forms exist in a generalized state 
and can be grasped as in a bird’s-eye view. In the later nine- 
teenth century another delusion arose, and both are now preva- 
lent. This other delusion arose from the persecution and the 
triumph of Wagner. Both the persecutors and the Wagnerians 
argued without knowledge of any genuine principles of musical 
composition, and both sides were in unconscious agreement that, 
whether Wagner could or could not compose, he did not, as a matter 
of fact, do so. It is as absurd and as essentially underbred to com- 
plain of the ‘vogue’ of Wagner as to complain of the ‘vogue’ of 
Beethoven. But extracts of Beethoven as accompaniments to cow- 
puncher films are not more artistic than Wagner concerts of selec- 
tions which, like Mr. Punch’s early classification of trains, consist of 
(a) those which start but do not arrive ; ( 6 ) those which arrive but 
do not start ; and (c) those which neither start nor arrive. With the 
vogue of such concerts and the approval of them by critics, the 
last vestiges of popular and academic instinct for composition dis- 
appeared. It has now been decided to ordain that Wagner shall be 
out of fashion. To this I move an amendment. Let it be decided 
that Wagner is a composer; and that until the arbiters of musical 
fashion have shown themselves capable of recognizing the dif- 
ference between a composition and a scrap-book the public that 
goes to hear Wagner’s music-dramas shall be allowed to enjoy its 



WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM IO3 

normal and healthy activity of understanding Wagner’s music 
through his drama without fear or favour of fashion. How grave 
the destruction of all critical and academic standards of composi- 
tion has become through the acceptance of inartistic Wagner 
excerpts may be seen from a recent example when a highly 
educated writer on music contributed to a musical journal some 
interesting and important remarks upon the prelude to Tristan , in 
which he assumed that in the concert-room it was inseparable from 
the Liebestody and accordingly had no complete key-system. No 
doubt to the general public key-systems are academic technicalities 
which concern only teachers of harmony. Similarly, to repeat one 
of my favourite illustrations, the distinction between the nominative 
and accusative is an affair for grammarians. But the general public 
will miss something of material interest to it if the translators and 
producers of a tragedy in a foreign language do not know who 
killed whom; and a piece without a key-system or with an in- 
coherent key-system does not give the naive listener the same 
coherent impression, or even the same tuneful impression, as he 
will get, without any knowledge of theory, from a piece that has a 
key in which it begins and ends. Now the excellent critic who 
wrote so well about the prelude-and-liebestod monstrosity be- 
trayed that he did not know that Wagner wrote a page, one of the 
most beautiful in all his works, that finishes the prelude in its 
proper key and makes it as coherent and as exact in its proportions 
as any movement by Bach. The critic was thus quite unaware that 
the modulations which lead to the rise of the curtain upon the first* 
act are a powerful and subtle dramatic catastrophe in their proper 
place. 

This orthodox view of Wagner’s later style is no better than a 
conviction that Wagner’s mind was a mush. Here we see a rever- 
ential Wagnerian actually unaware that Wagner did his best, and 
an absolutely perfect best, to make the Tristan Vorspiel a coherent 
piece of music in A minor ending in A major, with a sense of 
tonality strengthened, instead of being weakened, by what has been 
happily called his ‘chromatic iridescence’ at its highest power. Most 
unfortunately, it happens that the catastrophic darkening to C 
minor upon which the curtain rises at the beginning of the play 
makes a grammatically correct join with the dark chords from 
which Isolde’s dying utterances emerge into a key not only different 
from, but totally destructive of the harmonic basis of the prelude. 
What do we gain by joining these two pieces in the concert-room? 
For those who know the whole music-drama we gain the oppor- 
tunity of listening to a quotation from the end of the opera after we 
have heard the uncompleted prelude. We can, if we like, imagine 
that the rest of the three acts are past. But vte do not gain the 



104 WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM 

living or dying presence of Isolde herself, because the problem of 
how to represent the voice-part in a purely instrumental perfor- 
mance is solved by the sublimely simple process of leaving it out. 
Liszt, in his wonderful transcription of the Liebestod for pianoforte, 
did not go quite so far, inasmuch as he contrived to represent no 
less than seven independent vocal notes and a grace-note near the 
beginning: seht ihr's Freunde? Seht ihr's nicht? For the rest, it is 
a remarkable symptom of an abnormality in Wagner’s art that, 
though the voice inevitably dominates the attention whenever it is 
heard among instruments, and though the vocal writing of Isolde’s 
Liebestod is perfect both in declamation and singability, it is so 
little essential to Wagner’s invention that Isolde’s Liebestod is a 
complete piece of music without Isolde at all. She is singing for 
sixty-eight bars, and in twenty-five of these she is able to deliver 
the main theme, constantly broken, sometimes quite awkwardly, 
by pauses and other necessities of declamation. For the other 
forty-three bars she is descanting in counterpoints, of which, as I 
have already remarked, Liszt has been able to preserve seven notes 
and a grace-note. How much of these counterpoints does any one, 
except the singer, remember? Surely her last notes should be 
memorable? They are the right notes in the right declamation; 
they easily penetrate the orchestra, and they will do justice to the 
most golden of voices. How many music-lovers can quote them? 
They have never been heard in the concert-room, except when a 
singer was engaged ; but I should not be surprised if many of the 
music-lovers who go to every stage performance of Tristan found 
themselves unable to quote them. 

If we wish to use Isolde’s Liebestod in the concert-room as a 
quotation, just as we might enjoy an eminent actor reciting a 
soliloquy from Shakespeare, we cannot object to doing the Liebestod 
without Isolde. It is no case of Hamlet without the Prince of 
Denmark. The only possible objection to playing the Liebestod 
as an instrumental piece is that it begins nowhere. Liszt’s piano- 
forte transcription remedies this by four magnificently powerful 
and subtle introductory bars which ought obviously to be used in 
the orchestral version. For the rest, not only is the Liebestod 
a mere quotation in the concert-room, but it owes most of its 
power in the opera itself to the fact that it is there a quotation 
from the love-duet in the second act. That is one reason why 
Isolde’s vocal part in it is so fragmentary. In the original duet 
both she and Tristan are much more centred upon the real themes 
of the music. 

Busoni argued the case for Wagner excerpts. He objected 
strongly to Wagner on various grounds of taste, some of which we 
may regard as indisputable in the Horatian sense. Horace was a 



WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM IO5 

wise man whose guiding principle in life was to avoid causes of 
irritation; and no stupidity irritates me so much as the intelligence 
which sees so instantly through everything that it has no time to see 
into anything. Swift noted with admiration the use of a special 
blunt-edged knife that could cut folded paper safely and neatly, 
whereas more acute instruments would leave the crease. The 
interesting point in Busoni’s defence of concert-room extracts of 
Wagner lies in his complaint that the emotional concentration of 
such music, added to the effect of stage action and poetry, becomes 
intolerable when presented as Wagner intended, but is acceptable 
when diluted and dosed out as elegant extracts in the concert- 
room. This argument begins to concern us when we have some 
idea of what Wagner is driving at ; but in the present state of know- 
ledge as represented by a popular Wagner concert it is far above 
our heads, for the people who can accept such concert-pieces as the 
Walkurenritt and Waldweben attach no more emotional or intel- 
lectual ideas to these extracts than they attach to whisky. The 
exciting sensuous quality of Wagner’s music — and not only of 
Wagner’s, but of any music — may become as bad for them as the 
exciting sensuous quality of whisky; and they will not long be able 
even to keep up appearances as persons of discriminating taste. 
The expert wine-taster must take care to be a sober man. 

I have before me a collection of the most usual Wagner concert- 
room excerpts, and propose to describe some of them. First, 
as a matter of principle, let us be quite clear that there can be no 
objection to producing large scenes from Wagner’s operas upon* 
the concert platform with singers, but without scenery and cos- 
tumes. We know that we are listening to dramatic scenes, and 
we gain as much by hearing them with unfatigued attention as 
we lose by the self-evident fact that these scenes are fragments. 
I should not have the slightest objection to covering most of the 
ground of Wagner’s music-dramas in concert-room performances 
of whole scenes with singers. In this way I have enjoyed at a Leeds 
festival the end of Siegfried , beginning with the passage of Siegfried 
through the fire, and have felt myself rather than the conditions to 
blame for any feeling of absurdity when music which represented 
Siegfried as setting the sleeping Briinnhilde free from the burden 
of her armour could receive no illustration from the deportment of 
a lady and gentleman standing up in evening dress on the platform. 
Together with a financial licence for performing the complete works 
of Berlioz and Mahler, I should like nothing better than the oppor- 
tunity to take the Reid Orchestra on such terms through every- 
thing of Wagner that they ought to know, and I should think that I 
was participating in educating the public for a better appreciation 
of the dramatic, as well as the musical, values of Wagner’s art by 



106 WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM 

an all-comprehending series of such concerts. But I cannot speak 
too strongly in condemnation of some of the most popular concert- 
pieces that have been carved from Wagner’s works. Even some of 
the vocal ones are miserably scrappy, and seem almost deliberately 
calculated to reveal weaknesses which in the magnificent flow of the 
drama would pass unnoticed by any one with a sense of proportion, 
Siegmund ’s love-song from the Walkiire {Wintersturme wichen dent 
Wonnemond) comes at one of the supremely poetic moments in the 
first act of Walkiire . Wagner’s bitterest enemies have confessed 
themselves overwhelmed by the poetic beauty of the moment when 
the doors of Hunding’s house fly open and reveal the moonlight 
that has followed upon the departure of the storm. The accepted 
concert extract misses this moment and confines itself to Sieg- 
mund ’s tune, which begins well, but taken by itself reveals certain 
weaknesses from which Wagner’s more sustained melodies are 
seldom free ; it then carries the tune as far as Siegmund can carry it, 
and adds an orchestral cadence which finishes the business with a 
bump. In its proper context the slight local weaknesses of the 
melody are negligible, and the whole passage begins to take shape 
with a glorious flow when Sieglinde takes it up in the same tempo, 
but in a broader musical metre. I could greatly enjoy the whole act 
without scenery, and I should have no objection to beginning half- 
way through, where Siegmund has been left alone to reflect by the 
firelight upon his desperate plight, before Sieglinde re-enters to tell 
him of the sword awaiting his grasp in the trunk of the very tree 
which supports his enemy’s house where he is sitting. In such an 
extract it would be pedantic to detect a weakness in a few bars of 
Siegmund’s spring-song. 

The Walkurenritt is more effective, and for that very reason 
considerably worse. In the drama it comes with sublime effect 
after the human tragedy seems over. Siegmund is slain in spite 
of Briinnhilde’s attempt to protect him, and the disobedient 
Valkyrie has rescued Sieglinde and fled from the wrath of Wotan. 
The curtain rises upon the third act, and we are on mountain 
heights among the storm clouds, far away from human tragedies, 
watching the personified storm clouds assembling as Valkyries 
riding through the air bearing the souls of slain warriors to become 
Wotan ’s garrison in Valhalla. But what is the use of describing 
all this to an audience which is going to hear nothing but a scrap 
of orchestral fireworks that fails to achieve any musical form and 
yet lasts too long for its musical content? The Walkurenritt , as 
chopped off for concert purposes, spends twelve bars in establish- 
ing a galloping rhythm beneath a continued vibration punctuated 
by noises like the discharge of rockets. The noises and the gallop- 
ing rhythm continue beneath a good broad sequential theme moving 



WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM IO7 

in four-bar steps with four-bar pauses. With necessary repetitions, 
this is built up into two statements, the second of which achieves 
some emphasis by ending on a sudden tonic major chord. At this 
point the curtain should rise, but of course in the concert-room no- 
thing happens. The Ho-jo-to-ho of the Valkyries, one of the most 
thrilling war-cries ever devised by a musician, suggests nothing 
as an instrumental formula; and all that remains for the naive 
listener in the concert-room is to wonder why the whole bundle of 
sequences merely repeats itself some three or four times with the 
same climaxes and then ends with a bump. What people enjoy in 
the Walkiirenritt as a concert-piece is an orchestral firework which is 
neither more nor less than vulgar ; but the vulgarity is not Wagner’s. 
One of the main types of vulgarity consists in effects without 
causes. Here you have a set of effects which originally had perfect 
dramatic causes. There is accurate gradation in the arrival some- 
times of one Valkyrie, sometimes of two, and of the heightened 
expectation of the arrival of Briinnhilde, the cause of whose delay is 
known to the audience but not to the Valkyries. Wagner is tied to his 
monotonous key region by reasons self-evident on the time scale not 
only of the drama, but of the music itself. Thanks to the vulgarizing 
of the Walkiirenritt as a cheap and nasty orchestral firework, our 
up-to-date anti-Wagnerians, including Busoni himself, listen to 
Wagner even on the stage with ears trained to accept the abysmal 
ignorance of composition that has been inculcated by these mis- 
representations of him in the concert-room. 

The Walkiirenritt degrades a sublime episode into a vulgar fire- 
work, but does not reach the grovelling imbecility of the extract from 
Siegfried known as Waldweben. In the second act of Siegfried the 
hero, having been guided to the cave where the dragon Fafner 
lurks, is for a while left alone by his treacherous guide and foster- 
father, Mime. He spends the time in delightful speculations as to 
his origin and destiny and in listening to the song of the birds, which 
he wishes he could understand. He tries to imitate the bird-songs 
by piping on a reed which he plucks and cuts on the spur of the 
moment. Finding the resources of his pipe (or of the cor anglais in 
the orchestra) insufficient, he begins a tune on an instrument he 
knows better, his hunting-horn. This calls up a response from 
Fafner the dragon; and in the ensuing dialogue the tactlessness of 
the interlocutors ends fatally for Fafner, whose dying utterances 
reveal something, but not enough, to Siegfried as to his destiny. In 
pulling his sword from Fafner’s body Siegfried’s hand is stung 
by the dragon’s blood, and when he puts it to his lips the taste 
of the blood magically reveals to him not only the language of the 
birds, but the real meaning of all that the treacherous Mime has to 
say to him. Consequently, the song of the birds f is from this point 



108 WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM 

represented by the voice of an invisible singer telling Siegfried of 
the Ring and the Tarnhelm, warning him against Mime, and reveal- 
ing to him that a bride awaits him on a fire-encircled mountain. 
There are a few other incidents, such as a quarrel between Mime 
and his elder brother Alberich. Then there is the slaying of Mime 
by Siegfried as the inevitable climax of a dialogue in which the 
audience as well as Siegfried hear with the insight conveyed by the 
dragon’s blood the real intention of Mime disguised in the flatteries 
with which he offers the hero a poisonous brew to refresh him. 
Siegfried is then so lonely that he almost regrets this ; but the bird 
tells him of the bride that awaits him on the fire-encircled rock and 
flies before him to show him the way. 

In order to enjoy the second act of Siegfried , I do not feel the 
need of Wagner’s naively illusionistic Bayreuth scenery, and still 
less do I desire the interference of some of the modern forms of 
inattention which are foisted on Wagner’s dramas by our severer 
Disillusionists ; but I know few things sillier than the concert- 
piece known as Waldweben. In their place Wagner’s bird-song 
themes are charming, and beautifully balanced between pure or- 
chestral music and the necessary but quite unrealistic suggestion of 
actual birds. But we do not want to hear them built up twice into 
nothing in particular. This Waldweben extract begins harmoni- 
cally nowhere, at the only point at which some means can be found 
for leading to Siegfried’s meditations about his parentage. These 
meditations have to be boiled down into an affair with neither struc- 
ture nor contrasts ; and then the bird-song figures are given, also 
without structure or contrasts, some three times. (It is impossible 
to count precisely with piles of Wagner’s inherently self-repetitive 
expanses.) Anyhow, there is nothing left but bird-song, uninter- 
rupted by Fafner or Mime. But one problem remains: how is 
Wagner, or his arranger, to represent the difference made by the 
dragon’s blood ? Why, what could be more self-evident and thrill- 
ing than to add a glockenspiel? As soon as the notes are thus 
invested with the surprising moisture of a chocolate which you 
have crunched before you knew that it contained a liqueur, the 
miracle is accomplished, and one of Wagner’s most poetic scenes 
has been reduced to an even sillier triviality than the concert 
Walkurenritt . 

I am, as I have insisted elsewhere, entirely in favour of giving 
whole acts, or final scenes (not middle scenes), in the concert- 
room, with the requisite singers. Wotan’s Farewell in Walkiire 9 and 
Briinnhilde’s last scene in Gotterdammerung , for instance, with no 
cuts in the orchestral sequels, are intelligible musical propositions 
which carry dramatic meaning wherever they are produced. But 
Siegfried’s funeral march, out of its context, is nonsense. The 



WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM IO9 

annotator or critic who calls it a marvellous piece of musical 
texture and composition might as well apply the same praise to 
the pictorial values of the ‘cloud-clock’, or steam jets, or the ordinary 
curtain, or whatever means are taken to cover the change of scene. 
The funeral march in Gotterdammerung is part of a marvellous piece 
of texture and composition, but that marvellous piece has taken 
most of four days to reach the beginning of the march. And if you 
must take one triglyph and two blocks of masonry as constituting 
a sample of a monument you could hardly make a worse selection 
than this funeral march. Of its four main themes (I exclude the so- 
called Death-theme as a mere descriptive gesture) two are among 
Wagner’s most obvious lapses. In the vast achievement of the 
Ring they matter far less than a single perfunctory coloratura in 
one of Handel’s greatest works ; but if we are to regard such a frag- 
ment as this funeral march as an independent composition, it is 
a serious defect that one of its main themes should be the very 
awkward and mechanical transformation of Siegfried’s juvenile 
horn-theme into a sophisticated grown-up affair in learned syn- 
copations, and that another should be the theme of Briinnhilde 
as a mortal woman, a theme which descends markedly below 
Weber’s most suburban (spiessbiirgerlich) style. In a decent per- 
formance of Gotterdammerung these lapses are more negligible 
than a line like ‘Flies may do this, but I from this must fly’ in 
Romeo and Juliet ; and not less negligible from the fact that they 
are irremovably imbedded in the whole structure. There was a % 
time when Hamlet’s Soliloquy had its place along with Cato’s in 
volumes of Elegant Extracts. Dr. Johnson was compelled to hear 
Cato’s Soliloquy recited by a little girl who proved not only 
ignorant of the meaning of the words ‘bane’ and ‘antidote’ but 
unable to tell how many pence there were in sixpence. No doubt 
the lexicographical manner was alarming to one so young. But 
there are plenty of people not so very young who would be the 
better of something alarming when they start a fashion of abusing, 
or even patronizing, Wagner on the basis of their vast experience 
as concert-goers, enlarged later in life by the discovery that Wotan 
and King Marke are tedious ; a discovery which is far more jejune 
than honest George the Third’s observation that much of Shake- 
speare is sad stuff, and which lacks the royal common sense which 
inspired that under-rated monarch to add ‘but one must not say 
so’. We no longer try to appreciate Hamlet’s soliloquy as an inde- 
pendent poem. It is not so fragmentary as the funeral march in 
Gotterdammerung ; and for such disjecta membra in music the dif- 
ference is negligible between the genuine article and the version of 
the two rapscallions in Huckleberry Finn , which began 
To be or not to be, that is the bare bodkin 



IIO WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM 

and ended 

But soft! the fair Ophelia! 

Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws, 

But get thee to a nunnery; hence I away! 

A Good-Friday concert is considered orthodox if, and only if, it 
contains the Charfreitagszauber from Parsifal . At the end of the 
nineteenth century, when the dawn of British musical criticism was 
represented by the vitriolic attacks which writers of brilliant 
English in the Saturday Review and the Star directed against Stan- 
ford and Parry and any other musician who was guilty of holding 
an official post, this Good-Friday music from Parsifal was often 
adduced as an example of music which held its own in the concert- 
room on its pure musical merits in spite of all that Wagner himself 
said against the practice of representing him by such fragments, 
I had often heard it myself as a concert-piece, and have no reason to 
believe that I saw less of its purely musical beauty than did the late 
J. F. Runciman of the Saturday Review ; but when I first heard 
Parsifal at Bayreuth I noticed with some amusement that the Good- 
Friday music in its proper place did not strike a familiar chord at 
all. Not only did it mean all that was implied and explained by its 
position in the drama, but it became a piece of quite sensible music, 
instead of a piece of orchestration beginning nowhere in particular, 
repeating its figures, like all unsound Wagner extracts, far too often 
for variety, obstinately refusing to change its ground when change 
of ground is musically due, making no effort towards a climax un- 
less a belated one conscious of its untimeliness, and ending vaguely 
from exhaustion in a region which, like that of the beginning, is 
nowhere in particular, but different inasmuch as it is elsewhere. If 
your notion of music is that of Charles Lamb in his famous Essay on 
Ears, you may or may not like ‘sugar piled upon honey’ better than 
he did; but you and the late Mr. Runciman will be well advised 
to refrain from attacking as ‘proud academics’ such patient and 
faithful servants of music for its own sake as Stanford and 
Parry. 

The Charfreitagszauber is not as stupidly disconnected an ex- 
tract of Parsifal as the Waldweben is of Siegfried , but there is a 
version of it that reaches what we may hope to be the lowest and 
most elaborate stupidity that has been attained in concert-music 
since the days when the flute was a fashionable instrument for 
gentlemen, and Handel’s Hallelujah Chorus was published in an 
arrangement for two flutes representing four-part harmony by 
grace-notes. Some years ago, one of the world’s leading orchestras 
gave two concerts in London, one of which was a real concert, and 
the other was a Wagner night. It was a condition of etiquette that 
the leader of the orchestra should play a solo, and there was no room 



WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM III 

for this in the genuine concert; and he accordingly was allowed, or 
even encouraged, to spend a quarter of an hour of the Wagner night 
in playing Wilhelmj’s arrangement of the Good-Friday music as 
a violin solo. That is to say, the first-rate leader of a first-rate 
orchestra, with the connivance of the conductor, consummated the 
iniquities of the perpetrator of Bach’s Air on the G String by 
publicly performing a version of the Good-Friday music which 
added to the horrors of its mutilated condition the process of drain- 
ing it of all orchestral colour except in its accompaniments. Wil- 
helmj substituted, for every tone in the melody of voices, strings, 
and wind, a uniform whitewash of high and thin solo violin tone 
with nothing resembling violin style, until the climax where the 
glorious tone of the tutti strings made the poor solo player ever- 
lastingly ridiculous by answering him with his own phrase at the 
same pitch. How the distinguished leader of a distinguished 
orchestra could consent to make such a fool of himself is as 
incomprehensible as that the conductor could touch such an 
arrangement with a pair of tongs. 

The scope for Wagner concerts is wide if singers can be engaged 
and time found for the inclusion of whole scenes that comprise a 
definite dramatic or poetic entity. Without voices the scope is so 
restricted that I doubt whether more than two concerts could be 
given of which the programmes did not overlap. The following 
programme almost exhausts the possibilities of a ‘legitimate* 
Wagner concert without voices: 

i. Overture to Der Fliegende Hollander . 

а. Prelude to Act III of Tannhauser (Tannhauser’s Pilgrimage), in 

the Original Version. 

3. Venusberg Music. 

4. Vorspiel to Lohengrin. 

Interval . 

5. A Faust Overture. 

б. Siegfried Idyll. 

7. Vorspiel to Tristan und Isolde . 

8. Kaisermarsch. 

The overture to Der Fliegende Hollander is excellent as a musical 
whole and immeasurably riper than any other part of the opera. 
The introduction to the third act of Tannhauser is interesting 
in its original version, published long after Wagner’s death and 
rejected by him as redundant in the opera. It comprises the 
whole of Tannhauser’s narrative, and thus amounts to an instru- 
mental piece of which the contents are emotionally complete; for 



1 12 WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM 

which very reason it would weaken the effect of Tannhauser 's 
narrative later on. The Venusberg Ballet holds an extraordinary 
position in Wagner's works. Every one with a sense of integrity 
in style will agree with Weingartner in pleading that the opera of 
Tannhauser should be given in its native crudeness according to 
Wagner's first ideas. When his fame had been established beyond 
the power of Parisian and international hostilities, he attached 
enough importance to the possibility of a triumph in Paris to 
acquiesce in the local etiquette that demanded opportunity for the 
Parisian corps-de-ballet. The opening scene in the Venusberg was 
the only place where a ballet could be inserted, and he wrote one in 
his ripest style. He also confessed that his original ‘Venus of the 
coulisses' horrified his mature taste, and so he rewrote her share of 
the dialogue in a musical language as ripe as that of Isolde. But 
poor Tannhauser was past praying for. His famous song, and his 
whole share in the scene, hardly acquits itself better in these sur- 
roundings than the Tichborne Claimant. The ballet itself can 
neither by position nor substance achieve any important dramatic 
meaning. In order to make room for it, the contest of singers in 
the Wartburg, to which the opera owes its sub-title and half its 
dramatic importance, has had to be so shortened that Tann- 
hauser has no time to develop a gradual crescendo of his 
tragic opposition to the ascetic minstrels, but must act as under 
demoniac possession from the outset. Every musician must 
agree with Weingartner that the Venusberg Ballet is on the one 
hand destructive to the opera of Tannhauser , and on the other a 
highly effective concert-piece. But this is not all. We hear it year 
in and year out tacked on to the overture, as Wagner himself 
tacked it on for the Paris Opera. In this condition it is a monster 
without its Loch Ness. Nobody can tell how many humps it has, 
nor what purpose they serve. The overture to Tannhauser is a mix- 
ture of the best and worst things in Wagner’s early style. It is 
ripest where it is naughty — that is to say, in its Venusberg elements ; 
it is blotchy and feeble in Tannhauser’ s song; and where it means 
to be holy and humble it is predestined to a Moody-and-Sankey 
tub-thumping end, and of that end I would not see it deprived. As 
a whole it is not good music, but it is very good bad music. When 
the naughty Venusberg music of Wagner’s mature style encroaches 
upon it, the result is that the overture, instead of naively fulfilling its 
honest destiny as a piece of rather bad edifying music, proceeds to 
develop its naughty elements in a very much better style than it had 
ever dreamed of before. But the new climaxes do not rise from 
their own basis. They have been exhausted by two or three cruder 
climaxes of the same kind. No doubt it is well that the Moody- 
and-Sankey elements should disappear. There is no humour in 



WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM II3 

their being discountenanced by all this wicked superiority; but 
why put up with such a squalid misalliance at all ? It was a revela- 
tion to me when I first took the Venusberg Ballet by itself and 
realized that Wagner had achieved a perfect composition, of which 
the climaxes are exactly as many as are necessary, and the decline 
to exhaustion is entirely beautiful and perfectly proportioned. As 
printed, the ballet is a little indefinite in its beginning: enough so 
to make a plausible case for drifting into it from the overture; but 
a tradition, the origin of which I cannot trace, has added two bars 
to the printed opening which throw the whole thing into a shape 
hardly less perfect than that of the Tristan Vorspiel as Wagner 
ended it. 

The Lohengrin Vorspiel is another piece which is entirely admir- 
able by itself and immeasurably riper than anything in the opera. 
Joachim, as inveterate an anti- Wagnerian as ever refrained from 
joining in controversies, always expressed the greatest admiration 
for it, and overrode all opposition to including it in the repertoire 
of his Hochschule students. On the other hand, I have no use for 
the prelude to the third act of Lohengrin , which relapses very 
successfully into Wagner’s vulgarest early style and fizzles out 
more ineptly than most fragments. I would not mind swallowing 
it in its proper function as a prelude to the very pretty bridal march 
which, with singular disregard for ominous associations, replaces 
our beloved Mendelssohn’s march in American weddings. 

The other pieces in this programme are obviously not theatre 
music. The Siegfried Idyll is connected with Siegfried only by 
thematic links which amount to hardly more than quotations 
privately current in a family because their connexion with their 
source is jocular; yet some of our new anti-Wagnerians pose as 
serious critics and call this most important of all Wagner’s instru- 
mental works an operatic pot-pourri. 

The Faust Overture I have often performed, and have analysed 
fairly fully in Vol. IV of these essays. 

Irresponsible writers have latterly held up the Kaisermarsch to 
contempt: presumably on political grounds that are more worthy 
of elderly eggs than of human beings. No person who has read or 
heard the Kaisermarsch need imagine that he has the smallest 
claims to musical culture if he cannot see that it is a composition of 
the highest order and the noblest style. Even in the dawn of 
imperial Germany for which it was written, Wagner did not expect 
that there would be many occasions in which its concluding Volks - 
gesang could be actually sung by audiences, however carefully the 
text and notes* were distributed amongst them ; and he was too wise 
to make this consummation an essential part of his musical scheme, 
though no doubt the final element of community singing would 
vi 1 



114 WAGNER IN THE CONCERT-ROOM 

add greatly to the effect. I refrain from quoting the text, which is 
neither better nor worse than is to be expected from patriotic 
poetry written for a nation that could not disguise its satisfaction 
at having recently walloped a neighbouring nation ; but its boast is 
modest compared with the claims and powers of the humblest 
dictators of modern times, and I see no reason why politics should 
interfere with the integrity of this grand specimen of Wagner’s 
music at this time of day, 

CCLII. THE VENUSBERG MUSIC (‘TANNHAUSER’) 

Wagner himself is responsible for the bad effect of welding his 
magnificent and mature Venusberg music on to his crude Tann - 
hauser Overture. His temptation was overwhelming, for he was at 
the height of his fame, and the occasion was his opportunity for 
generously allowing Paris to rehabilitate its reputation after the 
riot with which its Jockey Club had ruined the production of 
Tannhduser years before. And perhaps he did not himself realize 
how effectively his own mature style ruins the rest of Tannhduser. 
The only position for a single ballet in that drama is at the opening, 
before the action has begun: the work is already dangerously long 
and quite incapable of digesting two ballets ; and to have dancers 
in the decorum of the Landgrave’s Hall of Song would be absurdly 
incongruous with any restriction of their share in the orgies of the 
Venusberg. The result is that the Venusberg ballet has no drama- 
tic significance at all. Neither, for that matter, has 70 per cent, of 
the ballet-music of Gluck; most of it has to be explained into the 
dramas by the choreographers. 

The Paris bacchanale replaces a cruder affair that serves to set 
the scene and pose the actors in the original version of Tannhduser. 
In the immense grottoes of the Horselberg Tannhauser is lying 
at the feet of Venus, who, knowing that his longing for a return to 
earthly daylight will soon transcend her power to retain him, is 
watching with some anxiety the growing frenzy of other denizens 
of her realm. Both in the perfunctory original ballet and in the 
mature Paris version, the frenzy of the dancers shocks the goddess’s 
sense of decorum; and at her command a posse of her winged 
archers discharge narcotic arrows at the dancers, who subside into 
languorous slumbers. 

The original Tannhduser ballet followed the overture, and made 
an excellent contrast to its Moody-and-Sankey end. The Paris 
ballet was tacked on by Wagner himself to the overture just after 
the recapitulation of its crudest passage, Tannhauser’s song, with 
the result that three passages of Venusberg naughtiness in the 
overture forestall and destroy all appetite for the perfectly balanced 



WAGNER. THE VENUSBERG MUSIC 115 

scheme of the new ballet, which I myself am now hearing for the 
first time in its musical integrity. Its only discoverable defect as a 
detached piece is that, as printed, it begins nowhere; but either 
some authentic tradition or the inspiration of a conductor who 
understands composition has removed this defect by the addition 
of two bars of Ex. i in a manuscript slip inserted in the hired 
orchestral material. 

Exx. 1 and 2 are common to the original and the Parisian ballet. 


Ex. x. 




Ex. 6 is a song of the sirens, which is the most thrilling feature 
both of the original and of the Parisian ballets. 



Ex. 6. 



Il6 WAGNER. THE VENUSBERG MUSIC 

Voices are needed to give it its full effect; but to bring these into 
the concert-room would commit us to the whole scene in which, 
while Wagner has rewritten his Kulissen- Venus into the divinest 
style of Isolde, he has left poor Tannhauser’s song in its original 
ragged bumptiousness. 

Although the defects of Wagner’s early style are sufficiently 
Meyerbeerish to account for his aversion to that master in parti- 
cular, it would be fairer to compare them with the style of a more 
disappointed master, Spontini. The mixture of styles is distressing 
in any version of Tannhauser as a whole. Might we be forgiven for 
claiming that the original unadulterated opera has at all events the 
virtue of ‘Spontineity’ ? 

According to the Paris ballet, in the magnificent slow movement 
that follows upon Venus’s orders the song of the sirens introduces 
two tableaux, representing two of Jupiter’s adventures: as the bull 
that carries off Europa, and as the swan with Leda. Both as music 
and as drama, these matters are neither here nor there; though the 
text informs us that both were classical examples of the power of 
love. What concerns the listener is the exquisite development of 
another new theme in Wagner’s ripest style, ‘conflated’ with 
Ex. 3 — 



which brings the movement to its musically appointed close. The 
last appearance of Ex. i indicates, as in the original ballet, how the 
troop of archers bow to Venus, signifying that they have succeeded 
in quelling the riot. The faint suggestion of church bells that 
haunts Tannhauser’s dreams of earthlight is accompanied by Wag- 
ner’s new theme (Ex. 7) as the music dies away in its appointed 
time. 


CCLIII. * KAISERMARSCH ’ 

Let us listen to the Kaisermarsch as a piece of music no more to be 
degraded by politics than Beethoven’s Weihe des Houses . To put 
it on the same level would be an error akin to the opposite extreme 
of criticism which rejects the Weihe des Houses . The Kaisermarsch 
is not of that supreme order of subtlety and sublimity; but it has 
nothing to fear from the presence of Beethoven at his greatest: and 
its style is quite as useful as any Amoldian ‘touchstone of poetry* 
for the purpose of revealing the poverty of weaker music. Its 



WAGNER. ‘KAISERMARSCH’ 117 

scheme anticipates Sibelius’s idea of displaying fragments of 
themes in an inchoate way, and reserving for the final climax their 
gathering-up into a complete tune. Here is Wagner’s complete 
tune — 


Ex. i. 




with which the composition ends; but the beginning is not frag- 
mentary. Wagner starts at once with the first eleven bars. The 
phrase-rhythm, with its cumulative repetitions and its avoidance, 
of symmetry, promptly shows that beyond all questions of taste this 
artist can compose. For my part, I do not understand how any 
disputes of taste can arise on any point in this composition. I can 
see nothing but the noblest music in it at every moment, and have 
no more use for political prejudices about it than for the eggs by 
which such prejudices are appropriately and practically symbo- 
lized. 

Wagner follows these first eleven bars by a running figure — 


&c* 

c? 

0 

which in two processes — first on the tonic, then on the dominant — 
turns this opening statement into an introduction ending on a 
pause. Then the larger structure begins. Its analysis would need 
an essay not less elaborate than my full discussion of the Weihe des 
Houses Overture, which cost me almost more labour than any of 



IIS WAGNER. KAISERMARSCH 

my other essays. All I can do here is to tabulate its main incidents. 
First there is a slow crescendo on a swinging ‘left-right, left-right’ 


Em* feste Burg. 

followed by fanfares and a continuation of Ex. 3 in the dominant. 
This leads, by a parallel incident of modulation, to another impact 
of Eiri feste Burg in the subdominant, thus closing into the tonic. 
The fanfares thereupon conclude the matter and die away at 
leisure. Then Ex. 3 is developed quietly on a large scale. Gradually 
the harmony leaves its home tonics and flashes out into bright 
remote keys. 


The note of das ewig Weibhche appears m the Walter-and-Eva 
stream of melody which ensues. Gradually the materials of Ex. 1 
assert themselves, and its figure ( b ) shows a power of shining like 
a rainbow in the remotest keys. The modulations eventually come 
round to the subdominant; and the approach to the climax is then 
indicated by a grand rising sequence developed from figure (e) 
which penetrates the softer counterpoints above, and is at length 
surmounted by a third quotation of Etn* feste Burg in A|? followed 
for the first and only time by its second line. 






WAGNER. ‘KAISERMARSCH* 119 

This closes with a grand interrupted cadence into the home- 
dominant upon which an adequate length of fanfare leads to the 
complete Volksgesang as given in Ex. 1. Musicians whose sense of 
composition has suffered from the various inept ways in which 
Wagnerian excerpts end either with a bump, an inexplicable fade- 
out, or a couple of exasperatingly conventional chords, will find 
more and more cause to admire the accuracy of the simple- 
seeming conventional fanfare and last chords of the Kaisermarsch ; 
the sort of detail which Wagner and Beethoven may perhaps take 
in their stride, or may (as we know from some cases in Beethoven) 
attain through dozens of sketches, the last of which may have been 
the same as the first. 

CCLIV. ‘PARSIFAL’, ACT III 

My objections to concert-room extracts of Wagner do not apply to 
whole scenes given with all the singers. Much is lost by the 
absence of scenery and action; but for some listeners almost as 
much is gained. The listener who has the intelligence to appre- 
ciate the loss will also have the imagination to supply what is 
missing, and may even find himself free from aesthetic discomforts 
that are inseparable from all efforts to present Wagner on the stage. 
There is not much to be said for people whose minds rise superior 
to any wish to see Wagner or Shakespeare acted. People who will 
not put up with reasonable, practical compromises may just as well 
confess that they do not want to put up with life. We may all wish 
that we knew what Shakespeare’s audiences knew, but, while we 
should be the better for the sum of that knowledge, we should 
probably be the worse on the whole for being transformed into 
Elizabethan groundlings or Elizabethan aristocrats. Wagner is 
nearer to our own time ; and those of us who can best appreciate his 
music can probably recognize that in matters concerning the stage 
his aesthetic sensibilities were less highly developed than his 
musical sense. Of the new highbrow anti-Wagnerian fashion I 
have no more to say than I have of the Edwardian anti-Beethoven 
reaction. Wagner’s mature style fought its way upward from 
squalid antecedents with a force of character and an instinct for 
purity unsurpassed by the masters whose salad-days gave them no 
cause for regret. His detestation of the style of Meyerbeer was 
intensified by his recognition that his own early style was not 
without affinity to it. This did not prevent him from acknowledg- 
ing in the most generous terms such good things as the end of the 
fourth act of Les Huguenots . With all his unscrupulous egotism, he 
was no snob. The anti-Wagnerians of the present-day have dis- 
covered with small labour and research that Wagner’s style, like 



120 WAGNER. 4 PARSIFAL*, ACT III 

most operatic styles, arose from squalid origins. They have dis- 
covered nothing else, and they proclaim from the housetops their 
inability to distinguish between Wagner and Meyerbeer. Won 
ragionam di lor , ma guarda e passa * 

It is permissible to find in Wagner’s temperament, as in Dante’s, 
Milton’s, Carlyle’s, Henry VIII’s, and Queen Elizabeth’s, much 
that one dislikes; and it is nobody’s duty in life to go in deliberate 
search of diets that one knows to be beyond one’s digestion. In 
Wagner’s lifetime there was something more than mere respect- 
ability in the cause of the anti-Wagnerites. To-day we can see that 
the musical language of Tristan is a rigorously logical, and even 
conservative, extension of the principles of classical tonality and 
harmony, arising naturally from the extension of the whole time- 
scale of music. To most of Wagner’s contemporaries that language 
was unintelligible in its grammar, and very upsetting in its effect 
upon the listener’s nerves. So great a musician as Joachim went to 
his grave in the twentieth century firmly convinced that the musical 
language of Tristan was nonsensical as well as morbid. And the 
musicians who knew that this was the result of their best efforts to 
construe it were wiser than the people who saw no difficulty 
in it at all. Their scepticism was based on a conviction, strongly 
held by Wagner himself, that his earlier work contained much that 
was not worthy of his ideals and was most popular where it least 
represented them. The modern anti- Wagnerian is either an artist 
so preoccupied with his own work that he resents even the most 
unquestioned classics if their systems conflict with it, or he is a 
dilettante who has drifted into music through current literature 
and cannot construe anything whatever. No reasonable person 
would expect Debussy to enjoy Wagner, or Berlioz to enjoy Bach. 
We want such artists to get on with their own work, and we do not 
see why they should be asked to listen to what disturbs them. But 
I frankly own that my social tact will never be equal to meeting 
with urbanity the anti- Wagnerian table-talk of the present day. 
At its best it represents a natural inability to enjoy music on a 
time-scale enormously larger than anything to which the listener 
has been trained. Great artists like Vernon Lee and Maurice Baring 
earn our gratitude by describing accurately the almost physical dis- 
comfort they experience by having their attention racked by the 
Wagnerian time-scale. But no illumination is given by gossip 
repeated at second-hand by people who have overheard the reac- 
tionary utterances of sensitive artists. The popular taste — and, for 
that matter, the fashionable taste — of those who are in a position, 
geographical and financial, to go to operas, is far in advance of 
critical fashions. Wagner continues to draw full houses because 
his dramas are among the most exciting that have been realized 



WAGNER. * PARSIFAL*, ACT III 121 

on the stage, and are the foundation of a music that has revealed 
the meaning of that art to persons who in former times never ven- 
tured to think themselves musical. He is one of the non-musicians* 
composers; and, by a curious paradox, he is a dramatist for listeners 
who are not habitual theatre-goers. A good claim could be made 
for Wagner as one of the most powerful of all influences upon 
modem drama. This is not evident in a country of such imperfect 
and discontinuous musical traditions as England; and even in 
musical countries it is obscured by the evident amateurishness of 
some aspects of Wagner*s poetry. Moreover, the genuine qualities 
of Wagner’s stagecraft are obscured by the determination with 
which he took upon himself the burden of every conceivable prob- 
lem of scenery and production. In this he was probably wise; for 
his multiform talents did not all mature at the same rate, and he 
would have needed three hundred years of life before his Allkunst - 
zuerk could be equally mature in ail its elements. Music was the 
art in which he attained full maturity. His poetry never became 
mature, though in Tannhauser , and even in Lohengrin , it was far 
riper than his music had yet become. Through his mature music 
we can learn that he did indeed achieve an Allkunstwerk ; that the 
imperfections of The Ring , Tristan , Meister singer, and Parsifal , 
though they be as obvious as the imperfections of Shakespeare, 
are relatively as unimportant. The music is music-drama, the 
language is music interpretative of words, and the import of the 
words as interpreted by music is poetry of the highest order, 
whatever literary critics may be compelled to think of the words, 
apart from the music. 

The third act of Parsifal should be heard after the other two 
acts, and all three should be seen in action on the stage. Yet, even 
for listeners who have no such opportunity, the presentation of the 
third act in the concert-room has some advantages that can also be 
appreciated by listeners who know the whole work in its integrity. 
Brahms, who was by no means the anti-Wagnerian that most of his 
friends wished him to be, used to enjoy his Wagner operas one act at 
a time. One of my own most vivid experiences was that of hearing 
the second act of Tristan when I arrived in London too late for the 
first act. The unfatigued impression of it was enormously greater 
than any of my previous experiences. Of course it was essential 
to bring to the experience an intimate knowledge of the first act. 
Let us see now what we can make of the third act of Parsifal on the 
supposition that we have just heard and seen the other two acts and 
prefer now to listen to music with our eyes shut. 

We have heard the wonderful prelude, which has given us all the 
themes of the Holy Grail; the curtain has risen upon a peaceful 
scene in the grounds of Monsalvat at dawn; ^nd the good old 



122 WAGNER. ‘PARSIFAL*, ACT III 

Brother Gurnemanz explains to two acolytes the story of the Grail 
and the present tragic position of its guardian, Amfortas, whose 
father, Titurel, still lives, but is kept alive only by the sight of the 
Grail, which is unveiled in the communion service of its temple. 
Long ago Klingsor had aspired to become a Knight of the Grail. 
Unable to control his natural lusts, he made himself a eunuch and 
offered himself to Titurel as a chaste candidate. Titurel rejected 
him with scorn. In revenge he established himself in a wilderness 
that lay in the path of pilgrims to Monsalvat, and turned this 
wilderness into a magic garden full of temptations into which 
many aspirants for the Brotherhood of the Grail fell. Amfortas 
sallied forth to vanquish the sorcerer. He rashly took with him a 
talisman of sanctity co-equal with the Grail itself: the Spear which 
pierced the side of Christ crucified and drew the Blood that filled 
the Cup. In Klingsor’s enchanted garden Gurnemanz himself saw 
the terrible fall of Amfortas, beguiled by a woman of appalling 
beauty and caught in that unguarded moment by Klingsor, who 
seized the holy Spear and wounded him with it. Gurnemanz 
rescued him, but the Spear remained in Klingsor’s unholy hands 
and nothing can heal the wound of Amfortas. 

Gurnemanz’s tale is interrupted by the entry of Kundry, a wild 
and distraught woman who brings with her a new balsam from 
Arabia, with grimly small hope that it will be of any use for the 
King’s wound. The Brethren of the Grail always regard her with 
suspicion, and she seems to hate them ; yet, as Gurnemanz points 
out, she is for ever busy on errands for them, and it is in her 
absence that grave disasters befall them. 

We see the suffering King Amfortas borne in a litter on his way 
to bathe. He accepts the balsam with gratitude, and Gurnemanz 
resumes his tale. In a vision Amfortas received a promise of salva- 
tion implied in the command to wait for the chosen one, the Pure 
Fool who understands by pity. Gurnemanz’s listeners, deeply 
moved, softly repeat the well-remembered words of this promise, 
but they are startled by a new and drastic interruption. In this 
sanctuary, where all wild creatures are tame, somebody has shot a 
swan. A trespasser, a youth strong and childlike, is brought in, 
overpowered by four men. He is armed with a bow and arrows, 
and sees no harm in hitting everything that flies. Gurnemanz soon 
fills him with remorse for his thoughtless destruction of beautiful 
life. He breaks his bow and arrows, and to all questions his only 
answer is, T do not know*. He cannot remember his name, though 
he has had many. All he can remember is that he has left his 
mother, Herzeleide, and gone into the world with a bow and arrows 
of his own making. Kundry suddenly supplements his story, and 
tells us that he was born after the death of his father, Gamuret, in 



WAGNER. ‘ PARSIFAL* , ACT III I23 

battle. His foolish mother brought him up as a fool in order to 
preserve him from a like fate. She adds that the boy became a 
terror to robbers and giants. The strange youth asks in surprise: 
‘Who fears me?’ She answers: ‘The wicked/ ‘Then were those 
who fought me wicked? Who is good?’ Gurnemanz says: ‘Thy 
mother, whom thou hast deserted and who is yearning and grieving 
for thee/ To which Kundry roughly says: ‘No more grief for her. 
His mother is dead. I was riding by, and I saw her die. And she 
sent her greeting to thee, thou fool/ Whereupon the strange 
youth springs at her throat. Gurnemanz restrains him. The 
strange youth trembles and is on the point of fainting. Kundry 
brings him water and retires from the scene, over-mastered by the 
dark power that enslaves her. Gurnemanz points out to him how 
she returns good for ill. But we learn from her broken exclama- 
tions that her own view is that she never does good. She longs for 
peace and for sleep — but no, not sleep, anything rather than sleep! 

Gurnemanz is forming the opinion that the strange youth is the 
Pure Fool whose coming was promised. He goes with him to the 
Hall of the Grail, in the hope that the promise may now be accom- 
plished. Amfortas is borne on a litter to fulfil his holy office. The 
voice of Titurel is heard from behind the altar, demanding the un- 
veiling of the Grail. Amfortas protests passionately, for the per- 
formance of this office renews all the agonies of his wound. At 
last voices from the heights of the dome remind him of the pro- 
mised coming of the Pure Fool who understands by pity. Am- 
fortas unveils the Grail and the solemnities proceed. At the end * 
it is evident that his wound has broken out again. Gurnemanz and 
the youth are left alone, and Gurnemanz is disappointed to find 
that the youth shows no understanding except a bewildered dis- 
tress. He pushes the youth roughly out through a side-door, 
advising him to leave swans alone and seek a goose for his gander- 
ship. Nevertheless, a voice from above ends the act with an echo 
of the promise. 

In the second act we first see Klingsor in the topmost room of a 
tower. He summons Kundry, who is in his power because he is 
the only man who has not yielded to her. A rash boast, for she is 
able to taunt him with the shameful secret of his power. She, the 
Rose of Hell, had (as we learn later) seen Christ bearing His Cross 
and had laughed. His gaze had fallen upon her, and she was doomed 
to tarry till He should come again. Now she must deal with the 
most dangerous of all Klingsor’s enemies, as she had already dealt 
with Amfortas. From his tower Klingsor sees the youth fighting 
his way into the garden through all the opposition the recreant 
knights can give. The scene changes, and we see the youth beset 
by a crowd of enchantresses in flower-like guise. He is quite ready 



124 WAGNER. * PARSIFAL*, ACT III 

to play with them, if only they will give him room and not crowd 
round him so closely. Suddenly he hears an over-mastering voice 
calling him by his forgotten name, Parsifal. The Blumenmadchen 
are dismissed by a mightier enchantress. Kundry appears in 
radiant beauty and holds him spellbound with talk of his mother, 
Herzeleide. At last she says that his dying mother sent him through 
her a kiss. At the kiss Parsifal starts up, enlightened by pity and 
terror, crying: ‘Amfortas, the wound!* The prophecy is fulfilled. 
He knows all, and Kundry’s most agonized efforts can force from 
him only the promise that he was sent for her salvation also, but by 
means far other than those she asks. Her only remaining power is 
to lay upon him a curse which shall make his return to the suffering 
Amfortas a long wandering through devious ways. Klingsor 
appears, imagining himself once more triumphant, and hurls the 
sacred Spear at Parsifal. Parsifal grasps the Spear and makes with 
it the sign of the Cross ; whereupon Klingsor’s castle crashes into 
ruin and all the flowers wither. Parsifal departs, telling Kundry 
that she knows where she will find him again. 

The third act begins with a mysterious quiet prelude on themes 
which we have not heard before. It gives an impression of sorrow — 



and of wandering footsteps that must often be retraced in order to 
find the right path. 



A short crescendo incidentally reminds us of the Dresden Amen 
and leads to Kundry’s wildest outcry, accompanied by three notes 
that suffice to remind us of fig. (c) of the Grail-theme that has 
become associated with the holy Spear. 



continued in Ex. 6. 


(For convenience I append the Dresden Amen and the Grail- 
theme in their original forms.) 




126 WAGNER. * PARSIFAL*, ACT III 

which had once been a lively feature of the whirling seductive 
dance of the Blumenmadchen in Klingsor’s garden. The curtain 
rises upon a lovely forest-scene at the edge of the Grail-precincts, 
profuse with springtide flowers far lovelier and more life-enhancing 
than the tropical glories of Klingsor’s garden. Some creature con- 
cealed in the bushes is moaning. 



&CT 


From Ex. 9 we know that it is Kundry ; and while we are reminded 
of Klingsor — 

&C. 


the door of a hut opens and Gurnemanz, now much aged and 
retired as a hermit, comes out to see what this moaning may be, 
more piteous than the plaint of any stricken hare, and most un- 
likely on this holiest of days (themes anticipating Exx. 22 and 16). 
He finds Kundry collapsed and unconscious in a thicket of 
brambles. He revives her with difficulty. At last she awakens with 
a wild cry. Yet there is no wildness left in her. She is in the robe 
of a penitent, her face is pale, and after gazing long at Gurnemanz 
she rises, sets in order her hair, and moves as if to go to work like a 
serving-maid. Gurnemanz asks in surprise if she has no word to 
say to him. At last, after a long effort, she is able to say: ‘Dienen, 
dienen/ Gurnemanz shakes his head. Service will give her no 
trouble. There are no more errands. We seek our simples and 
herbs for ourselves, learning from the beasts of the forest. Kundry 
sees the hut and goes into it, as if she knew her duty. Gurnemanz 
watches her in wonder. Is this the effect of Good Friday? And has 
Heaven allowed him to revive her to-day for her salvation ? Kun- 
dry, coming out of the hut with a water-jug, goes with it to the 
well. She points out to Gurnemanz an approaching stranger. 


Gl tx. 



He is in black armour with closed visor. Bearing a lowered spear, 
he enters slowly with drooping head. He seats himself on a little 
knoll by the spring. Gurnemanz, watching him in astonishment, 



WAGNER. ‘PARSIFAL*, ACT III 127 

greets him and asks him if he has lost his way. He gently shakes his 
head and merely nods when Gurnemanz asks him if he has no 
greeting. ‘If thou art vowed to silence, I am vowed to tell thee 
what is fit. This is a holy place, where no man comes armed with 
closed helmet and shield and spear, least of all to-day. Do you not 
know what holy day this is? No? What heathen company have 
you been keeping, that you do not know that this is the holiest Good 
Friday morning? Down with those weapons! Vex not the Lord 
Who to-day weaponless gave His holy Blood as atonement for the 
sinful world/ 

The knight thrusts the holy Spear into the ground before him, 
lays his shield and his own spear down, opens and takes off his 
helmet and puts it with the other weapons, and then kneels in 
silent prayer. Gurnemanz watches him with astonishment and 
emotion, and calls to Kundry, saying: ‘Do you recognize him? 
This is he who killed the swan. This is the Fool whom I angrily 
dismissed. The Spear, I know it. Oh that I should awaken to see 
this holiest of days l* 


Ex. 12. 



Kundry turns away her face, overcome with the sorrow of peni- 
tence. 


Ex. 12. 



Parsifal slowly rises from his prayer, recognizes Gurnemanz and 
greets him. In his long wanderings the beardless youth has grown 
into a Christlike man. He tells how he has trodden the path of 
error and suffering (Ex. 2). He now recognizes the murmur of this 
forest and the greeting of this good old man, yet all seems altered. 
Is he still at loss? ‘Whom are you seeking?’ asks Gurnemanz. 
Parsifal replies that he is seeking one whose deep woe he once saw 
in foolish wonder — 


Ex. 14. ^ 



and for whose healing he deems himself ordained. But a curse has 
driven him in pathless wanderings, and he has had to fight his way, 
defending the Spear itself from attack, for he dared not use it as a 


128 WAGNER. ‘PARSIFAL’, ACT III 

weapon; undefiled, he has carried it and brought it here, the holy 
Spear of the Grail. When Gurnemanz has mastered his emotion 
at this fulfilment of the vision of Titurel — 


Ex. 15. 


aL 


z$=j 5 5 = 






: &c. 


he assures Parsifal that, whatever curse kept him from his goal, its 
power has ceased. This is indeed the region of the Grail, whose 
Knighthood awaits Parsifal and is in dire need of the healing that 
he brings. Since Parsifal has left them, Amfortas has wished for 
nothing but death — 



and refused to perform his office. Now at last Titurel, deprived of 
the sight of the Grail that gave him life, has died, like all mortal 
men. 

Parsifal breaks out in an agony of remorse at his own folly that 
has caused all this woe. He is on the point of fainting. Kundry 
hastily fetches a bowl of water. As she returns we hear a pathetic 
echo of the lalst plea of her temptation of Parsifal: ‘Nur eine 
Stunde dein.’ 



Gurnemanz gently intervenes, for the Holy Well itself must be the 
pilgrim’s bath. 



He has a high task to-day before him. 

Kundry and Gurnemanz lead Parsifal to the edge of the spring. 
They remove his breastplate and greaves. Parsifal asks: ‘Shall I be 
led to Amfortas to-day ?’ Gurnemanz answers that the Hall of the 
Grail awaits them. 



129 


WAGNER. ‘PARSIFAL*, ACT III 



To-day is the funeral of Titurel, and Amfortas has promised as a 
last token of repentance to unveil the Grail. Parsifal, now in his 
white robe an unmistakable type of Christ, gazes on Kundry as, 
like the Magdalene, she washes his feet. He says to her : as she has 
washed his feet, so let his friend now besprinkle his head. Gurne- 
manz, scooping with his hand water from the spring, performs the 
rite; and Kundry completes the history of the Magdalene by pro- 
ducing a vessel of precious ointment which she pours over Parsifal's 
feet and then dries with her hair. Parsifal takes the vessel gently 
from her and hands it to Gurnemanz that the friend of Titurel 
may anoint his head as King. 

With this ceremony the well-known concert-room excerpt 
known as the Good-Friday music begins. As a beautiful piece of 
orchestral colour I had often enjoyed it in the concert-room, like 
the kind of ‘sugar piled upon honey' that Lamb disenjoyed as his 
only idea of music ; and I was interested to find, when I heard it in 
its proper context at Bayreuth, that I had no recollection of it 
whatever. In the early days of modern Homeric criticism, one 
Lachmann discovered that the Iliad of Homer was cleverly put 
together from a number of old ballads or lays. The difficulty about 
Lachmann’s lays was that, though the lays of this person and that 
person all had excellent beginnings, they all petered out vaguely. ♦ 
More recent criticism has found precisely the same phenomenon 
in the novels of Dickens and of every writer of fiction sufficiently 
voluminous to be driven to introduce characters and groups of 
persons with a separate exposition. With a great epic or a great 
novel these separate expositions can always be prised out of the 
total mass by misplaced ingenuity; but the naive reader or listener 
is the better critic in that he does not notice this possibility. With 
Wagner the popularity of concert extracts with (or without) 
plausible beginnings has efficiently destroyed all standards of 
musical finality and form. The Good-Friday music can be shut off 
somehow, as you can switch off your wireless. 

Gurnemanz solemnly anoints Parsifal as King. Parsifal fulfils his 
first office by baptizing the kneeling Kundry. 



Her age-long curse is over. Her laughter at the suffering Christ had 
always overcome her again and again whenever, a sinner fell into 


VI K 


130 WAGNER. ‘PARSIFAL’, ACT III 

her power, but now at last she can weep, and she is shaken with the 
peaceful tears of her penitence (Ex. 13). 

Parsifal admires the lovely springtime flowers around him, so 
different from the tropical glories of Klingsor’s garden. 


Ex. 21. 



Gurnemanz says that this flowering is the magic of Good Friday. 
Parsifal is astonished that on this day of highest agony all that 
breathes should not mourn and sorrow. Gurnemanz says: ‘You 
see, that is not so.’ All creation blossoms, watered by the sinners’ 
tears. Unable to see Christ Himself on the Cross, it looks up to 
redeemed mankind. 


Ex. 22. 



At last Kundry raises her head and gazes in grave longing up 
to Parsifal. He, remembering the mocking flowers of Klingsor’s 
garden, recognizes that they too may look for redemption. Kundry 
weeps, and the landscape smiles. He kisses her on the brow with 
the kiss of peace. The bells of the temple peal in the distance. 

&o. 

Orchestral version. 

It is midday. Gurnemanz and Kundry array Parsifal in the mantle 
of a Knight of the Grail. Parsifal grasps the holy Spear and follows 
Gurnemanz with Kundry. We approach the Hall of the Grail with 
dark harmonies of tremendous solemnity. First they recall the 
sorrow of Herzeleide, Parsifal’s mother, as related to him by 
Kundry. Then they merge into the funeral of Titurel, amid the 
thunderous tolling of bells. 

Within the Hall, from one side a procession bears the body of 
Titurel in his coffin. From the other side a procession carries 
Amfortas on his sick-bed with the veiled Shrine of the Grail. The 
procession of Amfortas asks the other procession what it is that 
they are bringing. They answer that their burden is the hero to 
whom God entrusted a holy power. 


Ex. 23. 





WAGNER. 1 PARSIFAL 1 , ACT III 131 

First Procession: Who has slain him who was thus protected by 
God? 

Second Procession: He was felled by the burden of age, since he 
could no more behold the Grail. 

I : Who barred him from seeing the grace of the Grail ? 

II: He whom you are bearing, its sinful warden. 

I: We bring him to-day, for once more he will do his office for the 
last timel 

Both Processions: Alas, for the last time! 

Amfortas wearily raises himself. He would rather receive death 
from them as the lightest atonement for his sin. The coffin is 
opened; and at the sight of Titurers corpse all cry out with grief. 
Amfortas raises himself upright and addresses the corpse. He 
implores his father, most blessed and purest of heroes, to whom 
angels had spoken, and to whom he who alone wished to die had 
given death. He beseeches him who is now beholding the Re- 
deemer Himself in divine glory, to beg that the holy Blood which 
gives new life to the Brethren shall at last give death to the 
sufferer. 

The Knights press around Amfortas, bidding him uncover the 
Grail. In a fury of despair Amfortas leaps from his bed, tears open 
his robe, and bids them plunge their swords into his wound. Let 
them kill the sinner with his pain, and the Grail will shine by itself. 

Meanwhile, Parsifal has entered unnoticed among the Knights. , 
He comes forward and touches the wound of Amfortas with the 
holy Spear. Gurnemanz supports the enraptured Amfortas, whose 
wound is healed. He is now simply a Knight of the Grail. Blessed 
from henceforth are his past sufferings, which gave the highest 
power of pity and pure knowledge to the timid Fool. From the 
point of the holy Spear, which has healed Amfortas’s wound, there 
is a miraculous flow of Blood, which aspires to rejoin its origin in 
the Holy Grail. The Grail shall never be closed again. Uncover 
the Grail; open the Shrine! 

Parsifal fulfils his office. The choir sings ‘Salvation to the 
Saviour!* The White Dove descends and hovers over Parsifal’s 
head. For Kundry this is the second coming of Christ, and she is 
released from the bondage of earthly life. 


Ex. 24. 

8 va. 


loco . 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 


The lacunae in these volumes are vast, obvious, and casual. In 
Vol. II, in the Preface I have explained those that result from general 
and local conditions; and I have now to fill up merely capricious 
gaps by mentioning some of the missing works. 

The greatest and most obvious defect is in the representation of 
modern music. I have explained the cause of this in the Preface 
to Vol. II, and need only repeat here that I am not to blame for not 
producing things hopelessly beyond local opportunities. 

As to the classics, the most apparent lacuna is Handel, who is 
represented only by Israel in Egypt , and by one not very well- 
known concerto. In my analysis I have referred to the ‘de-Bestifica- 
tion’ of Handers organ concertos as a task second in difficulty only 
to that imposed on us by Handel’s inveterate habit of not writing 
his music down. On the other side of the late W. T. Best yawns 
the deep sea of the still later Chrysander and his surviving hosts 
of Musikgelehrte. In my Companion to the Art of Fugue I have 
pointed out h ow im possible it is for a rapid writer not to let such 

figures as 3 . m j degenerate into every permutation and com- 
bination of q J and q m J. On the main- 

tenance of these subtle distinctions the Musikgelehrte are all 
Mumpsimites 1 to a man. But they are not less zealous in putting 
into the solo and orchestral parts of Handel’s works their own 
cadenzas and conjectures, together with every record of what 
any eighteenth-century singing-master may have taught to any 
singer within living memory of Handel. The fact is that every 
self-respecting conductor wants to rewrite Handel; or rather, to 
write him out completely in the first place, and, in the second 
place, to adapt him to the severely restricted conditions of the 
modern orchestra. For the paradox of Handel’s orchestration is 
that while neither it nor any other music, not even the Requiem 
of Berlioz nor the symphonies of Mahler, was ever designed for 
performance on the scale of our Crystal Palace Handel Festivals, 
it nevertheless presupposes quite as many oboes and bassoons as 
strings; and at present the proper conditions for its performance 
simply do not exist. Various great conductors have their ways of 
tackling Handel : my own conceit enables me to agree with them 

* This word is not in nor in its Supplement. It refers to the 

scrupulous monk, mentioned in one of Sir Walter Scott’s introductions, 
who persisted in reading mumpsimus for sumpsimus. 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA I33 

only as the missionary agreed with his fellow-workers of another 
denomination: ‘we both serve the same Master, you in your way 
and I in His.’ 

Bach is easier : his works are technically more difficult and there- 
fore present problems which the performers learn on the spot; 
and, except for the continuo, they are completely written out. The 
continuo itself is an ideal method of training students in harmony. 
The only thing that has prevented me from doing more Bach at 
the Reid Concerts is that his orchestra contributes little to the 
heartbreaking task of improving the musical climate of Edinburgh. 

Mozart is not badly represented in these essays. The ‘Prague* 
Symphony has arrived too late for inclusion ; and the ‘Paris* Sym- 
phony, a very important historic document, I have just been able 
to produce in the present volume, where with Gluck and C. P. E. 
Bach it completes the picture of the transition from the continuo to 
the self-supporting orchestra. It was a shock to me to realize that 
the most famous (and justly famous) of all Mozart’s pianoforte 
concertos, the D minor, is missing. We have played it several 
times, but on Sundays. The ‘Coronation* Concerto in D major 
we have not done; that splendid comedy the F major (Kochel 459) 
has occurred too late; so has the larger B flat major (K. 456) with its 
wonderful G minor variations; and there are at least four other 
pianoforte concertos which I intend to produce as opportunity 
arises. At Sunday concerts we have produced the concerto for 
two pianofortes; and some day we may find it amusing to pro- 
duce the opusculum for three, perhaps on an occasion when* 
we are producing the triple concertos of Bach. It is difficult to 
get together three harpsichords, ancient or modem, that will match, 
and I have no more scruple than Philipp Emanuel Bach had in 
using the pianoforte for Bach and Handel, so long as the instru- 
ment is under more intelligent control than that of a ‘pianistic’ 
player of the Tschopsztiksy school. 

Of Mozart’s violin concertos the two represented here are the 
perfect examples. There are three 1 earlier ones; and a slightly 
later one in D major, discovered in this century and certainly 
genuine though the solo part has been tampered with. By a per- 
versity not unusual in the case of Mozart, the violin concerto that 
is most often played is a voluminous work in E flat, welcome to 
violinists because its technique is more advanced than that of the 
other concertos, but obviously in so shocking a mess as to scoring 
and details that it cannot possibly be genuine as it stands. Perhaps 
a genuine work might assume such a shape, if an unmusicianly 
enthusiast had before him the solo part with its outline of the 

* Four, since the recent discovery of a sketchy specimen of his pro- 
digious childhood, •« 



>34 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

tuttis, and tried to make a full score from its data. At present the 
work looks as if the composition were all wrong (as is demonstrably 
the case with the Concertante for four wind instruments and 
orchestra). But incompetent or spurious accompaniments have 
an astonishing power to obliterate masterly form. Among Mozart’s 
ripest and wittiest works is a set of Divertimenti for two clarinets 
and bassoon which, until early in this century, were, in the most 
accurate sense of the term, obliterated by spurious parts for a pair 
of horns. I have not yet investigated the E flat violin concerto 
closely enough to see whether it presents a case for restoration. At 
present it does not make sense or grammar. The Concertante for 
four wind instruments, on the other hand, presents no case for 
restoration. In the sense that ‘the soul is either blue or not blue’, 
it can be construed ; but the man who wrote it could not compose. 
He could not, for instance, have been Pleyel, who wrote concer- 
tantes galore, but who was a pupil of Haydn. 

The Concertante Symphony (a curious but authentic title) for 
violin and viola is an important early work which we have played 
several times. My excellent first horn, Mr. Walter Worsley, has 
produced for us Mozart’s four horn concertos in all their bubbling 
humour. The analysis of them yields amusing points, but nothing 
quite so funny as the scurrilous remarks in Mozart’s autographs. 
And these would distract attention from the music. 

Mozart’s flute music with orchestra is represented completely 
in these essays. This we owe to the kindness of that great flautist, 
my lamented friend Louis Fleury, who came to our aid in the 
earliest days of the Reid Orchestra and joyfully helped us to com- 
memorate the founder of the Reid Chair on or about his birthday, 
February 13, by producing his genuine flute sonatas, instead of the 
traditional pot-pourri, heavily upholstered in orchestration of the 
Mahogany Age that passed for ‘the Reid Music* from the ’sixties 
onwards. Fleury created quite a vogue for General Reid’s sonatas 
in Paris. 

In the wildly improbable event of any demand arising for more 
of these essays, I may as well say that I do not propose to collect 
any more analyses of Mozart’s and Haydn’s instrumental works in 
future volumes. Nothing short of precis-writing can reveal the 
constant and vital differences between each work. And it may be 
news to some readers that I find precis-writing of Haydn and 
Mozart far too difficult for any but the most advanced of my 
students; especially if they have come to the University primed 
with traditional views of musical form. These are about as useful 
as bird’s-eye views of architecture ; and half the energy of three or 
four years of intensive training is spent in getting the Bird’s Eye 
into human pedestrian focus. 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 135 

Something has been said in these essays about the infuriating 
conditions for producing Haydn’s symphonies. By great good for- 
tune Haydn himself looked after the publication of his string 
quartets ; with the result that, while much remains to be discovered, 
such as Miss Marion Scott’s first-rate historical document, Haydn’s 
actual first quartet, earlier than Op. 1, No. 1, all such discoveries 
are certain to be of historic rather than artistic importance. Haydn 
himself wished to ignore everything earlier than his set of six 
quartets known as Op. 9. From that point onwards his art, as 
shown by the quartets, lives by its absolute values, and makes 
enormous progress from perfection within primitive conditions to 
perfection on higher and higher planes. Now the symphonies, 
acknowledged as such, begin at a higher level than the quartets 
of Opp. 1 and 2. (The line between string quartet and string 
orchestra is at first obscure, and wind parts have been discovered 
for some of the early ‘quartets’.) But the first fifty symphonies do 
not advance to the level of the best quartets in Op. 9; and, as I 
have reiterated elsewhere, a case might be argued for the proposi- 
tion that Haydn’s famous opportunities for experimenting with 
the orchestra at Esterhaz did him as much harm as good. At all 
events, the experimental elements in the first fifty symphonies 
consist in outbreaks of fantastic virtuosity for individual players, 
who, whether residents or visitors, were doubtless able to do justice 
to them. But meanwhile the general orchestral organization made 
no appreciable progress. The learned editor of the fourth volume 
does not comfort me for the delay in its appearance by his 
remarks about the impossibility of reproducing the living features 
of Haydn’s handwriting by any process short of facsimile. The 
remarks are charmingly expressed, but they will apply to any 
handwriting by any lively person. I saw the whole volume in proof 
on Mandyczewski’s table in 1928. A delay of six years in publishing 
does not seem adequately excused by the discovery that one sym- 
phony is five years earlier than Mand yczewski supposed, and that 

here and there Haydn wrote r^r_? rjJ in the score where the parts 

read Such matters can be treated, as was the custom of 



the best nineteenth-century scholars, in a later volume of Revisions - 
berichte . Moreover, I confess to an attitude which the modem 
Musikgelehrte may perhaps think snobbish, but which would cer- 
tainly advance or restore the standard of musical scholarship if it 
were more often adopted. I am prepared to appreciate the impor- 
tance of the erratum ‘for buz'd read buzz'd ’ if the work concerned 
is Paradise * Lost , but if it occurs only in Johnson’s translation of 
Lobo’s Travels in Abyssinia I shall not even trouble to see if I have 
quoted that title correctly. » 



136 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

Meanwhile, not being an expert collector, I cannot pick up printed 
full scores of more than twelve of the forty-two most epoch-making 
symphonies in the history of music ; those in which Haydn matured 
his style after leaving Esterhaz and before crowning his work with 
the twelve London symphonies. On the back of the fourth volume of 
the critical edition of Haydn’s symphonies the contents of the whole 
first series of the Denkmdler Deutscher Tonkunst are advertised. 
Far be it from me to deny that there are good things galore in those 
sixty-five volumes. But in comparison with the missing middle 
Haydn symphonies their catalogue reads like the list Stevenson 
drew up of the books a certain firm of publishers triumphantly 
issued as compared with the list of what they rejected. Jones's 
Latin Irregular Verbs ; Robinson's Stately Homes of Salop, &c., &c., 
as against the rejected comedy April Rain , the Biblical tragedy of 
David and Bathsheba , and an autobiography up to the production 
of King John — by William Shakespeare ; five books of an unfinished 
novel, Solomon Crabbe , by Henry Fielding, &c. 

Beethoven’s orchestral music is almost completely represented 
in these essays. The second concerto (really the first) in B flat 
is missing. A few words here will prevent the omission from being 
a serious lacuna. The first movement is full of jolly early Beethoven 
diversions, but is far more scattered than even the first movement 
of the C major concerto. The most amusing thing about it is that, 
as with the C major concerto, Beethoven revived his interest in the 
work later on and wrote a big cadenza for it. But whereas the best 
of the three cadenzas for the first movement of the C major con- 
certo is a magnificent thing which raises the status of the whole 
work, this cadenza to the B flat concerto is one of the most amusing 
exhibitions of temper that any artist or animal ever showed in the 
first or last stages of casting a skin. Brahms’s grafting of his latest 
ideas on to the stock of his early B major trio shows, as Rontgen 
always complained, a certain unfriendliness at the moments when 
the old composer grabs the young one by the scruff of his neck and 
kicks ripe wisdom into him ; but it shows nothing like the temper 
of the improvisatorial-inquisitorial, valedictory-maledictory fugato 
in which Beethoven storms for several pages over the whole newly 
extended compass of his pianoforte on a subject and counter- 
subject as loosely connected with the rest of the movement as all 
its themes and developments are connected with each other. The 
slow movement and rondo are masterpieces ; and it is a mere acci- 
dent that I have not yet produced the whole concerto at the Reid 
Concerts. The rondo is Beethoven’s second finale; he wrote an 
earlier one which appeared posthumously and would be worth 
playing as a separate piece, if the pianoforte part had not unfortu- 
nately been completed by Czerny in his most musical-box style. 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA I37 

The first movements of two juvenile concertos exist, but my 
programmes are concerned only with absolute musical values. 
Slightness and inequalities do not matter ; but I have no use for 
merely historical music, though the chamber music of Edinburgh 
University is produced under the title of the Historical Concerts. 

I have not had an opportunity of producing the Egmont music, 
which in Germany keeps what is by no means Goethe’s best play 
alive upon the stage. The difficulties of producing the music in the 
concert-room can be surmounted only by some form of recitation. 
This would certainly be worth while. Of Die Ruinen von Athen the 
overture is an amusing piece of genuine ‘light music* for which 
I may some day find room ; the solemn March in E flat, with or 
without chorus, is noble; the chorus of Dervishes is first-rate; and 
the famous Turkish March is neither better nor worse than its 
reputation. Altogether this piece <T occasion does not contain enough 
good fragments to group together in a satisfactory way. Of Konig 
Stephan I intend to produce neither the overture nor any of the 
rest. The eminent critic Rochlitz, like some of Beethoven’s best 
friends, was distressed at the master’s small output in the year 1812, 
and at its increasingly theatrical style. In fact, Beethoven’s energy 
was at this period sadly drained by lawsuits, chiefly about the 
guardianship of his scapegrace nephew; and the theatricality of 
Die Ruinen von Athen and Konig Stephan was hardly out of place 
in the theatre. Nevertheless Beethoven was irritated by Rochlitz’s 
criticisms ; though he thought far worse of these works than the 
elegant Rochlitz ventured to suggest. The late Dr. Prieger, of • 
Bonn, showed me a bound volume of Rochlitz’s musical journal 
with Beethoven’s furious notes. In these outspoken days it may 
be permissible to convey the substance of Beethoven’s remarks by 
summing it up as a comparison between his waste products and 
Rochlitz’s highest thoughts, to the disadvantage of the latter. 

The early ballet Die Geschopfe des Prometheus presents a rather 
intriguing problem to the designer of classical programmes. The 
editors of the Gesammtausgabe of Beethoven’s works were such 
absolute musicians that they removed almost all such vulgarities 
as stage-directions and dialogue from most of the theatre-music 
of Mozart and Beethoven. Much of the Prometheus music is broken 
up by pauses in a manner entirely pointless without the choreo- 
graphy; and large tracts of the music are monotonously frivolous. 
But the overture is excellent early Beethoven, beginning with a 
stroke of genius and leading to quite a good thunderstorm on the 
stage. In all there is something like an hour and a half of orchestral 
music in the work. The high lights are a piece with a solo violon- 
cello and a harp, doubtless representing how the lyre and voice of 
Prometheus gave life to his clay images; and the finale, a rondo on 



138 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

the theme which afterwards became glorified in the Variations, 
Op. 35, and in the finale of the ‘Eroica’ Symphony. The famous 
‘Battle’ Symphony ( Wellington's Sieg oder die Schlacht bei Vittoria) 
I shall neither produce nor describe here. A description of it would 
be amusing ; but the perky-precious reaction against Beethoven is 
too recent for fun at Beethoven’s expense to be permissible now. 

My conscience is clear as to the representation of Schubert’s 
orchestral music. In the case of Schumann, the omission of the 
C major Symphony is a serious lacuna; but, by way of compensa- 
tion, in the present volume I have been able to produce the Over- 
ture , Scherzo , and Finale which sheer perversity induced Schumann 
to deprive of its original title of Sinfonietta. We have also success- 
fully produced the Concerto for four horns, an interesting though 
nearly impossible work, of which my analysis has been crowded 
out. 

Brahms is completely represented, except for some of the choral 
works. Some day I hope to deal with certain misunderstood 
aspects of his style. At present things like the middle 4/4 section 
of the ‘Tragic’ Overture, and the ruminating triplet theme in the 
finale of the Second Symphony (see Vol. I, p. 105, Ex. 26) are 
as completely beyond the comprehension of the average concert- 
goer as the style of Bach was beyond John Hullah, who, in the 
’sixties or ’seventies, was the first person to say that ‘Bach is so 
satisfactory’, but who denied him all intention or capacity of 
expression beyond such as we can ascribe to the Great Pyramid. 
A supplementary note on the ‘Tragic’ Overture in the present 
volume attempts to discuss this matter, or at least to indicate its 
existence (Essay ccxxxix). 

It only remains for me to deal with Wagner. I claim for these 
programmes that they represent fairly exactly so much of Wagner’s 
mature work as can be decently produced in the concert-room at 
all. Time is running short, space is exhausted; your patience, dear 
reader, does not matter so much, because you have been emphati- 
cally warned that these volumes are intended to be read skippingly; 
but my patience is now completely exhausted and I must beg leave 
to hasten this conclusion by pontificating. Perhaps it has escaped 
your notice that hitherto I have always tried to prove my points; 
and, as Dr. Johnson said in the most pathetic of all his recorded 
utterances, ‘Sir I consider myself a very polite man’. But now, 
as Dr. Johnson said on another occasion, taking the words out of 
his disputant’s mouth, ‘we are to be as rude as we please’. I don’t 
ask for belief : but it will save time if I pontificate that anybody who 
turns up his nose at the Kaisermarsch will just have to keep it turned 
up, as is the fate of nurse-scared children who make faces when 
the wind changes. The merits of the Kaisermarsch are not political 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA I39 

affairs. Either you can recognize grand style and grand composi- 
tion or you can’t. I have attempted to analyse the Kaisermarsch in 
this volume, and have taken the opportunity of dealing faithfully 
with the question of Wagnerian excerpts. 

For the rest, let us never forget that these volumes are a collec- 
tion of occasional notes, produced mainly over a period of twenty- 
one years and including material already written in 1902. It would 
be a mistake to try to give them more coherent form. The collec- 
tion has, in fact, a form that arises naturally from its origin, and 
which secures an immunity from criticisms that would be fatal to a 
work with more serious pretensions. Yet the whole collection has 
been noticed to present the appearance of a solid body of con- 
sistent musical doctrine; and, if I had an uneasy conscience as to 
the duty of changing one’s opinions as one changes one’s linen, I 
should have been worried by the fact that the opinions I expressed 
in 1902 were essentially the same as those I wish to express in 
1938. Part of this immutability comes from my subject-matter. 

I have never been concerned with musical fashions ; and my master, 
Parry, taught me to study the classics of music from point to point 
according to the course of each individual work, instead of setting 
up classical forms a priori and treating the individual work as if it 
were compelled to fit the forms. Parry’s method, being thus 
elastic, cannot change; and a series of essays all written according 
to this method can show no progress, except in the range of its 
subjects. That range, as I am always pointing out, has been limited 
for me, by no means by my taste but by the practical restrictions 4 
on the repertoire of an orchestra limited to six hours’ practice a 
week and seldom able to afford instruments that Brahms would 
have regarded as extras. Obviously in such circumstances my 
reviews of modern music must be few, and irreducible to a coherent 
scheme. If my orchestra had had daily practice and support for 
some such series as the London Promenade Concerts, these volumes 
would have represented my views on modern music with a much 
less reactionary appearance. On this matter I think the time now 
ripe for me to divulge a piece of musical history. 

In 1902, when the second edition of Grove’s Dictionary was in 
progress, I was invited to write an article on Richard Strauss. I 
was gratified by the invitation, and had every intention of comply- 
ing with the editor’s request. I understood that he would prefer 
my detached view to that of a partisan who was likely to see little 
merit in any other music. On the other hand, he could trust me not 
to be shocked out of all sense of proportion by unorthodoxies in 
Strauss’s technique. Unfortunately I was in Berlin at the time; 
and there both the Straussians and the anti-Straussians were 
actively making what capital they could by sniggering over minor 



140 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

details in Strauss’s subject-matter which persons unacquainted 
with French literature were pleased to call Rabelaisian, and which 
canny Scots would call ‘sculduddery’. These things were neither 
here nor there. I was then, and still am, adequately impressed 
with Strauss’s immense powers of composition; moments of high 
pathos, such as were to culminate later in the recognition of Orestes 
by Electra, moved me profoundly; I rather enjoyed the more 
sensational and horrific elements of his style; and the only thing 
that thoroughly repelled me was his frequent fits of prettiness, in 
which he seemed to treat beauty with a parodistic patronage which 
I thought insulting. I felt then much as I feel now : that it was little 
use to be rein musikalisch unless one was thoroughly rein to begin 
with; and some of the Straussian beauty seemed to me as ineligible 
for great music as Klingsor was for the Brotherhood of the Grail. 
Of the ‘sculduddery’ I also thought then as I think now: it re- 
minded me of a boy showing a younger boy life in a railway 
refreshment room by ordering a brandy-and-soda, into which he 
solemnly dropped three lumps of sugar. 

Such were my views in 1902; neither then nor now would they 
have prevented me from contributing to Grove’s Dictionary an 
article on Strauss which Grove himself would have approved. I 
should have explained to the best of my ability the enormous 
efficiency of Strauss’s mastery, his command of movement in free 
composition, and, had Elektra by then appeared, his musical stage- 
craft and capacity to inspire the actors of his music-dramas. To 
matters of taste I should have referred as to things about which 
dispute is proverbially unprofitable. Unfortunately, in 1902 the 
habit of scandal-mongering in musical criticism was not yet 
obsolete. Even then this difficulty could have been tackled by a 
man of the world with a light touch. I felt that I had neither the 
lightness of touch nor the knowledge of the world; and I accord- 
ingly wrote to the editor of the second edition of Grove and told 
him that any contribution from me on the subject would be far 
too heavy-handed. When the new edition appeared I bitterly 
regretted my withdrawal, and wondered how I had ever been 
gulled by charm of manner into taking the editor for a man of the 
world. He wrote the article himself and produced one of the most 
notorious and ill-timed outpourings of vituperation in the whole 
history of criticism. Much of the article was judicious enough in 
a patronizing way, but it descended to an implication of ‘porno- 
graphy’ (which is a much worse word than ‘sculduddery’) and 
angrily accused Strauss of ‘impertinence*, besides constantly im- 
plying that the whole of Strauss’s intentions were fraudulent. It is 
not too much to say that that article sufficed to ruin the reputation 
of the second edition of Grove’s Dictionary . The music of Richard 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA I4I 

Strauss may have stood for everything that Sir George Grove 
would have hated if he had known it; but everybody who knew his 
conception of his duties as editor felt that this article must have 
made him turn in his grave. In the light of the event, I should have 
been far wiser to have contributed my own fumbling efforts. If I 
had had the slightest idea that the editor would have taken the line 
he did, I would have risked any number of tactless blunders of my 
own. 

But the reason why Strauss appears only twice in these volumes 
is not a matter of taste. It is the mere result of the fact that he 
regards as the normal orchestra three of each wind instrument 
instead of two. Some modern composers — Bax, for instance — will 
describe their own scores as written for a chamber orchestra unless 
they are using three or four of each wind instrument. Until the 
Reid Orchestra is better supported, such luxuries can seldom 
appear in my programmes ; and the Edinburgh public will forgive 
me for pointing out that it is rather more proud than ashamed of its 
dislike of modern music. By way of compensation, we have covered 
an unusually wide range of classical music, and the pieces which we 
have performed oftenest have not been those that are most hack- 
neyed elsewhere; nor have we played anything so often that it has 
become stale to us. 

Our Sunday concerts, for which no analytical programmes are 
issued, have included much that we have not produced at a Reid 
Concert. Hence several lacunae, of which the most astonishing is 
that there is no analysis of the most famous, the most perfect, and, * 
if so disputable a term be worth risking, the greatest of all Mozart’s 
concertos: the D minor, Kochel No. 466. Obviously no review of 
Mozart’s concertos could be regarded as complete if it omitted the 
most important of all; but these volumes cannot pretend to give 
a complete view of any particular set of classics. I could hardly 
have gone to press with a collection which, containing as much as 
it does, should omit any one of the nine symphonies of Beethoven; 
but even with these the essays are manifestly too unequal in scale 
to be regarded as much more than a chance collection of obiter dicta. 

The reception given by the Press to these volumes has far ex- 
ceeded my wildest expectations. Without exception, those critics 
who have pointed out my mistakes have reserved their strictures to 
the end of reviews that strike a note of generous appreciation. My 
errors are numerous, and nothing would have been easier than for 
a critic to draw up a list of them in a form calculated to expose me 
as a humbug. I owe it to the critics, and to the general public, to 
correct these errors, and I beg individual critics to forgive me for 
shirking the complicated task of distinguishing to which of them 
I owe particular corrections. One quality I may claim to share 



142 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

with Dr. Johnson, and that is a complete lack of method and a 
shameless and indolent reliance upon a well-stocked memory. If 
and when these volumes, or any parts of them, are reprinted, 
many corrections will be incorporated in the text, but no attempt 
will be made to turn my armchair garrulity into a serious work of 
reference. My only claim to solidity is in respect of purely musical 
analysis; and here I am far too slippery a customer to reward 
criticism, my fundamental proposition being that most of the 
orthodox terms and methods of musical analysis are rubbish, so 
that I am as free in my terminology as Humpty Dumpty, while my 
lacunae are self-confessed. One very important musical matter 
which I despair of clearing up is the innumerable errors in the 
musical examples. It is difficult to discriminate between legiti- 
mate sketchiness, such as a generalized form for a theme that 
recurs in several versions (with the consequent omission of slurs 
and other marks of expression), and real slips of memory and of the 
pen. But if ever another edition of this collection is required I will 
try to secure some Hercules to wash out the Augean stables of 
my quotations. 

As to dates and biographical details, I owe the debt of gratitude 
we all owe to the authors of that most emancipating intellectual 
maxim of modern times, viz. History is what you remember . Their 
cardinal date of 1066 is the only one that is indelibly graven on the 
tablets of my mind, and I often feel vague as to what event it com- 
memorates. I only know that it is too early for the birth of Bach. 
In writing my essays I have consulted, when time and opportunity 
permitted, the nearest available references, which have usually 
been the second edition of Grove and my own articles in the 
Encyclopcedia Britannica. However, now for an effort to correct 
some errors that have been pointed out by my generous and 
tolerant critics. 

Of these, the grossest are certain statements about Brahms’s 
Requiem and Debussy’s Damoiselle Slue. Brahms’s Requiem was 
not written in commemoration of the fallen in the Franco-Prussian 
War; and its soprano solo commemorated his mother, not his 
step-mother. Debussy did not submit La Damoiselle Slue for the 
Prix de Rome . 

Misprints (which, I flatter myself, I could correct more easily 
if the Oxford University Press committed more of them) have, 
for the most part, been corrected in second impressions. Of 
my own mistakes I can find nothing important in Vol. I. On 
page 101 the Allegretto of Brahms’s Second Symphony is said 
to have four horns: it has only three. This is the kind of thing 
the composer himself may or may not discover after he has 
finished his score. 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA I43 

Page 161: — the fanfares in the Allegretto of the ‘Military’ 
Symphony may possibly have some connexion with the fact that 
Haydn did actually write a set for an English regiment while he 
was in London. 

The footnote on page 214 raises a question slightly more com- 
plex than I thought at the time of writing. The fact is that the 
only possible range of tempo for Andante con moto § is precisely 
the same as that for Allegro moderato f , beat for beat. Accordingly, 
most conductors assume that the andante beats must at all costs be 
decidedly slower than those of the first movement. This is one of 
those scruples which, cogent as articles of a priori faith, absolutely 
vanish in real life. No two symphonic movements are more per- 
fectly contrasted than the Allegro and Andante of the ‘Unfinished’ 
Symphony, and the contrast would not be impaired if the tempi 
were exactly equal, or even if the Allegro were broadened, and the 
con moto of the Andante exaggerated till it were actually the 
faster of the two movements. 

On page 220 acknowledgement should be made to Prout for his 
comment on Mendelssohn’s wisdom in omitting oboes from the 
repeated chords at the beginning of Mendelssohn’s ‘Italian’ Sym- 
phony. Prout is less happy in remarking that Mendelssohn’s 
effect is better than that of Beethoven in the Allegretto of his 
Eighth Symphony; there is nothing in common between the 
passages but their appearance on paper. Beethoven’s is a deliber- 
ate ‘tick-tick-tick’, first drafted by him as a canon on Maelzel’s 
metronome. Mendelssohn’s is the avrjptdfLov ydXaofia of the sea, 
a tour de force of tonguing for the wood-wind. 

The inequalities in the analyses of the Beethoven symphonies 
are beyond remedy, nor do I wish to deprive students of the 
opportunity of working out for themselves what is needed to make 
the analyses as complete as my precis of the Ninth Symphony. 

Volume II 

The mistakes in Vol. II are more numerous and serious. My 
desperate struggles, on page 46 and in the foreword to the Second 
Impression, are worth recording for the obiter dicta about Rubin- 
stein and Tchaikovsky which they occasion, but of course they do 
not attempt to excuse the slander and blunder the consequences 
of which they attempt to evade. 

The footnote on page 47 states a mystery which I cannot 
attempt to explain. I am sure that Schumann would have scrupled 
to write such consecutive fifths if he had not echoed them ; but why 
the echo remedies them I cannot think. Since it undoubtedly 
does, we need not worry. 

Much new light has been thrown upon Bruckner by the recent 



144 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

pious publication of his works in their original form as he con- 
ceived them before certain eminent conductors took them in hand. 
Now this is not such a simple matter as it might seem. Bruckner 
was an object of party warfare in his lifetime, a butt for the 
‘Brahminen’, who saw no merit in him at all, a mascot for the 
‘Wagnerians’, who had for the most part a poor grasp of instru- 
mental music. The only musicians who had any chance of under- 
standing Bruckner were the Wagnerians, who were, probably 
without exception, violently opposed to Brahms, as Bruckner was 
himself. And whatever the limitations, and however provocative 
the arrogance of the Brahminen, there is no question that, except 
in matters of theatre music, the deeper musical knowledge and 
finer sensibilities were mainly on their side. To-day the pious 
restoration of Bruckner’s original form and scoring is acclaimed as 
the restoration of things that were beyond the spiritual grasp of 
the age, and particularly beyond the grasp of the great conductors 
who made Bruckner’s works practically possible by revising his 
scoring and making cuts in his recapitulations and digressions. If 
these changes had been made after Bruckner’s death or against his 
will, there would be a strong case for returning to his original 
versions; but, apart from their intrinsic merits, they were all 
accepted and published by him as expressing his final intentions. 
And it is to these that piety is due. 

In future performances of Bruckner’s works I shall certainly 
profit by a close study of his original versions. But I do not expect 
to find any reason, in piety to Bruckner, for rejecting the experi- 
ence he accepted from Loewe. We are told that cuts were made 
because the spirit of the age was not ripe for Bruckner. The 
limitations of Bruckner’s champions certainly did not include a 
blindness to his spiritual qualities; on the contrary, an out-and-out 
Brucknerite was, in his day as now, a person of slow intellectual 
processes to whom subtleties were as unintelligible as they were to 
Bruckner himself, and for whom Brahms’s mind was eight times 
too alert. We ought rather to expect to find them obtuse as to 
much that we pride ourselves on appreciating. But the situation is 
by no means that of the transformation of Mussorgsky’s Boris 
Godunov at the hands of Rimsky-Korsakov. Rimsky-Korsakov’s 
brilliant mastery was the perfect expression of a perky and con- 
ceited little mind, which was no more capable of telling a blunder 
from a stroke of genius or feature of style, than Herbert Spencer 
was capable of producing an authoritative edition of Plato. Bruck- 
ner’s champions were modest practical men, inspired conductors 
worthy of the confidence Wagner showed in them; and Bruckner 
did well to publish his works in the form in which these faithful 
champions revised them. I cannot claim, as yet, to have made a 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA I45 

study of the evolution of Bruckner’s scores; but I can already cite 
one obvious example showing both the futility of returning to the 
original and the advisability of knowing something about it. I 
quote with praise, on p. 74 of Vol. II, the ‘flowing figure in muted 
violins’ that weaves clouds of incense round the main theme on its 
return deepened in octaves. To an expert in orchestration it must 
seem incredible that this figure should have been entrusted merely 
to an unsupported flute; yet such is the case. The flute is still 
there in the revised version, but the weight of the tone, and all 
its security of legato, is in the muted violins. I have heard the 
‘Romantic’ Symphony since the publication of the original score, 
and have noticed with pleasure that the conductor used the 
ordinary revised version but made the flute more prominent than 
usual, thus realizing the composer’s first idea under the far better 
conditions of the revision, and incidentally showing how history 
repeats itself, since Haydn’s orchestration shows frequent signs 
of the inability of his flutes to support themselves. 

I should be very much surprised to find myself tempted to 
restore Bruckner's original complete recapitulations. The most 
ungebildet phenomenon in his treatment of form is his failure to see 
the irrelevance of his vestiges of classical procedure. 

On page 124-5 I give, from personal information, the demand 
of Sibelius that the conductor should visibly change his beat 
according to the shifting accents. In common with other and per- 
haps more widely experienced conductors I find this unnecessary 
and confusing. In ordinary syncopations it is a fault if the con- ' 
ductor falls out of the normal beat. Sibelius’s } versus | is not a 
case of syncopation: he wishes both forms of accent to be equally 
normal and hence desires the conductor to indicate the change. 
But sometimes the two rhythms are simultaneous, and in any case 
the conductor’s efforts will fail to make the listener believe hi9 
eyes rather than his ears. 

On page 146 I cite a record ‘in Mendelssohn’s letters’ of a per- 
formance of the Scherzo of his Octet in church. I cannot trace thi9, 
and I may as well suppose that I have dreamt it. 

Bach’s C minor Double Concerto has recently been published 
restored for Violin and Oboe in D minor. Nevertheless, I remain 
convinced that C minor is the right key. The compass of the oboe 
would already make this probable, for D minor would take the 
oboe up to E, whereas D is Bach’s inviolable limit for the instru- 
ment. But there is conclusive evidence for C minor in passages 
where the clavier faithfully records the fact that the violin sub- 
stitutes its open G for the low F that would have resulted from an 
exact transposition of the figures as first given in a higher key. 

Apropos of Handel’s Hornpipes (page 201), I now finally yield 

VI L 



I46 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

to the temptation to quote the following spirited example, which 
ought to be found somewhere in the British Museum. (If not, I 
shall put it there myself.) 




Volume III 

An occasional feature in these essays is an attempt to present the 
facts so that listeners may enjoy the element of surprise where 
the composer so intends. Thus in Vol. Ill, p. 54 , 1 have tried to 
leave the listener only half prepared for the solo violin’s production 
of the opening ‘trumpet’ theme at the pitch of a piccolo. 

As my addendum to the reprint of Vol. Ill shows, the Violon- 
cello Concerto attributed to Haydn is by Anton Kraft, and will be 
found under that heading in the Index. 

I am glad to hear that the title ‘Emperor’ for Beethoven’s E flat 
Concerto is quite unknown in Germany. 

The preface to the miniature score of Brahms’s Violin Concerto 
gives many interesting particulars as to the genesis of that work. 
(But the English translation must first be translated back into 
German; it makes appalling blunders and implies that Brahms 
disapproved of Joachim’s interpretation.) 

I was at first inclined to be violently sceptical as to Dr. Altmann’s 
suggestion that the rejected scherzo of the Violin Concerto may 
have become the tremendous second movement of the B flat 
Pianoforte Concerto. But sketches may advance a considerable 
way before they become too firmly set for drastic transformation. 
This is by no means an unlikely violin theme — 



In the Violin Concerto, Ex. 6, p. 127, there is some reason to 
suspect an allusion, personal to Joachim and Brahms, to a pro- 
minent theme in Viotti’s A minor Violin Concerto, a work of which 
both masters were specially fond (see the following example). With 
less probability, Viotti may be suspected of haunting Brahms with 
the rhythm of Ex. 2 in the Double Concerto (p. 141), but by this 
time the causal nexus is thinning out in uncontrolled diffusion, 
and might as well be extended to a similar figure in the first 
movement of the Clarinet Trio, Op. 114. 


RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 147 



Volume IV 


Here my troubles really begin. Evil communications corrupt 
good manners, and what I have called ‘the encyclopaedic inatten- 
tion' of the gratuitously illustrative composer enwraps my mind in 
a fog of that kind of General Culture which is to be sharply and 
exclusively distinguished from musical culture. We cannot be too 
grateful to Elgar for his courtesy, so soon before he joined the ages, 
in allowing me to ‘control' my analysis of that greatest of symphonic 
poems, Falstaff, by his own. Thus far I am protected. But 
Nemesis descends upon me with my footnote to page 77. Having 
fallen into the usual booby trap of the legend of Paganini's playing 
the viola part in Berlioz's Harold Symphony, I took an insolent 
pride in shifting my responsibility for the error upon Berlioz 
after having argued that his word was as the word of Baron 
Miinchhausen. But on that argument the legend would be true, 
for Berlioz's word happens to be precisely the contrary: he tells us 
the truth, that Paganini not only commissioned the work but paid 
him generously for it, and heard its first performance but refused 
to play the viola part. 

In answer to many friendly critics, and in defence of the printing- „ 
office proof-readers whose accuracy far transcends mine, I must 
point out that ‘Phileas' Fogg is not a misprint. Jules Verne's 
‘Phileas’ is one of the strongest of bilingual ties between England 
and France, worthy to be ranked with The First of the Fourth ( le 
premier du quatrieme), which Hugo persisted in believing to be our 
queer name for a certain Scottish estuary, his typical British Tar 
Mr. Tom-Tim-Jack, and the alias of the anarchist Ravachol when 
he passed as that eminent English man-about-town Mr. Flitpot. 

I ought not to be surprised at the indignation aroused by my 
giving no authority for my statement, on page 82, that Berlioz 
coolly confessed that his famous story of Habeneck's inviting 
disaster by taking a pinch of snuff at a critical moment while con- 
ducting the Grande Messe des Morts was a fabrication told simply 
because it was ben trovato. (It certainly was not ben trovato ; a more 
impossible story has never been told since Sir Boyle Roche wrote 
a letter with a pistol in each hand and a sword in the other.) This 
habit of quoting from memory will certainly get me into hot water 
some day. But my authority is first-rate, though I had forgotten it. 
The story was told to Sir Charles Stanford by t J. A. Osborne 
and quoted in Pages from an Unwritten Diary, pp. 68-9. 


148 RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA 

I ought to have known all the time, instead of waiting till 
Vol. IV was reprinted, that the wonderful chord, Ex. 2, in Men- 
delssohn’s Overture to A Midsummer Night's Dream, had already 
been written in 1790 by Mozart in Cosi fan tutte . 

No light has yet reached me as to the ‘well-known tune’ con- 
cealed beneath the theme of Elgar’s Enigma Variations. For some 
time the rumour was rife that the tune was Auld Lang Syne . It 
was not. We may be perfectly certain that whatever it was there 
would be nothing Straussian or archaic about the combination as 
counterpoint. With all his admiration for Strauss, Elgar is one of 
the cleanest contrapuntists in musical history. Road-hog counter- 
point simply did not interest him; and, if it did, to make an 
enigma of road-hog counterpoint is merely to put ‘barking like a 
dog’ into a riddle about a partridge ‘to make it harder*. 

Alas and alack-a-day, Hindemith, in his new Anweisungen zur 
Tonsatz, expressly repudiates atonality and polytonality, in terms, 
which give no support to the idea that he ever used these privileges 
even in early works! Still, facts are facts; and while I apologize 
to the composer of Hindemith’s Op. 24, No. 1, I see nothing to 
retract either in my account of that particular work or in my 
account of the hypotheses on which I now know that it is not con- 
structed. Hindemith’s development is rapid, and his practice as 
well as his theory has cleared up since 1921. Certainly it is a fact 
that Herr Wilm Wilm’s fox-trot is in one of the twelve major keys, 
and that it is accompanied by simultaneous identical runs in each 
of the other eleven. Moreover, in rehearsing an early violin sonata 
with a great violinist I found it impossible at first to get good 
intonation for a passage in which the violin was on the top, the 
right hand of the pianoforte playing the same melody a major sixth 
below, and the left hand playing it another major sixth below the 
right. But, taking the tune at its face value, I found that it lent 
itself naturally to harmonization in terms of Spohr. Thus har- 
monized, the violinist read it easily at sight, and, having once 
learned it, did not forget it when it was doubled in two other keys. 
Be this as it may, Hindemith’s later work is undoubtedly broaden- 
ing its range and getting rid of a priori encumbrances. 

Volume V 

Apart from a misplaced bass clef, which made the ‘rude Sylvanus’ 
intrude too soon into the peace of Weelkes’s Three Virgin Nymphs , 
the first and chief serious mistake is the wild statement that 
Brahms’s Deutsches Requiem commemorated the fallen in the wars 
of 1870. The first three numbers of the Requiem were performed 
in 1867, the whole work, except for the soprano solo, in 1868 ; and 
the soprano solo commemorates not his step-mother, who died 



RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA I49 

much later, but his mother, whose death in 1865 was presumably 
the occasion from which the whole Requiem originated. 

Debussy did not submit his Blessed Damozel for the Prix de 
Rome. He had already won that prize with his cantata L'Enfant 
Prodigue. But when he did send La Damoiselle Blue from Rome, the 
Section des Beaux-Arts of the Institut rejected it. So the point I 
was trying to make is good enough for conversational purposes. 

One or two anachronisms seem to have slipped in, rather 
from grammatical ambiguity than from real confusion. Loewe’s 
Erlkonig , for instance, is only a year or two later than Schubert’s: 
yet I still think his clever economy typical of the decline from a 
golden to a silver age. That is a golden age which is dominated 
by men of supreme genius, who are just as likely to put the clock 
back from an already tarnished silver age as to put it forward. 
At all events the preference for Loewe is a typical silver-age taste. 

When I said that Parry and Stanford offended our professional 
librettists and critics by choosing their own words instead of 
leaving English choral music in that state of culture to which it had 
pleased Mr. Chorley to call it, I did not mean to imply that 
Chorley was a contemporary, nor had I any curiosity as to the date 
of his death, which I find to be 1872. The Chorleys we have 
always with us: like Herodotus, I know their names but forbear to 
mention them. Chorley was an honourable man. So are they all, 
all honourable men. Peace be to their waste-paper baskets and to 
mine. 



GLOSSARY 


This glossary does not attempt the hopeless task of making an 
equivalent of a systematic treatise out of the disjecta membra of 
which these six volumes consist: it merely explains such musical 
terms as I find I have used without the explanation that some of 
my most intelligent readers may be glad to have. To those who 
can read music much of this glossary may seem unnecessary, 
though not all its explanations are orthodox; but there are many 
persons highly gifted in musical sensibility to whom the informa- 
tion here given will at least explain the extent to which my ter- 
minology is Pickwickian. 

ARPEGGIO 

A chord of which the notes are delivered one after another, 
whether or not then sustained, and regardless of their order in 
succession. As the word implies, such chords are characteristic of 
the harp, on which instrument chords are most sonorous when the 
strings are plucked in rapid succession from the bass upwards 
instead of all exactly together. 

ATONALITY 

The art of composing not merely ambiguously as to key, or 
with change of key too constant to be followed, but actually in a 
style that excludes all association whatever with keys or tonality. 
Not to be confused with ‘polytonality* (q.v.); though, like poly- 
tonality, it will probably prove to be, in all its forms, a mere con- 
tradiction in terms resulting from trying to make an abstraction 
out of a small number of special effects ultimately derived from 
classical music. (See also ‘Whole-tone Scale’.) (See Essay No. 
cxcv, vol. iv, pp. 172-3. Analysis of Hindemith’s Kammermusik , 
No. 1, op. 24, No. 1; but note that Hindemith expressly repu- 
diates atonality and polytonalitv.) 

AUGMENTATION 

The delivery of a theme in notes systematically longer than those 
of the original; a device used primarily in fugues, though aug- 
mentations, both strict and free, are used as means of transforma- 
tion or development in other compositions. Distinguish between 
genuine augmentation and the appearances of notation when a 
slow theme returns over accessories in quick tempo, as the Pil- 
grims’ Chorus at the end of the Overture to Tannhduser . 

CEMBALO 

For all practical purposes the reader may take this as meaning 



GLOSSARY 151 

‘harpsichord*. The forms Clavicembalo and Gravicembalo are 
found. 

CHACONNE 

Originally a dance in rather slow triple time, with a strong accent 
on the second beat; closely allied to the ‘passacaglia’ (q.v.). It 
had a processional character which, like the passacaglia, made its 
music conveniently fall into a long series of variations (q.v.) on 
a single phrase. In the ballets of Gluck’s operas the chaconne is 
no such series, but a long and freely developed symphonic move- 
ment in an energetic tempo of three in a bar. 

CHROMATIC 

A chromatic (i.e. ‘coloured’) scale is one that fills up the tones 
of the diatonic scale with semitones. Important matters of style 
depend on the harmonic meaning of such semitones. Their mean- 
ing may range from mere colourless inter-harmonic gliding to the 
profoundest and most iridescent ambiguities and paradoxes of 
Chopin and Wagner. Moreover, not everything that results in a 
chromatic scale is chromatic harmony. The following example is 
an entirely diatonic series of rapid changes of key (see ‘Modulation’ ; 
and Introduction, on ‘Tonality’): 



A chord is chromatic only if, while foreign to the key in which it 
appears, it does not intend or imply a change of key. The simplest 
case of a chromatic chord is the supertonic triad or seventh with 
a major third, as in the following cadence in C major: 



CLAVICHORD 

The strings of the clavichord are not plucked by ‘jacks’ (plec- 
trums) but set in vibration by ‘tangents’, upright metal laths, 
which are both the exciting cause of the sound and determinative 
of its pitch. The shorter portion of the string emerges from a 
wrapping of baize which permanently damps it. When the player 
puts down a key he thereby causes the tangent to press the string 
upwards. This pressure produces a musical note whose pitch 
depends on the length of the string between the tangent and the 
tuning-pin. It becomes sharper with increased pressure, and is 




152 GLOSSARY 

capable of vibrato; emotional effects much esteemed and artisti- 
cally used by the great musicians of the period. Thus the clavi- 
chord, though possessed of a very small tone unsuitable for display 
in a large room, is an extremely sensitive and suggestive instru- 
ment. See also ‘Clavier*. Certain features of style in Das Wohl - 
temperirte Clavier lead to the inference that Bach is often thinking 
of the clavichord rather than the harpsichord. But this is not an 
ascertainable matter. Composers did not limit the circulation of 
their clavier works by too precisely specifying what clavier they 
intended. They were as practical as the modern publisher who 
pointed out that the nobly alliterative title The Bad Boy's Book of 
Beasts would necessarily have only half the selling power of The 
Bad Child's Book of Beasts . In any case the conscientious editor 
who translates Bach’s title as The Well-tempered Clavichord com- 
mits the mistake of attributing too precise a temperament to an 
instrument whose unison-strings were always tuned slightly at 
variance (like the voix celeste of the organ) in order to make the 
tiny tone more penetrating and expressive. 

CLAVIER 

Generic term, up to the middle of the eighteenth century, for 
keyboard instruments, including the manuals of the organ. Thus 
it comprises the ‘clavichord* (q.v.), the ‘harpsichord’ (q.v.), and 
the harpsichord’s ancestral and diminutive forms, the virginals 
and spinet. 

COMMON CHORDS 

Common chords are ‘triads* (q.v.) of which the 5th is perfect 
and the 3rd major or minor. Doublings and dispersal through 
various octaves are ignored so long as the ‘root* (q.v.) is in the bass. 
They are concords, and every normal piece of classical music 
closes on a complete or implied major or minor tonic common 
chord; a bare 5th, 8ve, or unison, being the skeleton of such a 
chord. (See Introduction on ‘Tonality* (vol. i, pp. 7-9).) 

CONCORD , CONSONANCE: DISCORD , DISSONANCE 

Concord and discord are relative terms signifying opposite 
differences of degree in resonance, relevance, and finality. The 
literary uses of these terms make it advisable to warn the general 
reader that in musical parlance the terms are grammatical as well 
as relative. The musician knows what the non-musician means by 
complaining that such and such a music is ‘full of discords* ; but, 
strictly speaking, one might as well complain that a narrative was 
full of transitive verbs. It is only in an almost pre-harmonic 
state of music that pure acoustic smoothness is the main criterion 
of concord. When classical poets speak of ‘symphony* and ‘perfect 



GLOSSARY I53 

diapason* they imply (purposely or unintentionally) unison and 
octaves. (See vol. v, Essay ccxvm, p. 232, analysis of Parry’s 
Blest Pair of Sirens.) The ‘perfect concords’ (4ths, 5ths, and 8ves) 
have, in classical harmony (including counterpoint), so elementary 
a resonance that many restrictions govern their consecutive use 
between any two parts of the harmony lest false resonances and 
hollows result. The ‘imperfect concords’ were considered dis- 
cords in the twelfth century, before counterpoint was evolved. 
In classical music no harmony is complete without them, and on 
them depends the distinction between minor and major modes. 
(See Introduction on ‘Tonality’.) Moreover, a chord without dis- 
sonance in itself may become grammatically discordant in an 
unexpected context. In such cases it would make no grammatical 
difference if actual dissonances from the context were introduced 
into the chord. Many of Wagner’s discords that most shocked his 
contemporaries are thus acoustically less harsh than some of the 
most familiar classical chords. 

(See also ‘Preparation’ (a); ‘Resolution’; ‘Suspension’; ‘Passing- 
note’; ‘Essential’.) 

CONJUNCT MOTION ( movement). 

See ‘Motion’. 

CONTRAPUNTAL 
The adjective of ‘Counterpoint’ (q.v.). 

CONTRARY MOTION (movement). 

See ‘Motion’. 

COUNTERPOINT 

‘Point counter point’, i.e. ‘note against note’; the art of making 
harmony by means of a combination of melodies. Ouseley’s 
famous definition, ‘the art of combining melodies’, is inadequate, 
and applies better to the primitive efforts from which counter- 
point (and hence harmony) arose; the simultaneous singing of pre- 
existing melodies with rough-hewing to get rid of the worst 
discords. (See vol. iv, pp. 126-7, analysis of Vorspiel to Meister- 
singer.) Counterpoint is a general category of music, best under- 
stood as the origin of most of the classical grammar of harmony, 
and as comprising polyphony , which *s implicitly limited to the 
case of textures in which all parts are of more or less equal value. 

COUNTER-STATEMENT 

A restatement immediately following the original statement and 
turned in another direction. Distinguish from Recapitulation , 
Variation and mere repetition. 4 



GLOSSARY 


*54 

COUNTER-SUBJECT 

A theme consistently maintained as a counterpoint combined 
with the main subject of a fugue. The use of this term is normally 
restricted to the case of a recognizable theme systematically used 
as counterpoint to the subject of a fugue. (For ‘Fugue* see Intro- 
duction, vol. i, pp. 17 ff.) The counter-subject normally first appears 
as the accompaniment furnished to the Answer by the part which 
announced the Subject. Counter-subjects that first appear later 
in a fugue become so conspicuous from the delay that they earn 
the courtesy title of second subjects, though Cherubini, for obscure 
reasons of discipline, deals harshly with such pretensions. 

DEUX-TEMPS 

A waltz-rhythm in which the melody floats in a pattern of thrice 
two (12 3456) over the ordinary waltz basis of thrice three (I23 
456). The waltz in Gounod’s Faust is a deux-temps J r Jl 
r J. JMJ r JD- The cross-rhythm of f over J, as in 

Chopin’s Waltz, op. 42, is another matter, beyond the range of 
ordinary dance-music. 

DEVELOPMENT 

(a) The breaking up of themes and recombining their portions 
(figures, q.v.) into new phrases and sequences (q.v.). (6) The 
section specially devoted to such processes (sometimes called 
‘working out’ of* ‘free fantasia’) in the middle of a ‘movement’ 
(q.v.). Distinguish from Variation and the devices specially ap- 
plied to the subjects of fugues. 

DIATONIC 

A scientific definition of the diatonic scale is beyond the scope 
of these essays, if, indeed, it has yet been achieved to the satisfac- 
tion of musicians and men of science. The reader may therefore 
rest for the present contented with his familiar notion of the scale 
approximately produced by the white keys of the pianoforte, and 
transposable to other pitches by apt use of the black keys. This 
notion, however, should not be confined to the scale typified by 
C major (otherwise the Ionian Mode), but should include all the 
other Church Modes as producible by the white keys; the Dorian, 
from D to D; Phrygian, from E to E; Lydian, from F to F; 
Mixolydian, from G to G; and Aeolian, from A to A. Moreover, 
we should realize that good choirs, and also good string-quartet 
players, when left to their own instincts without the accompani- 
ment of pianoforte or organ, will produce diatonic music in ‘just 
intonation’, with a precision, and a consequent euphony, far beyond 
reach of any instrument with a number of notes limited, and there- 



GLOSSARY I55 

fore ‘tempered* in their tuning, by practical necessity. (See ‘Chro- 
matic*, ‘Temperament*, and ‘Enharmonic*.) 

DIMINUTION 

The opposite of ‘Augmentation* (q.v.), i.e. the delivery of a 
theme in notes systematically shorter than those of the original. 

DISCORD , DISSONANCE 

See ‘Concord*. 

DOUBLE COUNTERPOINT , TRIPLE COUNTERPOINT , &c. 

To the explanation given under ‘Inversion* (6) it remains to add 
that combinations may be so devised that one (or in rare cases 
more) of the melodies may be transposed by some other interval 
than the octave relatively to the others. In the case of Double 
Counterpoint in the 12th this gives rise to new harmonies and a 
new tonal orientation (see Brahms, Variations on a Theme of 
Hadyn , Essay LXI, vol. ii, p. 138). With Double Counterpoint 
in the 10th it makes numerous doublings and interlockings in 
3rds and 6ths possible. 

ENHARMONIC 

An enharmonic modulation is one which changes the intonation 
of part of a chord by a quantity inexpressible on keyboard instru- 
ments (as from C# to Db), and then treats the chord in its new 
sense. Not everything that looks enharmonic on paper is so in 
reality: convenience or caprice of notation may make a simple 
diatonic change seem enharmonic, when mere transposition to a 
key where the complex notation becomes inconvenient will cause 
the enharmonic semblance to vanish. (See Essay xlvii, on 
Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony, vol. ii, p. 15, Ex. 6, with remarks 
on the parallel passages, pp. 19-20.) 

An enharmonic circle is a series of keys that returns to its starting- 
point on tempered instruments, but in mathematically ideal intona- 
tion fails to do so by an enharmonic quantity. Thus the finale of 
Beethoven’s Sonata, op. 54, goes right round the ‘circle of 5ths*, 
the longest possible of enharmonic circles; and the first movement 
of Brahms’s Third Symphony goes several times round a circle 
of major 3rds (F, Db, Bbb = A, F). The same circle is shown in 
the four movements of his First Symphony, moving in the oppo- 
site direction (C minor, E major, G# major = Ab, C major). 
Another case is that of Schumann’s first Novelette. 

There is a widespread, but totally wrong, idea that enharmonic 
modulations depend on the tempered scale. They were explored 
by one of the greatest masters of the Golden Age, Marenzio, long 
before singers dreamt of singing in anything but ‘just intonation*; 



156 GLOSSARY 

and they mean exactly the same on keyboard instruments, that 
cannot express their actuality, as they mean on voices and stringed 
instruments that can. The musical ear has no more difficulty in 
understanding their meaning as implied on the keyboard than the 
linguistic ear has in ignoring the phonetic inaccuracy of a pun. 

EPISODE 

Generally any fairly definite section separating the main themes, 
or interpolated into the development of a composition. More 
specially: 

(а) Those passages in a fugue which separate one completed 
entry of the subject from another entry after an appreciable inter- 
val. Such passages do not interrupt the flow, and they develop 
previous material rather than displaying independence. 

(б) A new theme appearing in the course of the development of a 
movement in sonata form: e.g. the E minor theme in the first 
movement of the Eroica Symphony (Essay iv, vol. i, pp. 29 ff., 
Ex. 3). Some teachers, deeply committed to the terms First 
Subject and Second Subject, apply the term Episode to passages 
in the exposition of a sonata-form movement lying between the 
theme they call Second Subject and the closing theme or cadence- 
theme. This throws upon the analyst the vexatious task of deciding 
in compositions like the Eroica Symphony, which of half a dozen 
themes is worthiest to be called the Second Subject. (See ‘Subject’ 
and Introduction on Sonata form.) 

(c) The episodes of a Rondo (see Introduction) are the more or 
less well defined and important sections which separate the recur- 
rences of the rondo-theme. 

ESSENTIAL DISCORDS 

Essential discords are discords which have become established 
in their own right as secondary only to common chords . They are 
practically all ultimately referable to the dominant (see ‘Tonality’ 
in Introduction) and there is no clear borderline between essential 
and unessential. No discord was thought of as essential until the 
Monodic revolution (see ‘Monody’) had done its work. 

FIGURE (German: MOTIF) 

The smallest recognizable fragment broken off from a theme. 
In mature Wagnerian opera every theme and every figure naturally 
becomes a dramatic symbol of the situation and words with which 
it was first associated; and the fascinating and easy analysis of the 
resultant Leitmotive has greatly promoted the doctrine, against 
which my essays constantly protest, that good music is built up 
from small figures, instead of consisting of larger things from 
which small figures can be broken off. 



GLOSSARY 157 

FIGURED BASS or CONTINUO 

A bass part for the use of the organist or cembalist (harpsi- 
chordist) in music between c. 1 600 and the Church music of Mozart, 
indicating by numeral figures the chords of the harmony to be 
filled in at the keyboard. 

FUGATO 

A passage in the style of a fugue. (For ‘Fugue* see Introductory 
Essay, vol. i.) 

FUNDAMENTAL BASS 

A bass, imaginary except in so far as coinciding with the actual 
bass, consisting entirely of the ‘roots* (q.v.) of the harmony. The 
theory of the Fundamental Bass (with the term itself) was worked 
out by Rameau (1683-1764) and had its use in giving students a 
more definite notion of chords and tonality than could be obtained 
from purely contrapuntal principles. But Philipp Emanuel Bach 
already saw its limitations when he remarked to Burney that it 
childishly reduced all music to a series of full closes ; and it did in 
fact lead to the worst rigidities and complexities of the teaching 
of harmony in the nineteenth century. These are more or less 
like analysing language without understanding the uses of meta- 
phor, and most typically, without understanding how much of 
current English is metaphorical as compared with classical Greek 
prose. 

HARMONICS 

Overtones in the ‘harmonic series* (q.v.) producible by varied 
lip pressure in the tubes of ‘brass* instruments, and by touching 
a string at a point corresponding to a harmonic segment, lightly 
so as not to check the vibration of the whole string. Until valves 
were applied to trumpets and horns, so as to provide instant 
changes in the length of the tube, these instruments could produce 
only the notes of a single harmonic series, except the muffled 
‘closed* notes producible in the horn by blocking part of the bell 
with the hand. 

HARMONIC SERIES 

The natural series of overtones, or upper partials, corresponding 
in ratio to the harmonic progression 1. &c. The first sixteen, 
reckoned from the open C string of a violoncello, are as follows: 



z 



158 GLOSSARY 

No. 7 is so flat as not to lie within the scales of classical harmony 
at all. Probably the fashion (now become banal) of corrupting 
triads with an ungrammatical ‘added 6th* is an unconscious striving 
to represent this flat 7th. The difference between the ratios 8-9 
and 9-10 asserts itself wherever singers and string-players produce 
pure polyphony without accompaniment. No. 11 is another note 
outside classical harmony, and so is No. 13. No. 14 is, of course, 
the octave of No. 7. Nos. 15 and 16, on the other hand, give a 
perfectly classical diatonic semitone. The intervals between suc- 
cessive higher numbers, of course, continue to diminish, and so 
pass out of classical reckoning except for the octaves of the classical 
notes. The folly is manifest which would seek to derive all the 
phenomena of classical music from a natural series which already 
contradicts classical harmony after its first six terms. On the 
other hand, there is no sanity in a scepticism which would deny 
the musical relevance of those six. 

HARPSICHORD 

The strings of the harpsichord, virginals, and spinet are plucked 
by ‘jacks’, upright carriers of horizontal spines of raven-quill 
operated by the keys under the player’s hands. (Nobody knows 
what Shakespeare means by describing the jacks as kissing the 
palms of his lady’s hands; they are as obviously incapable of this 
as the hammers of the pianoforte; and it is no less inconceivable 
that Shakespeare’s meaning can be the nonsense that it seems to 
be.) Large harpsichords have several sets of jacks and several 
sets of strings, including octave strings above and below the central 
pitch, and also furnishing decided contrasts of tone-colour accord- 
ing to the position and nature of the plectrum. (The position does 
not affect the pitch, as in the clavichord, for the whole string 
vibrates.) Besides these resources large harpsichords have two 
keyboards. Composers were, nevertheless, careful not to limit the 
circulation of their works by often writing intricacies impossible 
on one keyboard. Only three of Bach’s clavier works explicitly 
demand simultaneous contrasts of tone, and only one of these three 
contains passages otherwise too involved for one keyboard. 

Thus the harpsichord has a large variety of contrasted tone- 
colours, six distinct combinations being implicit in the lay-out of 
Bach’s Italian Concerto and French Overture . On the other hand, 
it lacks the subtle nuances directly controlled by the fingers of the 
clavichord-player (see ‘Clavichord’). 

HOMOPHONY; HOMOPHONIC 

Music that avoids all appearance of its opposite, polyphony (see 
‘Counterpoint’), expressing its harmony in terms of chords simply 



GLOSSARY IS9 

massed, broken (see ‘Arpeggio’), or repeated in rhythmic formulas. 
Not coextensive with ‘Monody* (q.v.). 

IMITATION 

Free and sporadic canon , i.e. the imitating of one voice by one 
or more others at short time-intervals so that the voices overlap. 
Canon is strict and continuous imitation, sc. relation of one part 
to another by a rigid rule; the actual ‘canon’ being, in early 
examples, the rule by which the unwritten follower was to be 
deduced from the leader; e.g. ‘I give tithes of all I possess’ indi- 
cating canon in the 10th; and ‘Get thee behind me, Satan’ ( Vade 
retro) indicating that the answering voice should sing backwards. 

INTERVAL 

The musical sense of this word applies only to the pitch-relations 
of notes. As a rule, care is taken in these essays to avoid using 
musical terms in any non-musical sense that they may have in ordi- 
nary language, except in cases where the author fails to suspect 
any source of confusion. Experience shows that the word ‘interval’ 
can cause confusion to general readers who take considerable 
trouble to inquire into musical matters. An exact grammatical 
article on intervals, however necessary for students, is not to the 
purpose of these volumes: but I have known Balliol scholars to 
waste labour on Greek music from not knowing that our names of 
intervals do not denote fractions but are the results of counting the 
steps of a scale from the bottom note of the interval to its top, 
both inclusively; thus the 5th from C is G, because C and G are 
boundaries of five notes of the scale (C,D,E,F,G). Many transla- 
tions of musical treatises teem with blunders on these points. 
There is an old English version of Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s 
Musical Dictionary which must be translated back into French 
before you can be sure whether ‘5th’ means $, No. 5, or the viola! 
It seldom seems to mean the interval. 

INTONATION 

1. {a) Tuning (see ‘Just Intonation’); (b) the art of singing or 
playing in tune. 2. Any piece of Gregorian or Ambrosian or 
Anglican chant (including monotone) as delivered by a single 
voice. 

INVERSION 

(а) The more or less exact reversal of the rise and fall of the 
notes of a melody (e.g. several cases in Brahms’s First Symphony; 
see Essay xi, vol. i, pp. 84 ff., Exx. 7, 10, 16, 23). 

(б) The inversions of Double (and Triple, &c*) Counterpoint 
(q.v.) are the permutations of its possible positions. 



l60 GLOSSARY 

(c) A chord is inverted when its root is not in the bass; thus a 
common chord has two inversions: 



Root position. 1 st inversion. 2 nd inversion. 


JUST INTONATION 

Performing in tune with a mathematical precision according to 
what classical harmony implies. Voices, instruments of the violin 
tribe, and slide trombones can approximate to this, since they 
make their own notes with continuous graduation. Hence, as they 
can perform indefinitely out of tune, so they can perform in better 
tune than keyed instruments with a limited number of notes. 
What degree of mathematical precision classical harmony implies, 
where it implies it, and what harmony is classical, are questions 
which science will not answer in haste. But the experience of 
unaccompanied (and uncorrupted) choirs and first-rate string- 
quartet players shows that just intonation does exist, under certain 
favourable conditions. (See ‘Temperament*.) 

MARKS OF EXPRESSION 

The reader will need no information about the commoner marks 
of expression and their abbreviations ; but certain distinctions are 
worth noting. Whereas fp means forte-piano , i.e. a loud note 
suddenly damped to softness, pf does not mean the opposite pro- 
cess (an effect in any case difficult to make convincing) but stands 
for poco forte , just as tnf stands for mezzo-forte . 

Distinguish between sf sforzando y a sharp accent on a single 
note, and rf rinforzando , a sudden reinforcement maintained at 
a level presumably until the next indication. 

Dim . for diminuendo is used by Beethoven and most composers 
as the opposite of crescendo . But some connect it also with a 
slackening of time; notably Schubert, who often follows it by a 
tempo , having previously used no such sign as rail, (rallentando) or 
rit. ( ritardando ). With this possibility the word decrescendo is less 
ambiguous. But if composers adopt the picturesque habit of 

spreading a cres cen do thus over several lines, 

they must not blame the printers if the turn of a line or a page 
produces disaster to a de - - - - cres cen do . 

MODULATION 

The general reader may need warning that in music the word 
modulation means change of key and nothing else. Even the 
modulations of the Church Modes, which are simply the privi- 
leges of making full closes on chords based elsewhere than on the 



GLOSSARY l6l 

final of the mode, differ from changes of key only in degree, in so 
far as the modal composer never thought of ‘establishing* a key. 
The ordinary use of the word, as when we speak of a beautifully 
modulated voice, must be allowed its actual precedence over the 
musical sense. Contrast the case of ‘tonality* (see Introduction, Vol. 
I, on that subject), a word which has never had any but a musical 
sense. One of our most famous novelists, who often says good things 
about music, and who has more than once remarked upon the 
pitfalls which it prepares for the the unwary conversationalist, 
has represented some musicians as discussing a young player’s 
tonality. They might have discussed his tone, or even his capacity 
for modulating his tone; but they ought never to have used the 
word ‘tonality* of anything but the work of a composer. 

MONODY 

The art by which the Monodists (Peri, Cavalieri, Monteverdi, 
&c.) at the outset of the seventeenth century laid the foundations 
of opera, oratorio, and (incidentally) instrumental music: the 
development of dramatic and lyric singing by one voice over an 
instrumental accompaniment of homophonic chords. Thus not 
coextensive with ‘Homophony’ (q.v.). 

MOTION (or Movement (c)). 

The rise and fall of two parts relatively to each other is obvi- 
ously classified into three kinds of motion , or movement. 

In Contrary motion one part rises while the other falls. In 
Similar motion both parts move in the same direction, though not 
necessarily to the same extent. In Oblique motion one part moves 
while the other stands still. The term Parallel motion has been 
applied (perhaps first by some Irish school of theorists, or by the 
drivers of colliding motors) to the condition where neither part 
moves. 

Contrary motion is an element of safety as well as of variety in 
harmony and counterpoint. Not only does it tend to resolve most 
discords (see ‘Discord* and ‘Resolution’) but it explains away 
many otherwise unclassifiable discords and reduces their harsh- 
ness often to imperceptibility. Most errors in harmony and 
counterpoint occur only in similar motion, which, as such, can be 
neither blamed nor avoided, since up and down are the only ways 
in which parts can move, so that with more than two moving parts 
some must be in similar motion. Polyphony cannot always fly for 
safety to oblique motion. 

Conjunct movement (here ‘movement* is more usual than 
‘motion’) is the movement of any part by degrees qf a scale with- 
out skips. This is what Grove means by saying that many of 

VI M 



1 62. GLOSSARY 

Beethoven’s melodies consist largely of ‘consecutive notes*— a 
statement that has puzzled many leaders who cannot see how a 
sentence could fail to consist, not only largely but entirely, of 
consecutive syllables. 

MOVEMENT 

(а) Used in the ordinary significance of the word; the sense of 
movement being a fundamental element in music, and one in 
which the great composers are strongest, as the small composers 
are weakest. 

(б) In the technical musical sense a movement is a complete 
self-contained part of a larger composition, needing other move- 
ments to complement its emotional effect, but not needing them 
to complete its form or its treatment of its themes. Any allusion 
by one movement to the themes of a former one is thus an allusion 
to a finished past. The tempo of a classical movement is either 
fixed or subject only to changes which alternate in a simple and 
symmetrical way. 

( c ) The relative movement of parts: see ‘Motion’. 

OBLIQUE MOTION (or Movement). 

See ‘Motion’. 

PASSING NOTES 

Dissonant notes, usually on unaccented moments of rhythm, 
normally passing up and down the scale between concordant 
notes. They are the most ‘unessential* of discords. Passing notes 
by skip are possible, in a complex musical language. See the 
Aoidante of Mozart’s E flat Symphony; Essay xxm, vol. i, 
pp. 189-90. (See ‘Essential Discords’.) 

PEDAL 

(a) A note, normally in the bass and either the tonic or domi- 
nant, sustained immovably through harmonies that proceed regard- 
less of conflict with it. (It is not worth calling a pedal if it is merely 
a normal component of the harmonies.) A pedal-note elsewhere 
than in the bass is called an inverted pedal. Another term for a. 
pedal is organ-point ; but readers should be warned that the French 
expression point-d'orgue means any kind of sustained pause, such 
as is expressed by the sign /tn over a chord or note. 

(b) The pedal notes of certain brass instruments (especially 
trombones) are the fundamental notes of the tube, obtained with 
some difficulty by a specially loose lip and a great quantity of 
breath. 

(c) The seven pedals of the harp convert its scale one by one 9 



GLOSSARY 163 

in two stages, from the diatonic scale of C[> to all other scales up 
to C#, and hence give it command of the chromatic intervals with 
possibilities restricted by the agility of two human feet. 

The reader presumably needs no information about the pedals 
of the pianoforte and the organ, 

POLYTONALITY 

Not the mixing of several keys in a harmonic scheme, but the 
writing of several parts (whether independent or duplicates of 
each other) each in its own different key. As with ‘Atonality’ and 
the ‘Whole-tone Scale’ (q.v.), the listener will do well to enjoy 
without prejudice the pleasure which the masterly handling of 
these devices can give, without committing himself to a belief in 
the official theories of their propagandists, who are often weak and 
superficial in their efforts to relate and contrast the new theories 
with classical practice. (See Hindemith, Chamber Music No. 1, 
op. 24, no. 1, Essay cxcv, vol. iv, pp. 172-3.) 

PREPARATION 

(a) A discord is said to be prepared when the dissonant note has 
first been heard as part of a concord, and becomes a discord by 
being retained while the rest of the harmony changes. 

(b) Dominant preparation is the emphatic and formal establish- 
ment of a key by harping on its dominant before settling down to 
a main theme or other event in that key. (See Introduction, on 
‘Tonality’.) 

RECAPITULATION 

Repetition of one or more large groups of material, usually after 
intermediate developments or episodes, and turned in the direction 
of finality. 

RECITATIVE 

Musical declamation governed entirely by speech-rhythm, and 
accordingly absolved from fixed ‘tempo’ (q.v.) and conforming 
with a time-signature (see ‘Time’) only by a convention of notation. 

RESOLUTION 

The completion of the sense of a discord by making the disso- 
nant voice proceed with melodic logic to a concord. The smoothest 
and most normal resolutions are by a step down one degree of the 
scale. Upward resolutions and resolutions by skip are usually 
harsher and often imply some ellipsis or circumlocution. If a 
discord is compared with a transitive verb, preparation would be 
its subject and resolution its object. Most of the more complex 



164 GLOSSARY 

associated phenomena develop in music in much the same way 
as in language. 

ROOT 

That note of a chord from which, if it is placed in the bass, the 
rest of the chord is seen to arise wholly or in great part as ‘essential’ 
(q.v.), consisting mainly of a common chord or a dominant discord. 
(See Introduction on ‘Tonality’, vol. i, p. 7; example giving the 
common chords in the key of C major. See also ‘Fundamental 
Bass’.) 

SEQUENCE 

Repetitions of a ‘figure’ (q.v.) whether in melody alone or also 
in harmony, on different degrees of a scale. The second part of 
‘God save the King’ (‘Send him victorious, Happy and glorious’) 
shows two steps in sequence in the melody, and also shows that 
these require a somewhat different sequence in their bass. 

When, as in this and most melodic examples, the figure is warped 
by its changes of position within the same scale, the sequence is 
tonal. When the figure is exactly transposed, changing its key at 
each step, the sequence is real. Thus in Beethoven’s Waldstein 
Sonata, op. 53, bars 5-8 repeat bars 1-4 in real sequence. Some 
40 bars before the end the same figures, with brilliant counter- 
points, are developed in tonal sequence with powerful rhetorical 
effect highly characteristic of perorations in which topics, at first 
separated, have become concentrated into one key. 

SIMILAR MOTION (or Movement). 

See ‘Motion’. 

STRINGENDO 

= pulling together. It is purely an indication of time-hurrying, 
perhaps more intense than accelerando', whereas its cognate ‘stretto’ 
is almost exclusively used as a term of musical form. (See Intro- 
duction, vol. I, on ‘Fugue’.) 

SUBJECT 

A term the musical uses of which are deplorably confused. 

(a) The subject of a fugue is its theme (see Introduction to vol. i 
under ‘Fugue’, where also the fugal sense of Answer is described). 

( b ) The two main groups of material in the exposition of a sonata- 
form of movement are usually called First Subject and Second 
Subject. I regret that most of my analytical essays were written 
before I had hit upon the terms First Group and Second Group 
for such aggregates. (See Introduction to vol. i, pp. 11-12. Also 
see ‘Counter-subject’.) 



GLOSSARY 


SUSPENSIONS 

The typical case of prepared discords (see ‘Preparation’), the 
suspended note being actually tied over from its previous concor- 
dant existence till it becomes an accented (but unessential) discord. 
Such a tied note is not a suspension if it produces an essential 
discord that must resolve on another chord, as in the following 
example of the preparation and resolution of a dominant 7th (an 
essential discord). 



A true suspension requires no new chord on which to resolve 
but is merely a delay in the arrival of part of the chord over which 
it is suspended. Thus Ex. 1 will become a suspension if the lower 
parts remain as part of an E minor chord. 



Example 3 is a true suspension — 


and remains a true suspension even if the bass move to form 
another chord, since the suspended 9th has no more ‘essential’ 
meaning in any case. 



TEMPERAMENT 

Instruments whose notes are limited in number and rigidly 
tuned must represent the infinite mathematical complexities of 
harmony by striking such an average in the tuning of their notes 
as may give tolerable approximations to the greatest number of 
harmonic facts. Until the example set by Das Wohltemperirte 
Clavier of J. S. Bach was followed, systems of unequal tempera- 
ment were used, by which the keys easiest for most orchestral 
instruments were tuned as well as possible at the expense of the 
rest. Bach’s equal temperament, dividing the 8ve into twelve 
equal semitones (each in the ratio of I2 V2), secure^ tolerable in- 
tonation for all keys, at a slight sacrifice in the tuning of the hitherto 



l66 GLOSSARY 

most favoured keys; and so gave the keyboard instruments freedom 
over all harmonic ranges. But it is a fundamental mistake to sup- 
pose that this was the means by which he created new harmonic 
values. 

TEMPO 

A uniform rate of rhythmic units. The classical Italian tempi 
may be ranged in the following order. The literal meanings of the 
words have for the most part ceased to have any relation to the 
mood of the music, except in the case of earlier composers. 

Very slow tempi: Grave (lit. ‘heavy*, ‘solemn*). Largo (‘broad*). 
Larghetto (less broad than largo). Adagio (‘at leisure*). 

Moderately slow tempi: Andante (‘at a walking pace*). The 
diminutive Andantino should mean at a slower walk than Andante . 
See Beethoven’s effort, in his Sonata, op. 109, Variation 4, to 
correct the already current mistake as to the meaning of meno 
andante . Moderato and Allegretto are not easily distinguished from 
Andante con moto. 

Quick tempi: Allegro (‘cheerful*) is merely the average quick 
tempo and implies nothing as to mood. Handel, however, still 
means by Andante allegro ‘going cheerfully*. Vivace (‘lively’) is 
quicker than allegro; and so we end with Presto and Prestissimo . 
Schumann, however, goes further, both in German and Italian; 
and in two of his works, having started presto possibile , indicates 
piii presto. 

THEME 

(0) A single musical statement recognizable apart from its 
original context and capable of maintaining its identity through 
processes of development and transformation. There is no reason 
to seek a means of rigidly defining the length of a theme or delimit- 
ing it from its neighbours. 

(b) The theme of a set of ‘Variations* (q.v.) is normally a com- 
plete melody. In the case of a ‘Passacaglia* (q.v.) or Chaconne , it 
is a single phrase of not more than eight bars, usually placed as a 
‘Ground-Bass* (q.v.). But see analysis of Brahms’s Fourth Sym- 
phony (Essay xiv, vol. i, pp. 115 ff.) for a description of a 
passacaglia with its theme announced in the treble. Most varia- 
tions are built on themes of more than one phrase, constituting 
complete tunes in one of the so-called binary and ternary forms 
(see Introduction, vol. i) with repeated sections. See also ‘Figure*, 
‘Subject*. 

TIME 

The regular grouping of rhythmic units, preserved under all 
changes of the audible rhythm. Thus, triple time is that in which 



GLOSSARY 


167 

the regular counting of rhythmic units by threes will keep every 
note of every part in place, whatever its length. The normal series 
of note-values is graded by subdivision into two, the semibreve 
being divided into two minims, the minim into two crotchets, the 
crotchet into two quavers, &c. Time-signatures resemble fractions 
of which the numerator shows the group and the denominator 
the note-value of the unit: thus % \ (two crotchets; three crotchets). 
Normal subdivision of the units is ignored, however slow the tempo 
and however large the resulting unit, though if the units are 
permanently divided by three the time is called compound and the 
triplet notes are designated as the units. Thus J is not a slow form 
of l but is a duple time of two dotted crotchets each containing 
three quavers. 

For historic reasons \ is represented by and is called alia breve 
time, and J (or common time) is represented by C. These signs 
stand for the ancient semicircle indicating ‘imperfect* time, so 
distinguished from the full circle indicating ‘perfect* or triple 
time. 


TRIAD 

Any combination of a note with its 3rd and 5th. If the 5th is 
( a ) imperfect, or ( b ) augmented, the triad is named accordingly 



tion is not a triad at all but part of some more complex chord or 
progression. Concordant triads are Common chords (q.v.). 


VARIATION 

Applied in music to the transformation of a complete phrase or 
melody, preserving its integrity as a whole, whether the essential 
whole be conceived as melody, bass, harmony, or rhythmic scheme. 
Distinguish from Development . 

WHOLE-TONE SCALE 

A scale purporting to proceed in the whole tones of instruments 
tuned by equal temperament. It has undoubtedly been discovered 
in the course of extemporizing on such instruments; and before 
those who use it become tired of it they may believe that it and 
other phenomena of modern harmony are founded on the equally 
tempered scale. This is like supposing that geometry is founded 




l68 GLOSSARY 

on the carpenter’s inability to make a microscopic approximation 
to incommensurable quantities. To the charge that the whole-tone 
scale is an impossible monstrosity the obvious replies are solvitur 
ambulandOy and that it is vain to confront the giraffe with the asser- 
tion that ‘there ain’t no such animal’. But extravagant claims for 
the importance of the whole-tone scale are confronted by the fact 
that even in the too short career of its greatest master, Debussy, 
it represents a middle (though important) phase by no means co- 
extensive with his style, and that in his last works it tends to cede 
more place to other resources. At all times its charm depends on 
the fact that it really has an enharmonic kink — 



which becomes the more obvious with every effort to ignore it. 
Recently Walford Davies and others have shown that it is really 
a complicated chord projected into one octave. As such its 
absorption into the scheme of classical polyphony is inevitable as 
soon as that system is rediscovered. 

Here are the six possible enharmonic variants of Holst’s ‘Word 
of wisdom* (vol. v, p. 256) in a position of an extended chord. 
This is neither better nor worse than other paradigms of harmonic 
possibilities: it is strictly grammatical according to classical prac- 
tice, and, while no spontaneous composer would write so schematic 
a passage, all the six progressions are equally likely to pass 
unnoticed in Wagner or Brahms. It is a mere accident if they 
have not occurred before; and if you enjoy exploring haystacks 
for needles you may amuse yourself with seeking for these six 
progressions in Tristan and Parsifal . You are more likely to find 
each chord collapsing on the same augmented triad (F# B|j D) 
in various spellings. 



INDEX 

This index relates to all the six volumes of 
Essays in Musical Analysis. Those works to 
which a complete essay is devoted have their 
titles printed in small capital letters. 




INDEX 


Aachen, li. 2. 

Abaco, Dal, vi. 21. 

Ablative Absolute, see Passacaglia. 
Acadlmie Fran9aise, vi. 44. 

Accent, reversal of, i. 60, 173, 176, 220, 
221, ii. 95, 200, iii. 143, iv. 149 
(Ex. 9), v. 5, 6, 109. 

Hemiole (jj v. J), ii. 124-5, 186, 
iii. 184, 215, iv. 149, v. 5, 226, vi. 2. 
Acle, see Walker, Dr. Ernest. 
Afterthoughts, i. 64, 65, 73, 84, 89 (?), 
197, 206, 207, 210, 216, ii. 36, iii. 
183 passim , iv. 23, 25, 30-41, 48, v. 
39-40, 193, vi. 137 (Brahms), 145 
(Bruckner). 

Agelastic Philosophy, untenability of, 
see Edwards. 

Agnostic, see Dachshund. 

Alassio, vi. 83. 

Albert Hall, the, v. 107. 

Allen, Sir Hugh, ii. 201. 

Altmann, Dr., vi. 146. 

America, and Dvofak, ii. 106. 
Andalusian Merchant, see Weelkes. 
Anderton, H. Orsmond, ii, p. xi. 
Andr£ (publisher), iv. 25. 

‘Annie Laurie’, vi. 5. 

Appendicitis, see Cadenza. 

Arbbs, Fernandez (pupil of Joachim), 
v. 229. 

Architecture and music, ii. 4, 5, 55, 

v. 123, 130, 149, 199, vi. 8. 
Aristophanes, iv. 164, 165. 

Arnim, Gisela von, iii. 108. 

Arnold, Matthew, iii. 1 12, iv. 87, 89, 

vi. 17, 44, 100. 

Arpeggio, vi. 150. 

Arrangements and conjectural restora- 
tions, i. 27, 62, 193, 199, xl, ii. 17 
(footnote), lxiv, lxix, 171, 177, 185, 

LXXII, LXXIV, LXXVII, LXXVIII, 1 92, 

195, iii. 12-14, iv. clxi. 63-6, v. 
32, 33, 35, 38, 40, 4L 45, 47, 49, 
194, vi. ccxxv. 

Art forms, i. 9 if; in Bach’s Choral 
Music, v. 24. 

Asch, iv. no, iii. 

Atonality and Poly tonality, iv. 172-3; 

repudiated by Hindemith, vi. 150. 
Augmentation, i. 18. 

Examples, i. 88, 98, 104, 1 13, 1 14, 
118, 119, 137 , ii« 74, 93, 173, 174, 
2x1, iii. ng f 186, 226, v. 12, 32, 37, 
44, 130, 153, 171, 216, 220. 

‘Auld Lang Syne*, vi. 148. 

Austen, Jane (Love and Freindship 
quoted), v. no. 

Austria, i. 161, ii. 72, vi. 60. 


Bach and Abel Concerts, the, I. 167. 
Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel, i. 21, 
139, 167, 168, v. 126, vi. 8-12, 15, 
X33» *57; openings in foreign keys, 
i. 2 1 . Works : symphony in d major, 
vi. ccxxvi. 8-12. 

Bach, Johann Christian, i. 139, 167. 
Bach, J. S., i. 7, 8, n, 12, 15, 17, 39, 
65, 135, 138, 140, 142, 144, I5L 
186, 202, ii, p. ix, 2, 8, 33, 37, 48, 55, 
72, 123, 130, 162-8, 172, 175-99, 
202, 203, 205, 208, iii. 4, 7, 8, 10-15, 
61, 105, 109, no, 116, 119, 131,215, 
217, iv. 4, 72, 91, 125, v. 1, 7, 13, 14, 
20-83, 94, 95, 97, xoi, 106, 119, 120, 
123, 124, 146, 149, 164, 167, 172, 
175, 179, 198, vi. 1-8, 10, 17, 45, 
58, 71, 82, 87, 103, in, 120, 133, 
138, 142, 145, 152, 158, 165. 

LINEAR HARMONY, vi. CCXXIV. 4-7 ; 
and Handel, art-forms of, ii. 20S; 
and Haydn, compared, v. 116, 121, 
126, 127, 136, 149; and orchestral 
polyphony, ii. 162 (see ii, p. ix); 
and stretto, ii. 165, v. 32, 37; as a 
contrapuntist, ii. 181, v. 66; ‘Bach- 
gesellschaft’ editions, v. 32, 45, 49, 
55, 60, 61, vi. 7, 8; compared with 
Palestrina and Mozart, v. 42; reli- 
gious significance of his B minor 
Mass, v. 22, 23. See also Art-forms; 
Balfour ; Eight-part writing ; Handel ; 
Hullah; Joy-motives; Quintessence. 

Works: cantata (Halt im Ge- 
dachtniss) for the first Sunday 
after easter (Sonntag Quasimo- 
dogeniti), ‘hold in affection jesus 

CHRIST’, V. CCI. 60-6, V. 71 ; CANTATA 
FOR THE SIXTH SUNDAY AFTER 
TRINITY, ‘VERGNOGTE RUH\ V. CCII. 
66-70 ; PRELUDE TO CHURCH CANTATA, 

No. 29 (‘Wir danken Dir Gott*), 

FOk ORGAN AND ORCHESTRA, vi. 

ccxxv. 7-8. CONCERTOS : Bran- 
denburg in g major, No. 3, ii. 
lxxv. 190-3, iii. n, vi. 87; Bran- 
denburg in o major, No. 4, ii. 
LXXVI. 193-5; IN A MAJOR FOR OBOE 
d’amore, ii. lxxvii. 196-8; in a 

MINOR FOR CLAVIER, FLUTE, AND 

violin, ii. lxxviii. 198-9, ii. 188; 

FOR VIOLIN AND OBOE IN C MINOR, ii. 
LXXIV. 188-90; IND MINOR FOR CLA- 
VIER AND STRINGS, ii. LXXII. 180-5, 

iii, p. ix; in d minor for two 

VIOLINS AND ORCHESTRA, il. LXXIII. 
185-8; DOUBLE CHORUS, ‘NOW IS THE 

grace’, v. cciii.*7i- 3, vi* 8 ; magni- 



172 INDEX 

FICAT, V. CC. 50 - 60 , V. 6 l, 64 , 1 12 ; 

MASS IN B MINOR, V. CXCIX. 20-49,1. 1 , 

II. 8, v. 53, 61, 63, 71, 94, 125, 127, 


163, *73t *79, vi.8, 10; motet, ‘jesu, 

PRICELESS TREASURE*, FOR FIVE-PART 
CHORUS, V. CCIV. 73-82 J ORCHESTRAL 
SUITE (OVERTURE) IN D MAJOR, No. 3, 
11. LXX. 175 - 8 ; OVERTURE IN B MINOR 
FOR FLUTE AND STRINGS, 11. LXX I. 
178-80, Vi. 2; OVERTURE IN C MAJOR 
FOR ORCHESTRA, vi. CCXXIII. 1 - 4 , 6 . 

CONCERTOS : Brandenburg No. i , 
ill. 13, v. 52; Brandenburg No. 2, 
11 . 188, 191, ill. 12; Double in C 
major, ii. 188, ill. 15, v. 53, vi. 145 ; 
the Italian, ii. 194, vi. 158; the 
Triple, vi. 133 ; Chromatic Fantasia, 
vi. 58; Fugue in A minor, v. 89; 
‘Kunst der Fuge*, ii. 165 ; ‘Matthew* 
Passion, ii. 8, ill. xi6, v. 77, 81, 
94; Mass in A major, v. 65; the 
French Overture, vi. 158 ; Partita in 
E major for unaccompanied Violin, 
vi. 7; Sonata in B minor, ill. 14; 
Suite for Violoncello in C minor, 
vi. 6 ; Toccatas (F major, D minor, 
G minor), v. 71; Coffee Cantata , 
V. 70. 

Bacon, Francis, iv. 176. 

Bagehot, Walter, v. 197. 

Baini, v. 14. 

Balance of tone, Beethoven and, 1. 170, 

ii. 24, 159; Chopin and Klindworth, 

iii. 104; Handel and Haydn, ii. 159; 
Handel, v. 96; Schubert, i. 202; 
Wagner, ii. 171. 

Balfour, Lord, and Bach, v. 39. 
Bantock, Granville, ii, p. xi, 123, 124, 

iv. 158-60, v. 247-50. 

Works I ‘DANTE AND BEATRICE*, 
POEM FOR ORCHESTRA, iv. CLXXXVIII. 
I58-60; ‘SAPPHO*, PRELUDE FOR OR- 
CHESTRA AND NINE FRAGMENTS FOR 
CONTRALTO, V. CCXXI. 247-50; 
Hebridean Symphony, ii, p. xi. 
Bantock, Lady, v. 248. 

Barcelona, ii, p. x. 

Baring, Maurice, vi. 120. 

Basevi, Professor, v. 196. 

Bass, paradoxical relation between 
vocal and instrumental, vi. 29-30. 
Bassoon jokes, and Sullivan, i. 66; the 
great, i. 152, 170, 173, ii. 156. 

* Battle of Prague * (pianoforte piece by 
Kotzwara), v. 222. 

Bax, Sir Arnold, vi. 141. 

Bayreuth, ii. 69, 70, iv. 116, vi. 108; 

orchestra, the, i. 181. 

B.B.C., the, vi. 89. 

Beaver as lace-maker, see Continuo. 
Beecham, Sir Thomas, iv. 112, vi. 35. 
Beethoven, L 3, 8, 12-16, 21-85, 88- 


91, 105, 106, 109, 115, 1 16, 118-20, 
123, 128, 129, 13L 138-4*. 145, 146, 
IS®, 151. 153, 154, 157-9. 161, 162, 
165, 167-71, 174, 175, 184, 187, 188, 
190, 192, 193, 196, 198-202, 207-9, 
21 1, 213, 215, 216, 218, ii, p. ix, 1- 
45, 47, 48, 53-5, 58, 59, 61-3, 65, 7°- 
2, 75, 82, 84, 90, 92, 94, 95, 97, 102, 
105, 108, 122, 124, 128, 129, 133-7, 
142, 143, 147, 148, 156-75, 180, 204, 
208, iii. 1, 3-5, 7, 9, 14, 16, 18, 20, 
23, 25-7, 40, 43-7, 56, 58, 59, 64- 
105, 107-10, 1 14, 1 15, 117-20, 125, 
129, 130, 131, i34, 135, 140, 149, 
153, 160, 178, 181, 2xx, 216, iv. x, 
3, 4, 26-50, 52, 56, 62-4, 76, 78, 80, 
91, 93, 94, 97, 99, 104, 108-10, 115, 
1 18, 120-2, 130, 139, 173, v. 7, 13, 
23, 33, 40, 42-4, 86, 88, 100, 1 16, 
123, 126, 132-4, 136, 142, 154, 161- 
94, 198, 209, 228, 235, 238, vi. 4, 
17, 20, 31-5, 41, 60, 75, 83, 87, 89, 
90, 102, 1 16, 1 19, 136-8, 141, 143, 
146, 155, 160, 166. 

and Brahms, striking parallels, i. 
85 ; and the British Grenadiers, iii. 
66; and Haydn, theme variations 
contrasted, ii. 30; and the Coda, 
i- 34, 56, 145, 157, 158, 160, 162, 
165, 167, 170, 174, ii. 20; as a con- 
trapuntist, iv. 1, 1 18, y. 164; as a 
conservative revolutionist, i. 21; as 
a Latin scholar, v. 166; as the in- 
ventor of the Scherzo, i. 25; choral 
style of, not a good model, v. 164; 
deafness of, and balance of tone 
(q.v.), i. 170, ii. 159; religious sig- 
nificance of ‘Missa Solemnis*, v. 
163-4; strain on voices in Op. 123, 

v. 164. See also Balance of tone, 
Cherubini, Mendelssohn, Military 
Music, Scoring, Weber. 

Works : cantata, ‘becalmed sea 
and prosperous voyagb* (dedicated 
to Goethe), Op. 112, v. ccx. 193-4, 
iv. 93; choral fantasia, Op. 80, 

ii. lx. 133-6, ii, p. ix, iii. 1. CON- 
CERTOS'. PIANOFORTE, FIRST IN C 
major, Op. 15, with beethoven*s 
cadenza, iii. c. 64-9, iii. 18, 78, 

vi. 136; pianoforte, third in c 
minor, Op. 37, iii. ci. 69-75, i* 26, 
89, iii. 16, 40, 64, 65, 78, 96, 104, 
107, 108, 1 18, 1 19, 149, 160; PIANO- 
FORTE, FOURTH IN G major, Op. 58, 

iii. cii. 75-84, i. 39, iii. 26, 65, 66, 
71, 96, vi. 17; PIANOFORTE, IN B 
FLAT MAJOR, Op. 73, ill. CIII. 84“7 i 
iii. 26, 65, 71, 72, 96, 100, 120, vi. 
146 (Rhythmic specimens, i. 39); 
VIOLIN, IN D MAJOR, Op. 6l, iii. CIV. 

87-96, iii. 72, 99. no. 1 14. 120, 



INDEX 


129 , ▼. 1235 TRIPLE, FOR PIANO- 
FORTE, VIOLIN, AND VIOLINCBLLO, 

Op. 56, iii. cv. 96-103, ill. 71, 78; 

DUNGEON SCENE FROM ‘FIDELIO*, 
Act II, V. CCIX. 185-93; FIFTEEN 
VARIATIONS AND FUGUB, ‘PROME- 
THEUS’, Op. 35, vi. ccxxxii. 31-5, 
1. 33, Vi. 138; GRAND FUGUB IN B 
FLAT, Op. 133 , li. LXIX. 170 - 5 , Vi. 
90; 4 MISS A SOLEMNIS’, Op. 1 23, V. 

ccviii. 161-84, i. 179, ii. 173, V. 
23, 235, 236. OVERTURES: ‘zur 

WEIHB DES HAUSES’, Op. 1 24, H. 
lxviii. 156-70, ii, p. ix, iv. 48, vi. 
1 17; 4 Leonora*, Nos. 2 and 3, iv. 
CXLVI. 28-40, v. 186, vi. 90; 
‘LEONORA*, No. I, Op. 138, iv. 
cxlvii. 40-1, ii. 9, iii. 130, v. 186-7 ; 
‘FIDELIO*, iv. CXLVIII. 41-3; ‘CORI- 

olan*. Op. 62, iv. cxlix. 43-5, iii. 
105, iv. 46; ‘egmont*, Op. 84, iv. 
CL. 45-7, iv. 97, 104, vi. 137; FOR 

THE NAME-DAY OF KAISER FRANZ, 

Op. 1 14, iv. cli. 47-50. SYM- 
PHONIES : FIRST, IN C MAJOR, 

Op. 21, i. 11. 21-5, ii. 157, 158, vi. 

141, i. l 8 g\ SECOND, IN D MAJOR, 
Op. 36, i. iii. 25-9, i. 123, 129, 216, 
ii. 27, 61, v. 132-3, vi. 141; THIRD, 
in e flat major (Sinfonia Eroica), 
Op. 55, i. iv. 29-34, i- 1. 8, 12, 14, 
58, 85, 175, 188, 196, ii. 4, 5, 8, 20, 
53, 54, 75, 82, 137, 138, 158, iii. 4, 
84, 86, iv. 3, 109, vi. 3 1—4, 138, 156; 
FOURTH, IN B FLAT MAJOR, Op. 60, i. 

V. 34-7, *• 42, 184, ii. 5, iv. 50, v. 
1 16, vi. 75, 141 ; FIFTH, IN c minor, 
Op. 67, i. VI. 38-44, i* 37, 47, 53, 
57, 58, 85, 141, 190, 192, 215, ii. 
9, 30, 53, 58, 59, 61, 9a, iii. 153, 

iv. 139, vi. 141; SIXTH, IN F MAJOR 
(‘Sinfonia Pastorale*), Op. 68, i. 
VII. 44-56, 1. 15, 4*. 57, 8s, 128, 
li. 102, 129, iv. 1, v. 134, vi. 
141 (Rhythmic Specimen, i. 39); 
SEVENTH, IN A MAJOR, Op. 92, i. VIII. 

57 - 6 i, i. 34, 38, 42. 62, 219, ii. 5 , 
128, iv. 47, 48, 78, vi. 75, 141 
(Rhythmic Specimen, i. 39) ; eighth, 
in F major. Op. 93, i. ix. 61-7, i. 34, 
57, 59, *4*, U. 55, iv. 173, vi. 143; 

NINTH, IN D MINOR, Op. 1 25, PRECIS, 

i. x. 67-83 ; essay (Its place in musi- 
cal art), ii. xliii. 1-45 ; other refer- 
ences: i. x, 2, 26, 34, 57, 91, 93, 140, 
171, 192, 208, ii, p. ix, 65, 70, 75, 
92, 169, 170, iii. 1, 107, 1 14, ns, 

130, iv. 3, 80, 85, 120, 121, v. 133, 
vi. 4*. 55, 141.' 143, 155 (Rhythmic 
Specimen, 1. a8, 40). Ballet, ‘Pro- 
metheus*, vi. 32, 137; Concerto in 
B flat, Op. 19, iii. 64, 78; ‘Fidelio*, 


173 

Op. 72, iii. 75. iv. 48, 50; ‘Kflnig 
Stephan*, Op. 117, iv. 50, vi. 137; 
‘Kreutzer* Sonata, Op. 47, 1. 10, ii. 
90, iii. 65; ‘Lebewohl* Sonata, iv. 
62; ‘Leonore*, v. 185, 193; ‘Les 
Adieux* Sonata, v. 228; Overture, 
‘Prometheus*, ii. 157, 158, iv. 26; 
Pianoforte Duet, Op. 134, ii. 171; 
Pianoforte Fantasia, Op. 77, ii. 36; 
Pianoforte piece, Op. 89, iii. 10 1. 
PIANOFORTE SONATAS : Op. 
22 in B flat, ii. 122; Op. 31, No. 2, in 
D minor, i. 26, 52, ill. 46; Op. 31, 
No. 3 in E flat, i. 64; Op. 54, vi. 
155; The Hammerklavier, in A, 
Op. 101, vi. 89; Op. 106 in B flat, 
ii. 124, 164, v. 126; Op. 109 in E, 
ii* 35, vi. 166; Op. iii in C minor 
(the last sonata), ii. 35, lift. 76. 
QUARTETS : Op. 18, No. 4 in C 
minor, i. 15, 23, iii. 70; Op. 59, 
No. 1 in F, i. 15; Op. 59, No. 2 
in E minor, i. 13, 42, 192; Op. 59, 
No. 3 in C major, ii. 163 (Rhythmic 
Specimen), i. 39; Op. 74, Haip, i. 
39, 42, 157, ii* 204 ; Op. 95 in F minor, 

i. 42, 192, ii. 75, iii. 46; Op. 130 in 
B flat, ii. 62, 63, 170, v. 125, 142 
(Rhythmic Specimen, i. 39); Op. 

131 in C sharp minor, ii. 122; Op. 

132 in A minor, i. 42, 192, ii. 4, 30, 
42; Op. 135 in F (the last quartet), 

ii. 143 ; Quintet in C major, Op. 29, 
i. 23 ; ‘Die Ruinen von Athen*, Op. 
1 13, iv. 50, 52, vi. 137; Septet, Op. 
20, i. 123, 129; Serenade Trio, Op. 8, 

iii. 101 ; ‘Sonata Appassionata*, Op. 
57, i. 39, 1 16, iii. 93; Sonata in E 
minor, Op. 90 (Rhythmic Speci- 
men), i. 39. TRIOS: Op. 1, No. 2, 
v. 126; Op. 1, No. 3, in C minor, 
i. 26; Op. 9, No. 1, v. 126; Op. 70, 
No. 1, in D major, i. 14, ii. 23; Op. 
70, No. 2, in E flat, i. 42, ii. 30; Op. 
97 in B flat, i. 42, 140, iii. 93, iv. 109, 
no, v. 126; Violin Sonata, Op. 24, 
in F major, i. 52, 123, 129, iii. 216; 
Violin Sonata, Op. 30, No. 1, i. 52, 
192, iii. 70; Violin Sonata, Op. 30, 
No. 3, in A major, iii. 76; ‘Wald- 
stein* Sonata, Op. 53, in C major, 
i. 36, iii. 65, 130, vi. 164 (Rhythmic 
Specimen, i. 39); Wellington's *Sieg 
oder die Schlacht bei Vittoria* 
(‘Battle Symphony*), vi. 138. 

Benedict, Julius, iv. 61. 

Bennett, Arnold, i. 61. 

Bentley, iv. 16. 

Bergerac, Cyrano de, iv. 74, 82. 
Berlin, ii. 38, iii. 65, 194, 217, iv. 52, 
v. 185, vi. 139. 

Berlioz, i. 57, 194, &2Z, 11 . 3, 6, 7, 9, 



174 INDEX 


33, 143, iii- 86, 105, 221, iv. 1, 74- 
89, 100, 105, 155-7, v. 25, 103, 1x2, 
174, 198, 222, vi. 16, 17, 43-54, 77, 
105, 120, 132, 147. 

and Debussy, v. 242-3; and the 
giraffe, iii. 221 ; and the serpent, iv. 
100; and technique, iv. x ; and Jules 
Verne, iv. 75; as a contrapuntist, 
iv. 85. See also Mendelssohn. 

Works : ‘ HAROLD IN ITALY* SYM- 
PHONY, iv. CLXII. 74-82, vi. 43, 46, 
52, 147. OVERTURES : ‘kino 

LEAR', iv. CLXIII. 82-6; ‘LE CORSAIR*, 
vi. CCXXXVII. 50-2; ‘BEATRICE ET 

b£n£dict*, vi. ccxxxviii. 53-4; 

‘sefeNE D'AMOUR* FROM ‘ROmSo ET 
JULIETTE*, iv. CLXIV. 86-9, iv. IO5, 

vi. 51; ‘symphonib fantastique', 
Op. 14, vi. ccxxxvi. 44-50, vi. 43 ; 
Requiem, i. 222, v. 103, 174, 198, 
255; ‘Grande Messe des Morts*, iv. 
82, vi. 46, 147; ‘L61io', vi. 46; 
‘Mort de C16opatre', v. 242; ‘Te 
Deum', vi. 46. 

Bernard, St., see Pope. 

Best, W. T., ii. 200, vi. 132. 

Birds, musical representation of, V. 
134-5. See also Starling, Mozart’s, 
and Schindler's ‘Yellow-hammer*. 
‘Bo!', Haydn's Lion says, V. 139. 
BOcklin, iv. 166-8. 

Bohemia, ii. 101. 

Boito, v. 209, 210. 

Bologna, Respighi’s birthplace, iii. 
217. 

Bonn, vi. 137. 

Bononcini (Buononcini), I. 132, v. 84, 

85- 

Boult, Sir Adrian, iv. 143. 

Bradley, Professor Andrew, ii. 2, 3. 
Brahms, i. 10, 12, 25, 28, 61, 84-137, 
142, 153, 175, 176, I79> x 99» 202, 
216-18, 221, ii. 2, 29, 47, 70-4, 81, 
89, 90, 94 » io 4> *o5> *08, 127, 
136-9, 148, 151-6, 178, iii. 7. 8, 15, 
18, 20, 22, 23, 38, 43, 50, 56, 72-4, 
84, 85, 107-10, x 13-48, 164, 167, 
178, 185, 195, 211, iv. 1, 6, 71, 92, 
133, 135-7, *44, 147, v. 75, 76, 21 1- 
29, 230, 248, vi. 55-7, 59, 66, 69, 
. 87, 136, 138, 139, 142, 144, 146, 148, 
155, *66, 168. 

and BUlow on Verdi's Requiem, 
V. 198; as a contrapuntist, iii. 119; 
his test, ii. 178, iv. 6; on Dvof&k's 
’Cello concerto, iii. 148 ; on Haydn's 
Letter V, i. 142; on plagiarism, i. 
105, 153; the religious significance 
of Requiem, Op. 45, v. 21 1, 212. 
See also Beethoven, Orchestration, 
Quintessence. 

‘akademischb festouvertCrb', 


Op. 80, ii. ucvii. 154-6, iv. 1. 
CONCERTOS : violin in d major, 
Op. 77, iii. cx. 126-39, vi. 146; 
violin and violoncello, Op. 102, 
iii. cxi. 139-47, i. 107, vi. 146; 
pianoforte in d minor, Op. 15, 
iii. cviii. 1 14-20, i. 84, 107, iii. 22, 
74, 107, 108, 1 13, iv. 133; PIANO- 
FORTE IN B FLAT MAJOR, Op. 83, iii. 
CIX. 120-6, vi. 146; ‘DEUTSCHES 
requiem', Op. 45, v. ccxrv. 211-25, 
i. 84, vi. 142, 148; ‘rhapsodie* for 

ALTO VOICES, MALE CHORUS, AND 
ORCHESTRA, V. CCXV. 225-6; SERE- 
NADE IN D MAJOR, Op. II (for 
orchestra), i. xv. 123-31, i. 28, 84, 
13 1 ; SERENADE IN A MAJOR, Op. l6 
(for small orchestra), i. xvi. 13 1-7, 
i. 84, 123; ‘SONG OF DESTINY* 

(schicksalslied), for chorus and 

ORCHESTRA, Op. 54 , V. CCXVI. 227~9, 

i. 84. SYMPHONIES : No. i in 
c minor, Op. 68, i. xi. 84-95, iii. 73, 
vi. 155, 159; No. 2 in d major, 
Op. 73, i. xii. 95-106, i. 12, 85, 175, 

iii. 126, vi. 56, 138, 142; No. 3 inf 
major, Op. 90, 1, xiii. 107-15, vi. 57, 
155 ; no. 4 in e minor, Op. 98, i. xiv. 
115-23, iii. 50, vi. 166; tragic 
overture, Op. 81, ii. lxvi. 15 1-4; 
a further note, vi. ccxxxix. 55-7, 

iv. i, 144, vi. 138; variations for 

ORCHESTRA ON A THEME BY HAYDN, 
Op. 56a, ii. lxi. 136-9, vi. 155; 
Clarinet Trio, Op. 114, vi. 146; 
Quartet in G minor, Op. 25, vi. 55; 
Quartet in C minor. Op. 60, i. 89, 
1 15, iii. 75, vi. 56; Quintet in F 
minor, Op. 34, i. 10, 85, 115, 218; 
‘Rinaldo' Cantata, i. 84; Sextet in 
B flat, Op. 18, i. 179; Sonata in F 
sharp minor, Op. 2, i. 85 ; Sonata in 
F minor, Op. 5, i. 85; Sonata in G 
for Violin, Op. 78, i. 114, iii. 15, 
iv. 92; Trio in B major. Op. 8 (in 
its two versions), vi. 136; ‘Triumph- 
lied’, Op. 55, i. 84, iii. 18, v. 2i i. 
Breitkopf and Hartel edition of 
Mozart, v. 1, 2. 

Brema, Marie, v. 90. 

Bretzner, vi. 25. 

Brian, Havergal, vi. 96. Works: fan- 
tastic variations on an old 
rhyme, vi. ccxlviii. 96. 

Bridges, Robert, v. 232. 

British Grenadiers, see Beethoven. 
Browning, ii. 48, iii. 185, 207, iv. 54, 
xi8, v. 4, 60. 

Bruch, Max, iii. 126, 176, 194-7, 21 1, 
2x7, iv. 6x. Works : concerto in o 

MINOR FOR VIOLIN AND ORCHESTRA, 

,iii.cxxvL x94-7,iILx76,2ii,iv.6x; 



INDEX 

Concerto in D minor for two violins, 
iii. 194; Kyrie and Sanctus, iii. 194; 
‘Odysseus*, iii. 194; Scottish Fan- 
tasia, iii. 194. 

Bruckner, i. 95, ii. 3, 6, 7, 13, 20, 62, 
69-84, 97, 1 18, 121, iii. 167, 21 1, 

222, vi. 60, 76, 77, 82, 93, i43“5 • 

See also Quintessence. 

Works : ‘romantic* symphony, 

No. 4, IN B FLAT MAJOR, ii. XLVIII. 
69-79, vi. 145; SYMPHONY IN A 
major, No. 6, ii. xlix. 79-84; Third 
Symphony, ii. 6; Seventh Sym- 
phony, ii. 81, 83 ; Eighth Symphony, 
ii.81 ; Ninth Symphony, ii. 6, 13, 70. 
Brunetti, iii. 59. 

Brussels, the Conservatoire of, iii. 63. 
Billow, Hans von, i. 31, 210, ii. 39, 

170, iii. 126, v. 198, 204, vi. 10. 

See also Brahms. 

Buononcini, see Bononcini. 

Bunyan, John, v. 128, 137. 

Burne-Jones, v. 123. 

Burney, Charles (his History of 
Music), v. 17, 104, 108, vi. 157. 

Busch, Adolf, vi. 96-100. Works : 
CAPRICCIO FOR SMALL ORCHESTRA, 

vi. ccxlix. 96-100. 

Busch, Fritz, i. 203, iv. 55, 65, 67, vi. 

96. 

Busoni, vi. 97, 104, 105, 107. 

Butler, Samuel, iv. 92, 139. 

Byrd, v. 7, 13. Works : ‘Bow Thine 
Ear*, v. 13. 

Byron, iv. 74“6, ”2) ”3» *55; and 
Horace, ii. 163, vi. 46, 50-2, 77. 

Calverly, quoted, v. 129. 

Calzabigi, vi. 13, 14, 19, 25. 

Cambridge, i. 92, iii. 3. 

Canon and Imitation, ii. 179, v. 5, 33, 

39, 44, 18 1, vi. 32. 

Carey, Clive, iv. 23. 

Carlyle, iv. 17, v. 147, vi. 56, 120. 
Carroll, Lewis, iv. 56, 100, 172, v. 
i35> vi. 81. 

Caruso, Enrico, iv. 138. 

Casals, ii. p. x. 

Case, Professor, iv. 91. 

Cassel, iv. 115. 

Castelli, iv. 65. 

Cathedral-polyphony, ii. 55, 56. 

Cato, vi. 109. 

Catalieri, vi. 161. 

Cavfilleria Rusticana (Mascagni), iv. 

76. 

Cellini, Benvenuto, iv. 82. 

Cembalo, vi. 150, 151. 

Chaconne, vi. 151. 

Chaucer, and Artemus Ward on his 
spelling, v. 243. 

Cherubini, i. *58, ii. 73,161, iii. 97, 


*75 

101, iv. 29, 30, 75, 76, v. 179, vL 
36, 41. 45. 53- 

and Beethoven, iv. 29, 30, v. 179. 
Works: ‘The Water Carrier*, iv. 
30; Overture to ‘Faniska*, ii. 73; 
M£d6e, vi. 36; Overture to ‘Lea 
Deux Journdes*, vi. 41. 

Chesterfield, iv. 170, 17 1. 

Chesterton, the, iii. 47. 

Chevalier, Albert, iv. 153. 

Chezy, Helmine von, iv. 54-6, 69. 
Chisholm, Dr. Erik, iv. 6, 89. 

Chopin, Frederic Francois, i. 25, iii. 
46, 51, 71, xoi, 103-6, iv. 161, vi. 
1 5 1 . See also Schumann, Balance of 
tone. 

Scherzos, L 25; Polonaises, iii. 
101. 

Works: CONCERTO IN F MINOR 
(Pianoforte and Orchestra), Op. 21, 
iii. cvi. 103-6, iii. 71 ; Concerto in 
E minor, Op. 11, iii. 103, 106; 
Sonata in B flat minor, Op. 35, iii. 
103; Violoncello sonata, Op. 65, 
iii. 103; Variations for Pianoforte, 
Op. 2, iii. 103. 

Chorale: (a) Complete settings, V. 
cciv; ( b ) Ecclesiastical tones, iii. 
cxxxiv, iv. 28, 126, 138, v. 36, 37, 
44. 59. 87 (Ex. 2), 251, 252; (c) Allu- 
sions, vi. 118. 

Christie (Mr.), vi. 30. 

Chromatic, vi. 15 x. 

Chrysander, v. 86, 102, iii, vi. 132. 
Cimarosa, ii. 160, iv. 22. Works : ‘II 
Matrimonio Segreto*, iv. 22; Over- 
ture to ‘ Gli Orazii e Curiazii* [ii. 60]. 
Clarino, see Trumpet. 

CLASSICAL CONCERTO, THE, iii. LXXXV. 
3-27- 

Clavicembalo, see Cembalo. 
Clavichord, vi. 15 1. 

Clavier, vi. 152. 

Clement, iii. 87, 88. 

Clementi, i. 140, iii. 7, iv. 16. 
Coleridge, Arthur D., iv. 11, x6. 
Collin, iv. 43. 

Cologne, ii. 55, vi. 84. 

Combinations of themes (unusual con- 
trapuntal examples), i. 81, 86, 87, 
1 14, 197 (quintuple counterpoint), 
ii. 43, 67, 138 (double and triple 
counterpoint in 12th and 9th), 171- 
5, 210, 21 1, iii. 181, iv. 10, 22, 77, 
126, 127, 138, y. 71 (sextuple 
counterpoint), 43 (in nth and 13th), 
47 (in 3rds), 106 (in 3rds). 

Common Chords, vi. 152. 
Comparisons, impertinent, vi. I. 
Composer, learned, see Verdi. 
Concerto principle, the, iii. 6-14; the 
Sonata-form, ULS4-25* 



176 

Concerts Spirituels, vi. 21, 23, 

Concord, vi. 152. 

Conjunct motion, see Motion. 

Consonance, vi. 152. 

Constance, ill. 23. 

Contes Drolatiques (Balzac), ill. 191. 

Continuo, i. 155-6, v. 34, vi. 157. 

Contrapuntal, see Counterpoint. 

Contrary motion, see Motion. 

Costa, Sir Michael, iii. 104, v. 113, 181. 

Counterpoint, vi. 153. 

Counter-statement, vi. 153. 

Counter-subject, vi. 154. 

Couperin, i. 15, 142, iii. 215, vi. 20. 

Critics, see Experts. 

Crotch, Dr., i. 92; ‘Chimes', i. 92. 

Crystal Palace, see Handel Festivals. 

Cyril Scott, see Scott, Cyril. 

Czechoslovakia, ii. 105, iv. 132. 

Czerny, vi. 102, 136. 

Dachshund, see Bernard. 

Dalcroze, and the sixteenth century, V. 
4- 

Dannreuther, iii. 46, iv. 76, 121. 

*das Chez 1 , see Chezy, Helmine von. 

Davies, Sir Walford, vi. 168. 

Debussy, Claude Achille, ii. 17, 129, 
130, iii. 175, 204, iv. 167, v. 242-7, 
251, vi. 75, 77, 82, 129; and Prix de 
Rome (a correction), vi. 149. See 
also Berlioz. 

Works: ‘thb blessed damozel’ 
(‘La Demoiselle filue*), v. ccxx. 
242-7, vi. 142,' 149; ‘L'Enfant 
Prodigue’, v. 242; vi. 149; ‘La Mer*, 
iv. 167; ‘Sir&ncs', v. 1. 

Delius, ii, p. xi, iii. 203-5. Works : 
violin concerto, iii. cxxix. 203-5 ; 
Double Concerto, iii. 203. 

Dent, Professor E. J., iii. 3, iv. 23, vi. 
28. 

Deppe, Ludwig, iii. 30. 

‘Der rote Igel', see Brahms on Haydn. 

Deux-Temps, vi. 154. 

Development, vi. 154. 

Devil, Symbolized by the Tritone 
Fourth, v. 70. 

Diatonic, vi. 154. 

Dickens, Charles, Iv. 152, vi. 75, 77, 
82, 129. 

Dickinson, Lowes, iv. 24. 

Dictionaries of Music, see Grove, 
Rousseau. 

Dimension in music, ii. 4, 5, iii. 15. 

Diminution, I. 18, vi. 155. 

Examples, i. 80, 82, 94, 96, 102, 
103, 107, 108, 172, 176, ii. 41, 104, 
113, 172, 173, iii* 102 (Ex. 13), 1 17, 
JJ9, 124 (Ex. 8), 143 (Ex. 9), x66, 
191, 193, 207, 210, iv. 10, 126, 127, 
131, 138, 148, 149 (153)# v. 176. 


INDEX 

Discord, vi. 155. 

Dissonance, vi. 155. 

Ditters, Karl, see Dittersdorf, Ditters 
von. 

Dittersdorf, Ditters von, iv. 16-19. 
Works: ‘fall of phaeton*, sym- 
phony, iv. cxxxviii. 16-19. 
Dohn&nyi, iii. 173-6. Works: varia- 
tions, nursery song (Pianoforte 
and Orchestra), iii. cxvm. 173-6. 
Dolmetsch, Arnold, ii. 18 1. 
Dominant: when and when not a key 
in its own right, i. 5-6, 23, 25, 125 
(before Ex. 3), 162, iii. 17-18+21-2, 
98, iv. 49. 

Dor6, Gustave, iii. 190. 

Double Counterpoint, vi. 155. 
Dresden, ii. 12, 23, iv. 62, V. 22. 
Dresden Amen , The, vi. 125. 

Drury Lane, v. 119. 

Dryden, iv. 57. 

Dupont, iv. 140. 

Dlisseldorf, ii. 53, vi. 38, 39. 

Dvof&k, i. 2, 13, 41, ii. 89-110, 139- 
42. I47-5L iii* 140* 148-52, iv. 
137-9. 

His na’ivetl, il. 89, 94; his transi- 
tions compared with Schubert's, ii. 
148. See also Brahms. 

Works: SCHERZO CAPRICCIOSO, Op. 
66, ii. LXV. 147-51; SLAVONIC 
RHAPSODY IN D MAJOR, Op. 45, No. I, 
iv. CLXXX. 137-8; SLAVONIC RHAP- 
SODY IN A FLAT, Op. 45, No. 3, iv. 
CLXXXI. I38-9; SYMPHONIC VARIA- 
TIONS ON AN ORIGINAL THEME, Op. 

78, ii. lxii. 139-42. SYMPHON- 
IES: No. I IN D MAJOR, Op. 63, ii. 
LI. 89-94, ii* IOI, 105; No. 2 IN D 
MINOR, Op. 70, ii. LII. 94-101; No. 
3 IN F MAJOR, Op. 76, ii. liii. 101-6; 
in b minor, Op. 95 (from the ‘New 
World’), ii. liv. 106-10, ii. 89; 

VIOLONCELLO CONCERTO IN B MINOR, 

Op. 104, iii. cxii. 148-52, iii. 140; 
‘Camaval* Overture, Op. 92, ii. 89 ; 
Moravian Duets, Op. 32, ii. 101; 
Symphony in G major, No. 4, ii. 
10 1 ; ‘St. Ludmila ', ii. 89. 

Dykes, Rev. John Bacchus, vi. 28. 


Eddington, Professor, iii. 206. 
Edinburgh, ii, pp. ix-xii, no, 205, iv. 

25* 52, 109, vi. 23, 67, 133. 137* 
Edwards, i. 149 et passim . 

Eight-part writing, Bach's and Han- 
del’s compared, v. 94. 

Elephant, see Haydn. 

Elgar, Sir Edward, i. 112, ii. p. xi, xx, 
1 14-21, 140, iii. 152-9, 166, 200-3, 
Iv. 3-16, 94. 149-54. 163. vi. 83-9, 



INDEX 


177 


147, 148; and Schumann compared, 
iv. 11. 

Works : ‘falstaff’, symphonic 
study, Op. 68, iv. cxxxvii. 3-16, ii. 

1 15, vi. 147; CONCERT OVERTURE, ‘iN 
THE SOUTH* (Alassio), vi. CCXLIV. 
83-7; INTRODUCTION AND ALLEGRO 
FOR STRINGS (QUARTET AND OR- 
CHESTRA), Op. 47, vi. ccxlv. 87-9; 
OVERTURE ‘COCKAIGNE*, iv. CLXXXVI. 
152-4, Vi. 84; SYMPHONY IN E FLAT, 

No. 2, Op. 63, ii. lvi. 1 14-21; 

VARIATIONS FOR ORCHESTRA, Op. 35 

(‘Enigma*), iv. clxxxv. 149-52, ii. 
140, iii. 152, iv. 94, 163, vi. 84, 89, 
148; violin concerto in b minor, 
Op. 61, iii. cxiii. 152-8, ii. 1 15, iii. 
159; violoncello concerto in e 
minor, Op. 85, iii. cxxviii. 200-3 ; 
‘Canto Popolare’ (‘In Moonlight’), 
vi. 86 ; ‘Dream of Gerontius’, vi. 84 ; 
Pomp and Circumstance Marches, 
vi. 83; Symphony, No. 1, vi. 84. 
Elssner, iii. 103. 

Encyclopedia Britannica f i. v, iv. 170, 
176, v. 2, vi. 37, 142. 

England, i. 132, 161, ii. 10 1, iii. 84, 
185, iv. 45, 57, 87, 98, 166, v. 15, 

1 14, 158, vi. 76, 10 1, 1 21 ; Joachim’s 
last visit to, v. 229. 

English Handel Society, the, v. 1 1 1 . 
Enharmonic, vi. 155, 156. 

Enharmonic Modulations, notable ex- 
amples: (a) genuine, i. 135 (Ex. 9); 

( b ) mere convenience of notation, i. 
69, ii. 15; (c) Enharmonic circles, v. 
170; (d) an illusory conflict, vi. 16, 

17 . 

Epigram, Schumann a master of, ii. 
46, 85. 

Episode, vi. 156. 

Erba, Dionigi, his ‘Magnificat* and 
Handel, v. 91, 102, 103, 107-8, 113. 
*Eroica f the\ and Napoleon, i. 29. 
Essential Discords, vi. 1 56. 

Esterhaz, i. 124, 143, 144, 15s, iii. p. 

xi, 62, vi. 135-6. 

Esterhazy, Prince, i. 151, v. 142. 
Europe, i. 177, iii. 45. 

Eurhythmies, iii. 215. 

Experts, see Critics. 

Farmer, John, i. 142, vi. 102. 

Fay, Amy, iii. 30. 

Figure (German Motif), vi. 156. 

Figured Bass (or Continuo), vi. 157. 
Finland, iii. 21 1, 215. 

Fitzgerald, Edward, i. 194. 

Fleury, Louis, iii. 47, v. 52, vi. 134. 
Florence, v. 196*. 

Forsyth, Cecil, iii. 52, 90, iv. 54. 

Fox Strangways, see Strangways, Fox. 

VI N 


France, iv. 87. 

Franck, Cdsar, ii. 62-9, iii. 166-9. 
Works: SYMPHONY in d minor, ii. 
xlvii. 62-9; ‘variations SYMPHON- 
iques*, iii. cxvi. 166-9; ‘bolides’, ii. 
62; ‘Le Chasseur Maudit’, ii. 62; 
Trio in F sharp minor, Op. 1, ii. 62. 
Franz, and Bach’s polyphony, v. 66. 
Fraser, Mrs. Kennedy-, see Kenncdy- 
Fiascr, Marjorie. 

Fugato, vi. 157. 

Fugue, i. 17-18, 32, 33, 80, 81, 198, ii. 
41, 43, lxviii. 162 foil., lxix. 176, 
179, 199, lxxxii, lxxxiii, iii. 1 19, v. 
28, 31, 36, 3«, 43, 47, 55, 59, 80, 89, 
98, 103, 105, 106, 130, 141, 152, 153, 
158, 161, 169, 175, 180, 206, 208, 
218, 238, 239, vi. 89; masked 
fugues, v. 57, 77; round fugues, v. 
24, 26, 30, 71 ; fugues with litornello, 

v. 24, 26, 36, 62. 

Fundamental Bass, vi. 157. 
Furtwangler, ii. 17 1. 

Gastein, i. 215. 

George III on Shakespeare, vi. 109. 
Germany, i. 132, 198, ii. 58, 72, iv. 
104, 166, v. 176, 185, 196, vi. 20, 
60, 137. 

Gevacrt, i. 160, 11. 19, iii. 9, 63, v. 36. 
Gibbons, Grinling, v. 123, 136. 
Giraffe, see Berlioz. 

Glasgow, ii, pp. ix, x, xi, iv. 89. 
Glazounov, ii. iii, iii. 209-10. See 
also Transformation of Themes. 
Works: PIANOFORTE CONCERTO IN F 
minor, Op. 92, iii. cxxxi. 209-10. 
Gluck, i. 122, 186, 187, iii. 8, 50, 81, 

iv. i, 17, 24, 63, 90, v. 1 12, 128, vi. 
8, 10-20, 24, 25, 44, 1 14. Works : 
overt ure to ‘iphigenib en aulide* 

— ‘ORPHEUS AND EURIDICE’, Act. Ill, 

vi. ccxxvil. 12-19 (Iphigdnie), iv. 
24; ‘Iphigdnie en Tauride’, v. 112 
(Orpheus), i. 122, iii. 50, 81; ‘ Al- 
ceste*, vi. 12-14; ‘Armide*, v. 12S, 
vi. 1 5 ; Overture to ‘Alccste’, iv. 24; 
‘Telemacco*, vi. 15. 

Glyndebourne, vi. 30. 

Goethe, iv. 24, 45, 46, 93, 94, 104, v. 

193-5, 225, vi. 137. 

Golden Age, sixteenth century as the, 

v. 3, 4, 14, 195, 196, vi. 149, 155; 
and silvery v. 195, vi. 149; and 
‘ Mahogany * , vi. 134. 

Gounod, vi. 154. Works ; ‘Faust*, vi. 
I 54‘ 

Gozzi, iii. 165. 

Grabu, iv. 57. 

Grainger, Percy, iv. 147. 
Gravicembalo, see Cembalo. 

Great Britain, see England* 



Ij 8 INDEX 


Greene, iii. 10. 

Gr^try, i. 133. 

Grieg, iv. 11. 

Grierson, Dr. Mary, ii, p. xi. 

Grimm, Gisela, see Arnim, Gisela 
von. 

Grinling Gibbons (Gibbon), see Gib- 
bons, Grinling. 

Grocer, see Hindemith. 

Gros, M’sieur Le, vi. 23. 

Grove, Sir George, i. 22, 42, 55, 89, 
192, 213, 215, ii. 8, 9, 17, 23, iii. 
136, iv. 31, 32, vi. 141. 

Grove's Dictionary , v. 95, 114, 149, vi. 
3, 19, 139, HO. 

Guines, the Duke of, iii. 60, 61. 

Haagsche Hopjes, iv. 170, 17 1. 
Habeneck, iv. 82, vi. 147. 

Hadow, Sir Henry, i. 11, 53, 167, 
iii. 191, iv. 85, v. 242. 

Haffner, Elizabeth, i. 177. 

Hall£, Lady, vi. 7. 

Hall£, Sir Charles, vi. 7. 

Handel, i. 12, 92, 124, 132, 138, 140, 
186, 220, ii. 2, 8, 37, 85, 124, 162-6, 
168, 200-1, 208, iii. 7-9, 12, 61, 
21s, 217, iv. 1, 17, 23, 90, 91, v. 4, 
5, 25, 39, 82-113, 119, i2i, 123, 
136, 149, 165, 167, 171, 176, 216, 
223, 248, vi. 1, 13, 15, 68, 87, 109, 
no, 132, 133; and Bach, i. 12, 186, 
ii. 37, 208, iii. 12, 61, v. 53, 58, 66, 73, 
83,94, 95, iai, 136, vi. 87; and Hay- 
don, i. 138; Handehan pause, V. 53; 
Handelgesellschalt, v. 73 ; his death, 
v. 1 19; his hornpipes, vi. 145, 146; 
his musical form, v. 85; his triple 
time, v. 4, 5, 108, 109; in England, 

v. 91; on himself, v. 85. See also 
Balance of Tone, Erba, Urio. 

Works : ‘ISRAEL IN EGYPT*, v. ccv. 
82~1 13; ORGAN CONCERTO, No. 7 
(Op. 7, No. i), ii. LXXIX. 200-1, 

vi. 132; ‘Athalia*, v. 93; ‘Deborah’, 
v. 93, 94; ‘Jephtha’, v. 86; ‘Mes- 
siah’, i. 220, ii. 8, iv. 91, v. 86, 
95, 97, n°; ‘Every Valley’, V. 58; 
‘Samson’, v. 248; ‘Saul*, v. 87, 91; 
‘Semele’, iv. 17; ‘Solomon’, v. 94. 

Handel Festival, and the Crystal 
Palace, ii. 85, v. 103, 107, 113, vi. 
132. 

Hanslick, ii. 70, 71, iii. 140. 

Hardy, Thomas, ii. 41. 

Harmonic freedom, Straussian, i. 196. 
Harmonics, vi. 157. 

Harmonic Series, vi. 157. 

* Harmoniemusik ’ (music for wind- 

band), i. 21, 22. 

Harpsichord, vi. 158. 

Harvey, Christopher, v* 68. 


Haslinger, Tobias (Beethoven’s pub- 
lisher), v. 40. 

Hasse, vi. 13. 

Hauptmann, Moritz, v. 6i. 

Hausmann, iii. 140, 148. 

Havard, vi. 19. 

Havergal, Henry, ii, p. xi. 

Hawkins, his history of music, v. 101. 

Haydn, Joseph, i. 8, 10-12, 15, 16, 19, 
23, 26-8, 32, 34, 35, 37, 41, 45, 46, 
52, 61, 62, 64, 84, 104, 106, 124, 
127, 131, 138-76, 183-7, 190, 202, 
223; ii. 2, 19, 27, 30, 59, 89, 102, 
107, 108, 1 14, 122, 136-9, 159, 
164, 180, iii. p. ix, 7, 15, 27, 44, 56, 
61-3, 73, 74, 159, iv. 19, 27, 31, 68, 
76, 90, 133, 137, 173, v. 13, 30, 44, 
89, 104, 114-61, vi. 4, 6, 10-12, 39, 
101, 134-6, 143, 145, 146. 

HAYDN THE INACCESSIBLE, i. XVII. 
138-40; and Mozart, v. 116; as the 
lather of the symphony, i. 139, 155; 
formality of, i. 149; his early style, 
i. 139 ; his freedom of form, v. 136; 
his modem treatment of the brass, 

v. 41; his pupil Pleyel, vi. 134; ‘not 
an elephant’, v. 137; on Mozart, 
iii. 159. See also Balance of Tone, 
Beethoven, Brahms, Handel, Hers- 
chel, London, Paradox, Quintes- 
sence, and Scoring. 

Works: SYMPHONIES , No. 
88, in G MAJOR (Letter ‘V’), i. 
xviii. 140-3; No. 92, in g (the 
Oxford), i. xix. 143-7, *59; No. 

94, IN g major (the Surprise: 
Salomon, No. 5), i. xx. 147-8, 152, 
V. 151; No. 95, IN C MINOR (Salo- 
mon, No. 9), i. xxi. 149-50; No. 98, 
in b flat (Salomon, No. 8), i. xxn. 
150-6, v. 151, vi. 12; No. 99, in 
B flat (Salomon, No. 10), i. xxiii. 
156-9; No. 100, in G major (the 
Military: Salomon, No. 11), i. 
xxiv. 159-62, iv. 173, vi. 143; 
No. 1 01, in d major (the Clock; 
London, No. 11), i. xxv. 162-4; 
No. 102, in B flat (Salomon, 
No. 12), i. xxvi. 164-70; No. 103, 
in B flat (Salomon, No. 1) (with 
the drum roll), i. xxvii. 170-3; 
No. 104, in d major (Salomon, 
No. 2), i. xxviii. 174-6, i. 104, 165; 
violoncello concerto in d major, 
iii. xeix. 62-3. See also: anton 
kraft, addendum, iii. p. ix and 

vi. 146; ‘the creation’, v. ccvi. 
114-46, i. 27, v. 154-6, 160, vi. 39; 
compared with ‘The Seasons’, v. 
148-9; ‘thb seasons’ (Jahreszeiten), 
v. ccvii. 146-61,1. 153, v. 131, 145 ; 
chorus Set uns gntidig (prayer for 



INDEX 


the future harvest) erroneously re- 
ferred to as ‘chorus in honour of 
work*,!. 153. QUARTETS , Op. 1, 
No. 1, vi. 135; Op. 9, vi. 135; 
Op. 2, vi. 135; in F, Op. 50, No. 5 
(‘Golden Sections’), i. 19; in A 
minor, Op. 20, v. 89; Op. 9, Op. 1, 
No. 1, and Op. 2, vi. 135; String, 
No. 2, in E flat, i. 154; String, 
No. 2, in F, i. 165, 174; Symphony 
in B flat (9th London), v. 116. 
Haydn, Michael, i. 184. 

Hedgehog, see Brahms. 

Helmholtz, ii. 132, v. 4, 25. 

Henley, W. E., i. 57, vi. 44. 

Henschel, Sir George, v. 165. 

Hensel, Fanny, vi. 38, 39. 

Henselt, vi. 32. 

Herbert, George, v. 68. 

‘ Heritage of Music*, The, vi. 8, 14. 
Herodotus, vi. 149. 

Herschel, Sir John, v. 114, 115, 119, 
125; and Haydn, 114. 

Hesiod, v. 1 14. 

Heuberger, vi. 100. 

Higgs, James, v. 130. 

Hiller, Adam, see Reger, Works (vi. 

69). 

Hindemith, Paul, iv. 172-6, vi. 148, 
150, 163; and sugar, iv. 174. 

Works: chamber music, No. 1, 

FOR SMALL ORCHESTRA, Op. 24, 

No. i, iv. cxcv. 172-6, vi. 148. 
Hipkins, A. J., iii. 12, 126. 

Histories of Music (&c.), see Burney, 
Hawkins, Oxford; and Rousseau, 
Riemann, Grove’s (Dictionaries). 
Hochschule (Berlin), The, vi. 66. 
Hoffman, vi. 36. 

Hofmannsthal, iii. 206. 

Holderlin, Friedrich, v. 227. 

Holland, iv. 170, vi. 74. 

Hollins, Dr. Alfred, iv. 109, 1 10, vi.67. 
Hollywood, iv. 62, 78. 

Holmes, Sherlock, vi. 67. 

Holst, Gustav, ii. 42, 208-12, iv. 169- 
70, v. 1 , 250-6. See also Mozart. 

Works : ballet from ‘the per- 
fect fool', iv. cxciii. 169-70; 
FUGAL CONCERTO, Op. 40, No. 2, 
ii. LXXXII. 208-10; FUGAL OVER- 
TURE — Orchestra, ii. lxxxiii. 210- 
12; ‘THE HYMN OF JESUS*, Op. 37, 
v. ccxxii. 250-6; ‘The Perfect Fool’, 

ii. 212. 

Homer, v. 8, vi. 129; and Vergil, 

v. 133. 

Homophony, vi. 158. 

Horace, iii. 108, *v. 266, vi. 77, 104; 
also see Byron. 

House of Orange, the, iv. 171. 
Huberman, iii. 126. 

VI 


I79 

Hueffer, Francis, v. 186, 210. 

Hugo, Victor, iv. 94-6, vi. 77. 

Huller, John, vi. 56, 138. 

Hummel, i. 140, iii. 45, 71, 106, vi. 32. 
Humperdinck, i. iii. Works: ‘Hansel 
und Gretel*, i. iii. 

Hungary (Bataszek), vi. 100. 

Imitation, vi. 159. 

Imperfect Concords, see Concord. 
Interval, vi. 159. 

Intonation, vi. 159. 
introductions, i. 1. 1-19, ii. xlii. 
(Here and Elsewhere), pp. ix-xii, 

iii. lxxxiv. 1, iv. cxxxvi. 1, v. 

CXCVI. 1-2. 

Inversion, vi. 159, 160. 

Invisibility, How not to symbolize, 
v. 38. 

Italian Opera, vocal tradition of, v. 
195- 

Italy, iv. 92, 102, v. 119. 

Jacobi, iii. 187. 

Jahn, Otto, i. 181, iv. 28, 54; on 
Vogler, iv. 54. 

James, Dr. M. R., iv. 52. 

Jameson, Frederick (translations of 
Wagner), v. 2. 

Joachim, Frau, v. 229. 

Joachim, Josef, i. 112, 199, 202, 215- 
17, i>. 47, 57, 89, iii. 38, 59, 71, 74, 
88, 106-15, 1 18, 131, 148, 160, 
164-6, iv. 60, 67, 70, 71, 109, 133-7, 
v. 61, no, 220, 229-31, vi. 57, 66, 
74, 80, 96, 97, 1 13, 146; see also 
England, Orchestration. 

Works: ‘HUNGARIAN CONCERTO,’ 

iii. evil. 106-14, iii. 71, 74, 88, 118, 
160, vi. 74; marfa’s soliloquy, 

FROM SCHILLER’S UNFINISHED DRAMA 
‘DEMETRIUS’, SET FOR MEZZO- 
SOPRANO AND ORCHESTRA, Op. 14, 
V. CCXVII. 229-31; OVERTURE TO A 
COMEDY BY GOZZI, iv. CLXXIX. 133- 
7 ; VARIATIONS VIOLIN AND ORCHES- 
TRA, iii. cxv. 164-6. 

Joachim quartet, iv. 137. 

Johnson, Dr., i. 149, 171, 212, ii. 1, 
5i, 75, 1 14, 156, iii. 60, 74, iv. 175, 
v. 128, 147, 202, vi. 58, 109, 135, 
138, 142. 

his friend Edwards, ii. 156, iv# 
175, v. 139 (see also Edwards). 
‘Joy-motives’, Bach’s, v. 30. 

Just Intonation, vi. 160. 

Kalbeck, ii. 136. 

Kant, v. 1 14. 

Kennedy- Fraser, Marjorie, ii, p. xi, 

iv. 165. 



l8o INDEX 


Kensington, ill. 185. 

Kerll, Kaspar, v. 101. Works : Organ 
Canzona, v. 101. 

Key, key relations and tonality, i. 3-9. 

Kingsley, Charles, iv. 106, vi. 84. 

Kipling, Rudyard, i. 66, ill. 63, vi. 51, 
84. 

Klindworth, ill. 103, 104. See also 
Balance of Tone. 

KotzebUe, iv. 50. 

Kotzwara (Kocfwara), Franz, see 
Battle of Prague , the. 

Korsakov, see Rimsky- Korsakov. 

Kortte, Dr., iii. 12. 

Kraft, Anton, iii, p. ix. Works : vio- 
loncello CONCERTO IN D MAJOR, iii. 
xcix. 62-3; see reference iii, p. ix 
addendum, vi. 146. 

Kreutzer, Conradin, vi. 38. 

Kuhac, Dr., i. 173. 

Kuhlau, Ui. 47. 

Lablache, see Thumb. 

Lamb, Charles, i. 37, iv. 66, v. 85, 
vi. no. 

Laplace, v. 1 14. 

Lauckner, Rolf, iv. 55, 56, 65, 67. 

Lasso, Orlando di, i. 15, v. 6, 8, 29. 

Lear, Edward, iv. 56. 

Lee, Vernon, vi. 120. 

Leeds Festival, the, v. 229, vi. 105. 

Leighton, Sir William, v. 15. 

Leipzig, iii. 114, vi. 7, 39, 71, 100. 

Lenau, iv. 155-7. 

‘Liceo Musicale', the (Bologna), iii. 
217. 

Lidley, see Linley. 

Lincoln, Abraham, ii. 106. 

Linley (Lidley), v. 119. 

Linley, Thomas, v. 119, 122, 138. 

Liszt, Franz, i. 176, 193, ii. 7, 9, 14, 
121, iii. 33, 80, 81, 85, 107-10, 190, 
209, iv. 63, 70-3, 121, 130, 158, v. 
230, vi. 17, 4L 53, 54, 73, 77, 104; 
Works : Concerto in E flat, iii. 209, 
210; Dante Symphony, iv. 158; 
Faust Symphony, iii. 190, iv. 70, 
73, 121; ‘Mazeppa*, ii. 121; ‘Or- 
pheus’, ii. 121. 

Loch Ness, see Wagner and the Paris 
Opera. 

Loewe, v. 194, 195, vi. 144, 149* 
Works: ‘ErlkUnig’, vi. 149. 

London, i. 95, 107, 124, 153, 167, ii. 
47, 7*. 73, iii- 88, 127, iv. 22, 65, 
109, 152, 154, v. 14, 61, 82, 85, 1 14, 
119, vi. 12, 18, no, i2i, 143; 
Haydn ’8 visit to, i. 153; Promenade 
Concerts, vi. 139. 

Londoner, proletarian, agnosticism of, 
see Elgar ‘Cockaigne’, iv. 153. 

Lost Chord, see Subdominant. 


Lully (Lulli), ii. 178, v. 129, vi. 1. 

Works : ‘Armide’, v. 129. 

Luther, v. 217. 

Macaulay, ii. 4, 46, v. 197. 
Macfarren, v. 185, 186. 

Macfarren, Lady, i. 79, ii. 42. 
McEwen, Sir John B., iv. 161-2. 
Works: ‘grey galloway’, ballad 

FOR FULL ORCHESTRA, iv. CCXXXIX. 
l6l-2. 

Madhouse, see Weber on Beethoven. 
Maelzel, vi. 143. 

Mahler, ii. 3, iv. 1, v. 1, 2, 25, 96, 103, 
158, vi. 73-83, 105, 132. Works: 
SYMPHONY IN G MAJOR, No. 4, vi. 
ccxliii. 73-83; ‘Das Knaben Wun- 
derhorn, vi. 76; ‘Des Klagende 
Lied*, vi. 75; First Symphony, vi. 
75; Second Symphony, v. 158; 
Third Symphony, vi, 76; Eighth 
Symphony, v. 96, 103. 

‘ Mahogany Age\ see Golden Age. 
Maitland, Fuller, iii. 10. 
Mandyczewski,v. 121, 138, 143, vi. 135. 
Mannheim, vi. 24. 

Marenzio, vi. 155. 

Marks of Expression, vi. 160. 
Marschner, iv. 122. 

Martin, John, vi. 51. 

MASONIC MUSIC, iv. cxlv. 27-8; style, 

i. 200; symbolism, ii. 16 1; rhythm, 

ii. 168. 

Mattheson, v. 92. 

Mazzucato, v. 198, 207, 208. 
Medtner, v. 1. Works : ‘Vocal Sonata 9 , 
v. 1. 

M6hul, i. 132, iv. 30, v. 157, vi. 35-7. 

Works: OVERTURE, ‘LE JEUNE SAGE ET 
le vieux fou*, vi. ccxxxni, 35-7; 
‘H6tene’,iv. 30; ‘Joseph’, vi. 35 ; ‘La 
chasse du Jeune Henri’, v. 157; 
‘Uthal*, i. 132-3. 

Meiningen, Brahms’s Tragic Overture 
performed at, vi. 57; Concerts, the, 
i. 95, 107 ; Orchestra, the, i. 177, ii. 
47 . iii. 1 * 7 , V. 185. 

Mendelssohn, 1. 25, 65, 137, 138, 193, 
197, 210, 218-23, ii. 27, 42, 47, si, 
SS, 145-7. iii* *7, a8, 47, 56, 72, 74, 
1 18, 178-81, 192, 194, 21 1, iv. 4, 45, 
59. 61, 75, 90-109. 153, 163, V. in, 
129, 132, 136, 194, vl. 4, 12, 37~4»* 
1 13, 143, 145. 

and Beethoven, v. 194; and 
witchery, iv. 107; on Berlioz, iv. 75 ; 
‘Mendelssohn- Baiting’, v. 129. 

Works : incidental music to ‘a 
midsummer-night’s dream’, iv. 

CLXIX. 102-9; ITALIAN 8YMPHONY IN 
A MAJOR, Op. 90, i. XLI. 218-23, ii- 
55, vi. 142. OVERTURES: ‘a mid- 



INDEX 


181 


bummer-night’s DREAM*, iv. CLXVIII. 
97-103, iv. 45, 59, 90, 94, vi. 40, 

148; ‘CALM 6EA AND PROSPEROUS 
VOYAGE*, iv. CLXVI. 93-4, 1 52, 1 63, 

v. 194; ‘melusina*, vi. CCXXXIV. 
37-40; ‘ruy blas*, iv. CLXVII. 
94-7; ‘THE HEBRIDES*, iv. CLXV. 90- 
3, vi. 38, 40; SCHERZO IN G MINOR 
FOR ORCHESTRA, ii. LXIV. 1 4 5-7; 
VIOLIN CONCERTO IN B MINOR, Op. 

64, iii. cxx. 178-81 ; ‘Elijah*, v. 52, 

vi. 40; Duetto, Op. 38, No. 6, v. 
132; ‘Lobgesang*, v. 136; Octet 
in E flat, Op. 20, ii. 145, 146 (a 
correction about performance of vi. 
145); Pianoforte Rondo in E flat, 
vi. 38; Quartet, Op. 12 (erroneously 
referred to as Op. 1 1 in text), ii. 51 ; 
Quartet in F minor, Op. 2, iv. 90, 
85; ‘Song without words*, iv. 90, 
vi. 39; Thirteenth Symphony (now 
first) (1824), ii. 145-6; Trio in C 
minor, iii. 74; Violin Concerto 
(Op. 64), iii. 21 1. 

Mercator’s Projection, see Weelkes and 
Iceland. 

Meredith, George, ii. 147. 

Metastasio, iv. 26, 58, vi. 13, 14, 28. 
Meyerbeer, iii. 108, iv. 54, 62, 115, 
118, 133, 138, vi. 51, 59, 77, 82, 119, 
120. Works : ‘Les Huguenots*, vi. 
59, 77, i*9- 

Milan, iii. 176, 177, v. 198. 

Military Music, Beethoven and, ii. 40. 
Milton, ii. 9, 185, iii. 49, 54, 205, v. 
38, 84, 115, 118, 129, 137, i39, 144, 
147, 175, 232-4, 248, vi. 120. 
Modes (Ecclesiastical), examples : 
Dorian, ii. 42, 205 ; Phrygian, ii. 83 ; 
Lydian, ii. 42, 207, 210, iii. 205; 
Mixolydian, ii. 132, vi. 91; Ionian, 
ii. 207; Aeolian, ii. 207. 
Modulation, vi. 160, 161. 

Monody, vi. 161. 

Monster, see Loch Ness. 

Monteverdi, v. 6, vi. 14. Works: ‘Or- 
feo*, vi. 14. 

Moody and Sankey, vi. 112, 114. 
Morgann, iv. 5. 

Moscheles, iii. 103. 

Moser, iii. 164. 

Motet, Palestrina’s meaning of, v. 12, 

13, 165. 

Motion, vi. 161, 162. 

Moussorgsky, v. 229-30, vi. 144. 
Works: ‘Boris Godunov*, v. 229, 
vi. 144. 

Movement, vi. 162. 

Mozart, Leopold, iii. 159. 

Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, i. 8, 12, 

14, xs, 21, 23-6, 34-7. 4*» 4$, 61, 
62, 64, 84, 99. 1*5. 131. *38-41. 


*53-5, *57, *59, *60, 165, 167, 168, 
*7*, 173, 177-205, 213, 219, ii. 2, 5, 
6, 10, 16, 18, 19, 27, 43, 44, 98, 122, 
129, 158, 161, 163, 164, 182, 191, 
204, 205, 208, iii. p. ix, 3, 7, 14, 
16-18, 20-63, 65, 66, 70, 71, 76, 80, 
85, 88, 91, 100, 101, 105, 112, 119, 
125, 140, iv. 4, 16, 21-30, 56, 59, 
64, 76, 91, *08, 130, 143, 156, v. 1, 

2, *3, 34, 42, 59, 83, 95, **4, **6, 
1 19, 120, 123, 142, 149, 152, 180, 
182, 186, 196, 199, 242, vi. 10, 12, 
13, 19-31, 67, 87, 133, 134, 137, 141, 
148, 157, 162. 

and Holst, unison and discord, v. 
255; and the pianoforte, iii. 29; 
and Rondo form, iii. 24, 41 ; Haydn 
and the Serenade, i. 13 1 ; his use of 
polyphony, iii. 22-3 ; neglect of, iii. 

3. See also Haydn. 

Works: ADAGIO in e for violin 
and orchestra (Koch, 261), iii. 
xcvn. 59-60; ANDANTE for flute 
with orchestra (Koch, 315), iii. 
xciii. 5 1-2. ARIAS : from ‘die ent- 
fOhrung* (‘martern aller arten*) 
(Koch, 384), vi. ccxxix. 24-27, iii. 
23; FROM ‘la CLEMENZA DI TITO* 
(Koch, 621), vi. ccxxx. 27-30. 
CONCERTOS: pianoforte in a 
major (Koch, 414), iii. lxxxvi. 27- 
30; pianoforte No. 15, in b flat 
major (Koch, 450), iii. lxxxvii. 30- 
3, iii. 26, 30, 36; pianoforte in g 
major (Koch, 453), iii. lxxxviii. 
33-6, iii. 30, 51; PIANOFORTE IN A 
major (Koch, 488), iii. lxxxix. 37- 
42 ; PIANOFORTE IN C MINOR (K6ch, 
491), iii. xc. 42-6, iii. 36, 37, 46, 
72; FLUTE IN G MAJOR (Koch, 3 1 3), 
iii. XCI. 47-8; FLUTE IN D MAJOR 
(Koch, 3 14), iii. xcii. 48-51, iii. 47 ; 
CLARINET IN A MAJOR (Koch, 622), 
iii. XCIV. 52-3 ; VIOLIN IN D MAJOR 
(Koch, 218), iii. xcv. 54-6, vi. 133; 
VIOLIN IN A MAJOR (Koch, 2 1 9), iii. 
XCVI. 56-9, iii. 26, 54; FLUTE AND 
harp (Koch, 299), iii. xcvm. 60-2; 

SERENADE IN D MAJOR, 1 . XXIX. 1 77- 
80, i. 13 1 ; PIANOFORTE SONATA IN 
F MAJOR FOR FOUR HANDS (Koch, 
497) (erroneously as Kdch 452 in 
Volume 1), i. xxxv, 198-201, iii. 
30, 41, iv. 64. OVERTURES: to 
‘der schauspieldirektor*, iv. CXL. 
21-2, i. 191; to ‘le nozzb di 
FIGARO*, iv. CXLI. 22-3, iv. 21, 1 32, 

(quoted) v. 134; to *cosi fan tutte*, 
vi. ccxxxi. 30-1, vi. 13, 148; to ‘die 
zauberflOte*, iv. cxlii. 23-5, iv. 

22 *, tO ‘LA CLEMENZA DI TITO*, iv. 
CXLIII. 25-6; ORCHESTRAL DANCES. 



1 82 INDEX 

iv. CXLIV. 26-7; MASONIC DIRGE 
(Koch, 477), iv. CXLV. 27-8. S YM - 
PHONIES : The Prague in D (Koch, 

504), vi. 133. Thematic Example, 
iii. 28 ; the Paris in D major (Koch, 

297), vL ccxxvm. 19-24, i. 181-3, 

219, vi. 10, 133; c. major (Koch 

338), i. XXX. 181-3; THE LINZ, IN C 
major, No. 36 (Koch, 425), i. xxxi. 
183-6, i. 24, iii. 31; B FLAT (Ktich, 

543), i. xxxii. 187-91, i. 186, iii. 

37, vi. 162; G minor (Koch, 550), 
i. xxxm. 191-5, i. 186, iii. 37; the 

JUPITER, IN C MAJOR (Koch, 551), i. 

xxxiv. 195-8, i. I25» 149 (153, Ex. 5), 

154, 186, 219, ii. 138, iii. 17, 35, 37, 

v. 151,152; ‘ Acis and Galatea’, v. 95 ; 

Aria Bufla (‘ Voi siete un po* tondo’), 

‘Un bacio di mano’ (Koch, 541), i. 

140. CONCERTOS : ‘The Corona- 
tion*, in D major (Koch, 537), vi. 

133 (quoted, Ex. iii. 28) ; in D minor 
(Koch, 466), iii. 44, 45, 65, vi. 133, 

141 ; Pianoforte in C major (Koch, 

503) , iii. 16-24; in C major (Koch, 

467), iii. 26; Violin in E flat, iii. 30, 

56, vi. 133, 134; in E flat (Koch, 

271), iii. 76; F major (Koch, 459), 
iii. 28, vi. 133; in G, iii. 30, 51 ; in 
C major (Koch, 415), iii. 28; in F 
major (Koch, 413), iii. 28; (Koch, 

504) , Thematic example, iii. 28; 
Pianoforte in B flat major (Koch, 

456), vi. 133; Concertante in Ser- 
enade (Koch, 320), i. 177; Con- 
certante for four wind instruments, 

vi. 134; Concertante symphony for 
Violin and Viola, vi. 134; ‘Die Ent- 
fuhrung* (Koch, 384) (see vi. 24-7), 
i. 203, iii. 50, iv. 23, v. 120; ‘Die 
Zauberfldte* (Koch, 620) (see iv. 23- 
5), i. 160, 195, 200, ii.43, 158, 161, 
163,^1.3,35,49,51,^.21,22,27,56, 

V. 120, vi. 13, 27, 28; Divertimento 
for two Clarinets and Orchestra, vi. 

134; ‘Don Giovanni* (Koch, 527), i. 

183, 190, ii. 180, iii. 34, iv. 24, 29, 

V. 1, vi. 10, 30; ‘Eine Kleine 
Nachtmusik*, vi. 87; ‘Figaro’, iii. 

27, 3 6, v. 1, 199, vi. 30; ‘Idomeneo’, 
vi. 13, 25 ; ‘Ode to St, Cecilia’s Day*, 
v. 95. QUARTETS : D major 
(Koch, 291), iii. 50; Pianoforte 
(Koch, 478 and 493), iii. 25, 41. 
QUINTETS : in G minor (Koch, 

516), i. 99; for Clarinet (Koch, 

f 8i), iii. 52; Requiem (Koch, 626), 

, 192, iii. 35, iv. 27, v. 59, 152, 180, 

182, 199; Rondo (Koch, 386), iii. 

36; ‘Rondo alia Turca* (K6ch, 331), 
iv. 59; Serenade (Koch, 320), i. 177, 

179; Serenade (Octet) in C minor 


(Koch, 388, 388 a) — Quintet 

(Koch, 406), i. 131. SONATAS : 
Violin in F (Koch, 377), i. 204; 
Violin in A major, iii. 25, 41 ; Trio, 
Pianoforte, Viola, and Clarinet 
(Koch, 498), iii. 52 (Koch, 575), 
Thematic example, v. 255. Mass 
( K6ch , 25;), ‘Credo Missa*, iii. 61. 
Munich, iv. 50. 

Museum, the British, v. 132, vi. 146. 
Music, and illiteracy tradition, iv. 98; 
for four hands, list of, i. 198, 199, 

iv. 64; in England, iv. 57. 

Musical Antiquarian Society, the, V. 8. 

‘ Musical Times*, the , iv. 2. 

‘ Musikalische Zeitung *, the, vi. 39. 

Naples, i. 222. 

Napoleon, i. 29, 30, it. 40, 41. See also 
Eroica. 

Nawr&til, ii. 71, 82. 

Neapolitan School, Handel and the, 

v. 88. 

Netherlands, the, see Holland. 

Niecks, Professor, ii. 57, vi. 41. 
Noodles, see Brahms on plagiarism. 
Norfolk, iv. 162. 

Norway, v. 112. 

Nottebohm, iii. 75, iv. 48. 

Novello (publishers), v. 61, 78. 

Oakeley, v. 45. 

Oblique motion, see Motion. 

Ochs, Siegfried, vi. 66. 

Orchestral Polyphony, ii. lxviii- 
lxxxiii. 156-212, ii. p. ix. 
Orchestration, Dvof&k, ii. 108; Joa- 
chim, iv. 133; Rfintgen, iv. 147; 
Strauss, iv. 155; and Bach, vi. 1; 
Operatic, v. 7. 

Osborne, J. A., vi. 147. 

Ostinato, Example, i. 71 (Ex. 10), 72 
(Ex. 13), ii. 22, 23, 179 (Ex. 5), iv. 
164, vi. 62, 64. 

Ovid, iv. 16, 17, 19, 21, v. 1 14. 
Oxford, i. 143, ii. 2, iv. 91. 

Oxford History of Music, v. 83, 92, 95. 

Paderewski, iv. 71. 

Paganini, iv. 77, vi. 147. 

Palestrina, i. 4, 119, 138, ii. 2, 42, 71, 
1*4, iv. 173, v. 4, 7, 8, 14, *9, 4*. 73. 
75. 109, 163, 165, 171-3, 178, 196, 
*97. *99. 238, *50, Vi. 57, 58, 91. 

and triple time, v. 4, 109, vi. 2; 
his cross rhythms, v. 226; his 
modes, i. 4, ii. 42; Phrygian mode, 
i. X19. 

Works : ‘Dum Complerentur*, 
v. 14; ‘Exaltabo te*, v. 13, 14; 
‘Missa dum Complerentur*, v. 14; 
Palestrina, Mass: Sanctorum meritis 9 



INDEX 183 


an error for Sacerdotes Domini , v. 
39; ‘Stabat Mater*, ii. 71, vi. 57, 58. 
Palgrave, v. 147. 

Paradox and Haydn, v. 1x6, 125, 126. 
Paraprosdokian, i. 155. 

Parasitism and musical culture, il. 71. 
Paris, i. 177, ii. 71, 132, iii. 48, 56, 60, 
1 14, iv. 75, 1 17, v. 103, 257, 272, 
vi. 18, 20, 21, 24, 1 12, 114; Con- 
servatoire of, vi. 53; Opera, vi. 112. 
Parratt, Sir Walter, ii. 200, v. 76. 
Parry, Sir Hubert, i. 1,2, 10, 67, 218, 
221, ii. 28, 53, 139, 142-5, iii. 170, 

iv. 1, 18, 143-7; v. 50, 175, 232-5, 
vi. 23, 139, 149. 

and English style, ii. 143; his 
method of analysis, i. 1, 2, vi. 139. 

Works l SYMPHONIC VARIATIONS 
FOR ORCHESTRA, ii. LXIII. 1 42-5, iii. 
170; OVERTURE TO AN UNWRITTEN 
TRAGEDY, iv. CLXXXIII. I43-7, iv. I ; 
‘at A SOLEMN MUSIC*, V. CCXVIII. 

232-5, v. 175, ‘Blest Pair of Sirens*, 
vi. 153; Magnificat in F, v. 50. 
Passacaglia, i. 115. 

Passing Notes, vi. 162. 

Pathos, in sonata form, ii. 19. 

Pedal, vi. 162; remarkable examples: 
Tonic, i. 134, v. 218-19; Domi- 
nant, i. 88; Inverted, i. 41 -{-ref. 
Dvofdk, ii. 92; Mediant, ii. 54, 
Ex. 8, 87, Ex. 4, vi. 64, Ex. 11. 
Peel, Sir Robert, \i. 39. 

Pepys, iii. 217, v. 128. 

Perfect concords, see Concord. 
Pergolese (Pergolesi), v. 9, vi. 58. 

Works : ‘Stabat Mater*, v. 9. 

Peri, vi. 14, 161. Works: ‘Euridice*, 
vi. 14. 

Peters (score of Haydn’s Creation), 

v. 138, 143. 

Pfitzner, Hans, i. 50. 

Philharmonic, the (London), i. 210, 

ii. 38, 146, vi. 12; (Berlin), ii. 171. 
Phrygian Mode, v. 101. See also 
Palestrina. 

Piatti, iv. 109. 

Planch^, iv. 58, 59, 102. 

Plato, iii. 95. 

Pleyel, vi. 134. See also Haydn. 

Poe, E. A., iv. 75. 

Polyphony, see Cathedral Polyphony, 
Bach and Orchestral Polyphony. 
Polytonality, vi. 163. See also Atona- 
lity. 

Pope, see Bruckner. 

Prague, iv. 40, vi. 28. 

Preparation, vi. 163. 

‘Pretty Tinkle*, see Mozart and the 
pianoforte. 

Prieger, Dr. (of Bonn), vi. 137. 

Prout, ii. 9 5, 124, iv. 23, 69, vi. 143. 


Puccini, iv. 156. 

Purcell, ii. 201, iii. 217, iv. 57, v. 40, 
41, 91, 119. 

his independence, v. 89. 

Works: ‘Dido*, v. 41. 

Pushkin, iv. 140, 142, v. 229-30. 

Quantz, v. 67. 

Queen’s Hall, the, iv. 143. 
Quintessence, of Brahms, i. 105, 125; 
of Bruckner, ii. 81 ; of Bach, v. 36; 
of Haydn, v. 127 ; of Sibelius, vi. 93. 

Rachmaninoff, iv. 100. Works : Pre- 
lude in C sharp, iv. 100. 

Racial Characteristics, ii. 106-7. 
Racine, vi. 19. 

Raff, vi. 5. 

Raimondi, ii. 182. 

Raleigh, Sir Walter, iv. 175. 

Rameau, vi. 16, 157. 

Range of Modulation, ii. 165. 
Rasoumovsky, Count, iii. 75. 

Ravel, i. 169, ii. 205, 210, iii. 139, 

v. 134, 250, 251. Works: Trio, 
i. 169, ii. 210. 

Ravogli, The Sisters, vi. 18, 19. 
Recapitulation, vi. 163. 

‘Recherchd*, used in the sense of 
polyphonic, ii. 173. 

Recitative, vi. 163; and language, v. 
1 19, 120; classical, not Wagnerian 
declamation, v. 12 1. 

Reger, Max, ii. 208, iv. 69, 166-9, 

vi. 65-73, 97, 100. Works: four 

TONE POEMS AFTER BOCHLIN, iv. 
CXCII. 166-9; SERENADE IN G MAJOR 
FOR ORCHESTRA, Op. 95, vi. CCXLII. 
65-73; Conzert im alten Stil, ii. 
208; Sinfonietta, vi. 66; Variations 
on a Theme by Adam Hiller, 
Op. ioo, vi. 69. 

Reicha, iii. 100. 

Reid, General, vi. 134. 

Reid Orchestra, the, ii. pp. xi, xii, vi. 
23, 105, 134, 141; Concerts, the, ii. 
p. xi, iv. 1, v. 61, vi. 55, 133, 136, 
141 ; Chair, the, vi. 134; library, the, 
v. 45- 

Resemblances, real and casual, i. 24, 
26, 27-8, 41, 92, 93, 104-5, m» 1 12, 
1 14, 128, 129, 140, 141, 148, 153, 
154, 175-6, 178-9, 196, 217, ii. 14, 
61, 83, 204, iii. 22, 29, 32, 50, 63, 
67, 69, 73, iv. 77, 94, 99 [ see ‘Cosl 
fan Tutte’], 102, 152, 163, 209, v. 
84, 89, 90-3, 99, 100, 101-3, 105, 
107, 108, 109, v. 130, 133, 151, 152, 
136, 140, i. 140. See also Top-knot 
exegesis. 

Resolution, vi. 163/ 164. 



184 INDEX 


Respighi, Ottorino, ill. 217-20. 
Works : 'concerto gregoriano', 

FOR VIOLIN, iii. CXXXIV. 2 I 7 ~ 20 . 
RETROSPECT AND CORRIGENDA, vi. 1 32- 

49. 

Richter, Hans, il. 70, iv. 128. 

Richter, Jean Paul, ii. 102. 

Riemann, vi. 66; his Dictionary of 
Music, vi. 67. 

Ries, ii. 2, iii. 46. 

Rimsky- Korsakov, i. 170, iii. 217, iv. 
140-3, v. 229, vi. 20, 144. Works : 
‘Conte F6erique', iv. clxxxii. 140-3. 
Ritter, iv. 155. 

Robinson, P. (Handel and his Orbit), 

v. 91, zoi. 

Rochlitz, iv. 50, vi. 137. 

Rockstro, W. S., i. 222, v. 95, 96, 102. 
Rome, v. 14, 133, 242. 

Rdntgen, Julius, ii. 1 10-14, 202-4, 

208, iii. 175, iv. 147-9, vi. 76, 136. 
See also Orchestration. 

Works : triple concerto in b 
FLAT, ii. LXXX. 202-4, 208; OLD 
netherland suite, iv. CLXXXIV. 
147-9; SYMPHONY IN F MINOR, ii. 
lv. 1 10-14; Azzopardi Variations, 
iii. 175. 

Root, vi. 164. 

Rore, Cipriano da (de), v. 6, 7. 
Rossetti, v. 243, 245. 

Rossini, i. 186, 193, ii. 160, iii. 49, 
181, iv. 54, v. 196, 198, 200, 207, 

209. 

Rossini-fever, ii. 160; Rossinian 
Operas, v. 123. Works: Overtures, 
‘Barbiere', i. 193, v. 196; ‘William 
Tell*, v. 196; ‘Otello', v. 209. 
Rousseau, Jean -Jacques, vi. 16. 
Rousseau's Dictionary, vi. 159. 
Rubinstein, Anton, ii. 46, iii. 180, 

vi. 143. Works : Violin Sonata, 
iii. 180. 

Rubinstein, Joseph, ii. 46. 

Rubinstein, Nicholas, ii. 46. 
Runciman, J. F., of the Saturday 
Review , vi. no. 

Ruskin, ii. 40, iii. 170, 225, vi. 73, 74. 
Russia, iii. 217, iv. 143. 

Rust, Wilhelm, ii. 196. 

Sacchini, iv. 78, 89. 

St. James's Hall, the, iv. 109, 143, V. 
61. 

Saint- Sagns, i. 223, iii. 156, 176, 189- 
94, 197, 200, iv. 18-21, 61, vi. 44. 

Works : FOURTH pianoforte con- 
certo in c minor. Op. 44, iii. cxxiv. 

189-92; SYMPHONIC POEM, ‘ PHAE- 
TON*, iv. cxxxix. 19-21, i. 2, iv. 18; 

VIOLONCELLO CONCERTO IN A MINOR, 

Op. 33, iii. cxxv. 192-4, 197; ‘L© 


Rouet d’Omphale\ I. 2; Second 
Pianoforte Concerto, G minor, i. 
223; Third Symphony, iii. 190, 
193; Violin Concerto in B minor, 
iii. 156, 193; Violoncello Sonata, C 
minor, iii. 193. 

Saintsbury, Professor, iii. 49, iv. 174. 
Salieri, iv. 64. 

Salomon, i. 164. 

Salzburg, i. 177, 191, iii. 56. 
Sammartini, vi. 10. 

Sand, see Sugar. 

Saturday Review , the, vi. no. 
Scarlatti, Alessandro, iii. 7-12. 
Scarlatti, Domenico, i. 8, ii. 146, iv. 

103, v. 106; the manner of, ii. 146. 
Schiller, ii. 1, 35-9, 41, 42, 136, iii. 

18 1, v. 229. 

Schindler, i. 46, 47, 51; his ‘Yellow- 
hammer', i. 47, 51. 

Schmidt, Franz, iii. 216-17. Works: 

VARIATIONS ON A THEME OF BEET- 
HOVEN’S FOR PIANOFORTE WITH 
ORCHESTRA, iii. CXXXIII. 216-17. 

Schopenhauer, i. 124. 

Schubert, i. 2, 13, 25-8, 61, 138, 142, 
198, 199, 201-18, ii. 72, 90, 94, 100, 

104, 105, 108, 123, 139, 148. 160, 

iii. 7i, 148, 155, iv. 1, 26, 55, 63-73, 
no, v. 122, 140, 142, 159, 194-5, 
200, 248, vi. 90, 138, 160. See also 
Balance of Tone, Dvof&k. 

OBITER DICTA, i. XXXVI. 201-2 J A 
CENTENARY CONCERT, iv. CLVII. 63- 

5; and Italian style, i. 28, 208; and 
counterpoint, iv. 73. 

Works : ‘erlkOnig’, v. ccxi. 194- 
5, vi. 149; entr'acte in b minor 

AND BALLET IN G MAJOR FROM ‘ROSA- 
MUNDE' MARCH IN E MAJOR, iv. CLX. 
69-70; FANTASIA (THE WANDERER), 
ARRANGED FOR PIANOFORTE AND OR- 
CHESTRA BY LISZT, iv. CLXI. 7O-3. 

O VERTURES : ‘the faithful sen- 
tinel', iv. clix. 67-8, i. 203, iv. 65 ; 
‘die weiberverschwOrung' (The 
Conspiracy of Wives), iv. CLViiia, 
65-7, iv. 70; POLONAISE IN F MAJOR, 

iv. clviii*, 67. SYMPHONIES: 

No. 5, IN B FLAT, 1 . XXXVII. 203-5; 
No. 7 , IN C MAJOR, i. XXXVIII. 205- 
li; IN C MAJOR, ORCHESTRATED BY 
JOACHIM FROM THE GRAND DUO, Op. 
140, i. xl. 215-18 (iv. CLVIII C, 
reference to i. xl), i. 26-8, 67, 
70, 71 ; No. 8, IN B MINOR, THE UN- 
FINISHED, i. xxxix. 211-15, iii. 155; 
‘Die Allmacht', . Op. 79, v. 140; 
Du Bist die Ruh, Op. 59, ii. 72; 
Drei-Mdderl-Haus, iv. 65; First 
Mass in F, i. 203, iv. 67; ‘Gretchen 
am Spinnrade', Op. 2, v. 1 59 ; Over- 



INDEX 


ture, ‘Die Zwillingsbriider’, iv. 66; 
Quartet in D minor, No. 14, iv# 1 10; 
Quartet in G major, vi. 90; ‘Die 
Schone Miillerin, iv. 68. 

Schumann, I. 24-6, 28, 38, 125, 138, 
199, ii. 17, 45-62, 66, 84, 85, 87, 
hi, 1 19, 139, 142, iii- 8, 32, 86, 87, 
103, 105, 1 17, 170, 177, 182-9, 200, 
an, iv. 11, 109-15, 117, 151, 162, 

v. 199, vi. 4, 5, 22, 40-5, 138, 143, 
155. See also Scoring. 

on Chopin, iii. 103. 

Works : ‘CARNAVAL*, FOR PIANO- 
FORTE solo, Op. 9 (Scenes Mi- 
gnonnes sur quatre notes), iv. clxx. 
109-12, iii. 87, iv. 162; INTRODUC- 
TION AND ALLEGRO APPASSIONATO 
FOR PIANOFORTE WITH ORCHESTRA, 
Op. 92, iii. CXXIII. 188-9 ; OVERTURE, 
SCHERZO AND FINALE, Op. 52, vi. 
CCXXXV. 4O-4, Vi. 138; OVERTURE TO 
BYRON’S ‘MANFRED’, Op. 1 1 5, iv. 
CLXXI. 1 1 2-1 5; PIANOFORTE CON- 
CERTO in a minor, Op. 54, Hi. CXXI. 
182-4; SYMPHONY IN B FLAT MAJOR, 

No. i, Op. 38, ii. xliv. 45-52, ii. 57, 

Vi. 40; SYMPHONY IN E FLAT MAJOR, 

No. 3, Op. 97, ii. xlv. 53-6, ii. 87; 

SYMPHONY IN D MINOR, No. 4, 

Op. 120, ii. xlvi. 56-62, i. 26, 28, 
ii. 53, iv. 1 17, vi. 40; VIOLONCELLO 
CONCERTO IN A MINOR, Op. 1 29, iii. 
CXXII. 184-7; Concerto for four 
horns, vi. 138; ‘Etudes Sym- 
phoniques*, Op. 13, ii. 144, iv. 151 ; 
Kreisleriana, Op. 16, ii. 51; Noc- 
turne in E flat, iv. iii; ‘Phantasie- 
stttcke’, vi. 43; Quintet, vi. 22; 
Symphony in C major, vi. 138; 
Symphony No. 2, vi. 40, 44. 
Schumann, Clara, i. 84, ii. 57, iii. 80, 
iv. 109, no, vi. 74. 

SchUtz, i. 138, v. 37, 94, 96. 
Schweitzer, v. 23, 3°, 33, 34, 37, 4*, 
43, 48, 149, vi. 9. 

Scoring, Beethoven and Haydn com- 
pared, i. 144; Schumann’s, clumsi- 
ness of, ii. 47, and successful, iii. 
188; Wagner’s, iv. 125. 

Scott, Cyril, iii. 204. 

Scott, Miss Marion, vi. 135. 

Scott, Sir Walter, vi. 132. 

Seiffert, Dr. Max, ii. 186, 189, 200. 
Sequence, vi. 164. 

Shakespeare, i. 41, 197, 202, ii. 49, 
151, 152, iv. 4, 5, 7, 1 1, 43-6, 59, 75, 
83, 86, 89, 94, 101-5, v. 23, 84, 91, 
209, 210, vi. 20, 46, 55, 104, 109, 
1 19, 121, 136, 158; and George III, 

vi. 109. 

Shaw, G. B., ii. 102, iv. 151. 

Shelley, ii* 114. 


185 

Sheridan, Mrs. Richard Brinsley, v. 
119. 

Sherlock Holmes, see Holmes. 
Sibelius, ii. 121-9, iii. 211-15, vi. 80, 
89-95, 1 17, 145; and Wagnerian 
music-drama, ii. 12 1-2. 

Works : concerto for violin, 
Op. 47, iii. CXXXII. 211-15; SYM- 
PHONY in c major, No. 3, Op. 52, 

ii. LVII. 121-5, iii. 215; SYMPHONY 
IN E FLAT MAJOR, No. 5, Op. 82, U. 
LV1II. 125-9, vi. 80; SYMPHONY IN 
c major, No. 7, Op. 105, vi. CCXLVI. 
89-92; ‘tapiola*, symphonic poem, 

FOR FULL ORCHESTRA, Op. 1 12, vL 
CCXLVII. 93-5. 

Silver Age, see Golden Age. 

Similar motion, see Motion. 

Simrock, ii. 101, iv. 133. 

Slough, see Herschel and Haydn. 
Smetana, iv. 132. Works : ‘the bar- 
tered BRIDE’, OVERTURE, iv. CLXXVIII. 

132. 

Smyth, Dame Ethel, iv. 165, v. 42, 
235-42; and Palestrina, v. 238. 
Works : mass in d, v. ccxix. 235-42, 
v. 42. 

Sneeze, see Cherubini and Beethoven. 
Somervell, Sir Arthur, iii. 158-64, 
169-73. Works: concerto in g 
minor for violin and orchestra, 

iii. cxiv. 1 58-64; ‘normandy’, sym- 
phonic variations for pianoforte 

WITH ORCHESTRA, Hi. CXVII. 169-73. 
Sonata, progress of, as an art-form, v. 
12-13. 

Spencer, Herbert, iv. 174, vi. 144. 
Speyer, Edward, ii. 17 1; possessor of 
Beethoven, Op. 1 12, autograph MS., 
v. 194. 

Spinoza, v. 18, 235. 

Spitta, v. 59. 

Spohr, i. 37, 44, 140, 157, ii. 158, iii. 
38, 71, 101, 176-7, 194, iv. 61, 109, 
1 15, 173, vi. 12, 148. Works: scena 

CANTANTE FOR VIOLIN WITH OR- 
CHESTRA, iii. cxix. 176-7; ‘Bacarolle 
and Scherzo*, iv. 109; ‘Gesangszene*, 
Concerto, iv. 61; Ninth Concerto, 
ii. 158 (Ex. ic). 

Spontini, iv. 115, 122, vi. 116. 
S.P.C.C.A.,5*«‘Mendelssohn-baiting\ 
Stanford, Sir Charles, i. 2, ii. 14, 26, 
38, 42, 142, iii* 52, *°8, 197-200, 
v. no, vi. no, 147, 149; on Saint- 
Saens, i. 2. Works : clarinet con- 
certo in one movement, Op. 80, iii* 
cxxvii. 197-200. 

‘Star’, The, vi. no. 

Starling, Mozart’s, see Pianoforte Con- 
certo in G major, iii. 36. 

| Steinbach, ii. 47, vi. 57, 84. 



i 86 INDEX 


Stevenson, R. L., i. 38, il. p. x, vi. 136. 
Stradella, v. 90-3, 99, 100, 102, 105, 
hi, 1 13; his Serenata and Handel, 
v. 90-3, 100, 105, 107, hi. Works : 
‘Piet h Signore’, v. 90. 

Strangways, Fox, Hi. 54, 55, v. 2, 120. 
Strauss, Richard, i. 190, ii. 11, Hi. 3, 
22, 41, 70, 206-9, iv. 6, 83, 86, 154- 
8, v. 197, vi. 30, 66, 75, 83, 91, i.39, 
140, 141, 148; his musical aesthetics, 
V. 250. See also Orchestration. 

Works : PARERGON TO THE ‘SIN- 
FONIA DOMESTICA* FOR PIANOFORTE 
WITH ORCHESTRA, Op. 73 , Hi. CXXX. 
206-9, vi. 66; TONE-POEM, ‘DON 
juan* (after Nicholas Lenau), Op. 
20, iv. clxxxvii. 154-8 ; ‘Also sprach 
Zarathustra*, Hi. 22; ‘Ein Helden- 
leben’, iv. 6, vi. 66, 83, 84; ‘Death 
and Transfiguration*, Op. 24, iv. 
154; ‘Till Eulenspieger,iii.4i ;‘Tod 
und Vcrkiarung’, iv. 154; Tone- 
poem, ‘Macbeth’, Op. 23, iv. 154. 
Stringendo, vi. 164. 

Subdominant, i. 6-7. 

Subject, vi. 164. 

Sugar, see Grocer. 

Sullivan, Sir Arthur, i. 66. See also 
Bassoon Jokes; compared with 
Haydn, v. 133-4- 
Suspensions, vi. 165. 

Sweelinck, i. 138. 

Swieten, Baron von, v. 115, 118, 122, 
138, 146-8, 150, 152, 154-7, 159- 
Swift, vi. 105. 

Swinburne, v. 138. 

Talich, Vaclav, i. 22. 

Tallis, v. 7. 

Tastenbrecher, Herr Hammerfaust, 
iv. no. 

Tchaikovsky, ii. 46, 72, 84-9, 145, 
151, iii. 209, iv. 26, 144, vi. 58-65, 
143. Works : PATHETIC SYMPHONY 
IN B MINOR, No. 6, Op. 74, ii. L. 
84-9, ii. 72, 15 1, iv. 144, vi. 59, 
60, 62, 65; SYMPHONY IN E MINOR, 

No. 5, Op. 64, vi. ccxli. 58-65; 
Trio, Hi. 209. 

Technical Terms, an explanation, i. 

2-18. See also vi, Glossary. 
Telemann, ii. 185. 

Temperament, vi. 165-6. 

Tempo, vi. 166. 

Tennyson, i. 104, v. 135, 147. 

Terry, Dr. Sanford, v. 23, 63, 68, 78. 
Thalberg, vi. 32. 

Theme, vi. 166. 

Thibaut, Schumann’s friend, on 
Palestrina, v. 199. 

Thinking, disclaimed by future Chief 
Magistrates [ii. p. xii], iv. 153. 


Thomson, George (publisher), vL 4. 
Thomson, James, v. 147-60. 

Thumb, General Tom, i. 62. 

Time, vi. 166-7. 

Tolstoi, vi. 57. 

Top-knot exegesis, i. 141 ; othet 
examples, i. 92, ii. 14, iv. 38, 172, 
v. 84. 

Transformation of themes, Glazou- 
nov’s facility with, Hi. 209. 
Translations, v. 78, 79, 81, vi. 19. 
Trevelyan, Robert Calverley (dedica- 
tion to), i. p. vi, ii. 8. 

Triad, vi. 167. 

Triangle, i. 121, ii. 49, 139. See also 
Turkish Music. 

Triple time (and Sibelius), iii. 215. 

See also Palestrina. 

Troutbeck, v. 227. 

Trumpet, primitive characters em- 
phasized, i. 54, ii. 38; Bach’s 
Clarino, ii. 176; humorous imita- 
tions of trumpets, iii. 54, vi. 3. 
Tschopsztiksy, school of pianoforte 
playing, vi. 133. 

Tub-practise, i (dedication), p. vi, 
ii. 170. 

Turgenev, iv. 46. 

‘Turkish music*, i. 159, ii. [40], 45, 
170, iv. 59; equivalent to ‘military 
music*, ii. 40, 45. Used as such for 
music of the spheres in Beethoven's 
Ninth Symphony , ii. 169-70. 
Turner, vi. 51, 83. 

Twain, Mark, v. 155. 

Two-part writing (Brahms’s test of 
mastery), ii. 178, iv. 6. 

Unaccompanied ‘motet*, v. 74. 

Urio, Padre Francesco, his Te Deum 
and Handel, v. 91, 102, 106, 113. 

Variation, vi. 167. 

Variations, unsuitable themes for, ii. 
144. 

Vaughan Williams, Ralph, ii. p. xi, 
129-33, 205-8, iv. 162, 164, 165. 

Works : PASTORAL SYMPHONY, H. 
lix. 129-33; ‘concerto accadem- 

ICO*, IN D MINOR FOR VIOLIN, H. 
LXXXI. 205-8; OVERTURE TO ‘THE 

wasps’, iv. cxci. 164-5; incidental 
music to ‘The Wasps’, ii, p. xi. 
Verdi, i. 150, 195, 222, ii. 71, iv. 90, 
v. 12, 146, 195-21 1, vi. 57-8; and 
Haydn, i. 150; his fundamental 
tempo for church music, v. 202 ; his 
only musical idiom, v. 198. 

Works : REQUIEM IN MEMORY OF 
MANZONI, V. CCXII. 195-209, i. 222 ; 
SCENA FROM ACT III OF ‘OTELLO* (THE 

willow song), v. ccxiii. 2og-zx; 



INDEX 


187 


‘star AT MATER* TOR CHORUS AND 
orchestra, vi. ccxl. 57—8 ; ‘Aida’, 

v. 198, 209; ‘Falstaff’, i. 195, v. 
146, 197, 209; ‘Otello*, v. 197, 209 ; 
‘Rigoletto’, v. 12, 196; ‘Te Deum’, 

vi. 57; ‘II Trovatore*, v. 196, 204, 
209, vi. 57; ‘La Traviata*, v. 196. 

Vergil, v. 132, 133. 

Verne, Jules, iv. 75. See also Berlioz. 
Victoria, Luis de, i. 138. 

Vienna, i. 29, 185, 191, ii. 1, 69, 156, 
160, iii. 148, iv. 16, 26, 27, v. 23, 
140, vi. 28 ; Conservatonum, vi. 100. 
Vienna Opera, v. 1 ; House, vi. 76. 
Viennese Rococco, i. 168, 169. 

Viotti, iii. 38. Works: a minor violin 
concerto, vi. 146. 

Vivaldi, ii. 185. 

‘Vocal-Polyphony*, v. 23. 

Vogler, Abt, iii. 207, iv. 54. 
Volkmann, Dr. Hans, iii, p. ix. 
Voormolen, A., iv. 170-2. Works: 
overture, ‘baron hop*, iv. cxciv. 
170-2. 

Wagner, Frau, iv. 128. 

Wagner, Richard, i. 39, 65, 68, 121, 
176, 190, 193, ii. 7, 9-i2, 15, 24, 32, 
52, 65, 69-72, 81-3, 106, no, 146, 
148, 171, iq 1 , iii. 107, 108, 114,203, 

iv. 28, 43-6, si, 56, 59, 70-2, 89, 
90, 103, 104, 115-32, 143, 155, 156, 

v. 2, 8, 1 16, 120, 135, 185, 196, 227, 

vi. 13, 15, 16, 18, 45, 51, 59, 77, 91, 
92, 102-31, 138, 144, 151, 168; his 
discords, vi. 153. 

WAGNER IN THE CONCERT ROOM, vi. 

ecu. 102-14. 

Works: A ‘FAUST* OVERTURE, iv. 
clxxiii. 117-22, ii. 106, vi. 1 13; 
INTRODUCTION TO ‘TRISTAN AND 
ISOLDE’, iv. CLXXV. 124-6, iv. IO4; 
OVERTURE, ‘DER FLIEGENDE HOL- 
LANDER*, iv. CLxxii. 1 15-17, vi. 51, 
92 , 1 13; ‘PARSIFAL*, ACT. Ill, vi. 
CCXLIV. 1 1 9-31; PRELUDE ‘KAISER- 
MARSCH*, Vi. CCLIII. 116-19; vi. 113, 
13 8, 139; PRELUDE TO ACT III, TANN- 
HAUSER (TANNHAUSER’S PILGRIMAGE) 
IN THE ORIGINAL VERSION, iv. CLXXIV. 
122 - 4 ; PRELUDE TO THE ‘MASTER 
SINGERS*, iv. CLXXVII. i26-8,vi. 1 1 3; 
‘SIEGFRIED IDYLL*, iv. CLXXVII. 128- 
32 , ‘VENUSBERG* MUSIC, Vi. CCLII. 
114-16, vi. 1 12, ‘Der fliegende 
Hollander*, iv. 51, 117; ‘Gottei- 
dammerung*, ii. 70, v. 52, vi. 108, 
109; ‘Die Meistersinger’, i. 121, 
175, 70. iii.* 125, iv. 54, 154, vi. 

12 1 ; ‘Liebestod*, vi. 103, 104; 
‘Lohengrin’, iv. 54, 59, 115, 118, 
119, v« 196, vi. I2i; ‘Das Rhein- 


gold’, iv. 117; ‘Rienzi*, iv. 90, 115, 
‘Siegfried*, i. 121, iv. 128, 129, vi. 
105, 107, 108; ‘Parsifal’, iv. 124, v. 
244, vi. 110, 121, 168; ‘Tann- 
hauser*, i. 133, iii. 107, 1 14, 212, iv. 

115, 116, 120, v. 196, vi. 1 12, 114, 

116, 121, 150; ‘Tristan and Isolde’, 
iii. 125, iv. 45, 88, v. 116, 118, vi. 
103, 120, 121, 168; ‘Die Walkure*, 

i. 124, vi. 106, 108; ‘Walkurenntt’, 

ii. 71, vi. 105-8; ‘Waldweben’, ii. 
71, vi. 105, 107, 108, no; list of 
works for a ‘legitimate* Wagner 
concert without \01ces, vi. in. 

Wagner, Siegfried, iv. 128-9. 
Wagnerian Leit-motiv, i. 39, ii. 8i, 

iii. 153, 203, iv. 54, 70; and the 
Paris Opera, vi. 112. See also 
Balance of Tone, Scoring. 

Walford Davies, see Davies, Sir Wal- 
ford. 

Walker, Dr. Ernest, i. 24, iv. 162-4. 
Works: FANTASIA VARIATIONS ON A 
NORFOLK FOLK-SONG, Op. 45, iv. 

cxc. 162-4. 

Walton, William, iii. 220-6. Works: 
VIOLA CONCERTO IN A MINOR, iii. 
CXXXV. 220 - 6 . 

Weber, i. 34, 59, ii. 5, 102, 160, iii. 27, 
101, iv. 26, 29, 50-63, 68, 69, 102, 
122, 15 1, v. 142, vi. 32, 59, 75, 84, 
109; and Hollywood, iv. 62; on 
Beethoven, i. 34, 59, vi. 75. 

Works: conzertstCck in f minor 

FOR PIANOFORTE WITH ORCHESTRA, 

Op. 79, iv. clvi. 61-3, iii. 27. 
OVERTURES: ‘the ruler of thl 
SPIRITS*, iv. CLII. 50-2; ‘DER FREI 
schOtz*, iv. cliii. 52-4; ‘eury- 
anthe’, iv. cliv. 54-7, 59, 65, 68, 
69; ‘oberon*, iv. clv. 57-60, i. 159, 

iv. 102, 151; ‘Der Freischutz*, ii. 
93, iv. 29, 54, 61 ; Sonata in A flat 
No. 2, ii. 102. 

Weelkes, v. 3-12, 15, vi. 148; and Ice- 
land, v. 10; a great contrapuntist, 
V. 5- 

Works ; four madrigals, v. cxcvii. 
3-12; First set of Madrigals, v. 7; 
‘Three Virgin Nymphs*, vi. 148. 
Weimar, iii. 107. 

Weimar Group, v. 230. 

Weingartner, i. 31, 32, 38, 41, 51, ii. 
12, 14, 15, 24, 5L 58, 71, I5L 170. 
171, 178, iv. 31, 47, 140, vi. 112. 
Weisse, Dr. Sophie, v. 68. 
Weissnichtwo, see Tastenbrecher. 
West, Rebecca, iv. 155. 

Whitman, Walt, ii. 9. 

Whole Tone Scale, vi. 167-8. 
Whymper, Edward, ii. 169. 

Widor, v. 33, SO, 54- 



INDEX 


188 

Wieck, ii. 45, 

Wieck, Clara, see Schumann, Clara. 
Wilbyc, v. 7; and Palestrina, v. 12-19. 

Works'. FOUR SIXTEENTH-CENTURY 
MOTETS, V. CXCVIII. 1 2-1 9 . 

Wilde, Oscar, iv. 74. 

Wilhelmj, August, ii. 177, 178, vi. 1 1 1. 
Wilm, Wilm, iv. 176. 

Wilson, Steuart, v. 2, 120. 

Windsor (St. George’s Chapel), v. 76. 


Witchery, see Mendelssohn. 
Wittgenstein, Paul, ill. 206, 216. 
Wordsworth, ii. 27, 71, 72, 129, iil.40. 
Worsley, Walter, vi. 134. 

Wotton, Tom, iv. 100. 

Zador, vi. 100-2. Works: rondo for 

ORCHESTRA, vi. CCL. IOO- 2 . 

Zippel, Dr. Otto (his critical edition of 
‘The Seasons’), v. 147. 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRJFtfftJ^T^THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD 
BY VIVIAN TO THE UNIVERSITY 




