Hey everyone,
thank you very much for coming. Maybe
I'll start with simple questions.
&gt;&gt; Can everyone hear me?
&gt;&gt; Great. Okay, raise your hand if you ever
use bull from Alpha and it helped to
solve your problem.
&gt;&gt; That's good.
&gt;&gt; Amazing.
Well, today you got a unique opportunity
to say thank you to the person who made
it possible. Our speaker today graduated
and obtained also make art fellowship
sometimes called as a as a scholarship
for geniuses at the age 21 work on
numerous theories and last and not least
but not least he also is CEO and founder
of wolf from Alpha without further ado
Steve
[applause]
thank you well okay I I will talk a bit
about science Maybe I'll talk a little
bit about the story of how things like
Wolf and Alpha came to be. Um, but
there's quite a bit of science I wanted
to talk about. I've I've had the kind of
interesting life trajectory of having
alternated between doing technology
development and doing basic science so
far about five times in my life. And
it's kind of kind of nice because you do
technology development, you build tools
that let you do a bunch of science. you
do science gives you ideas and
discoveries that let you do more
technology. So I could uh well let let
me maybe I'll tell the little bit of the
life story. So I grew up in England as
you can perhaps still tell from my
accent and uh in the in the 1960s the
kind of the big thing that was exciting
was space and spacecraft and things like
that. So I was really interested in
those when I was a younger kid. And then
from that I got interested well how
would you design spacecraft etc. And
from that by about the time I was 11
years old or so uh I got interested in
uh physics and so I started reading
books about physics and so on. Actually
I could show you let me show you one
example. I realize um the uh
um I sort of discovered that you could
um just uh read books and learn stuff.
The web didn't exist obviously at that
time. I realized that I have a picture
of a particular book that I that I read
which will which will come back later.
This was a anybody I don't know if this
book still exists but that was a college
physics textbook that I I realized that
I actually was very efficient to wrote
my name in these things uh and the date
and that was when I was 12 years old.
Um, and uh, so I actually was very
interested in the in kind of what the
front cover of that book shows, which is
something that is kind of a physics
phenomenon of this collection of
idealized gas molecules kind of start in
a sort of ordered way on one side of the
box and in the course of time they kind
of get get more random. And I was really
interested in why that happened. And uh
uh I actually then
uh happened to have access to a computer
and I thought I will reproduce this
picture that's on the cover of this this
book. This is the computer that I had
access to. Um it's a uh a pretty
non-modern thing programmed with paper
tape um and so on. So I I tried to write
a program for this that would um would
reproduce that picture. I failed to do
that at the time although later on I
realized that I'd actually discovered
something more interesting but didn't
know it yet. Anyway then mid 1970s
um was a time when particle physics was
really an exciting state stage kind of
quantum field theory had just started to
work for a bunch of purposes and lots
and lots of things were getting
discovered and the much younger me um
was was into those kinds of things and
started trying to figure things out
about that. I kind of uh u and ended up
starting to write papers and things
about about particle physics. Uh later
also cosmology which at the time was
sort of a separate branch of physics
from from particle physics. Anyway, so
uh that got me sort of I got to do a
bunch of particle physics. So been my
kind of goal was to sort of be a
physicist when I was growing up. So by
the time I was about 20 years old, I was
sort of a a young faculty member doing
physics and um but the thing that had
happened was I guess I had had sort of
the secret weapon of using computers to
figure out things in physics and
particularly figuring out things like
algebraic computation and uh I I never
really understood why other people doing
theoretical physics didn't use those
tools. One of the sort of learnings from
my life is always try to use the best
tools you can because it will give you
the most leverage and let you get the
furthest. But in any case, at that time
I was kind of building up my own tools
using other people's tools and so on.
And 1979 I kind of I think I was the
world's largest user of things like
computer algebra and so on and I kind of
you know got exceeded what was what was
possible with systems existed at the
time. So then I decided, okay, I'm going
to build my own system for doing
mathematical computation. And so I I
sort of took a uh took kind of a clue
from what I had done in physics and
said, okay, you're going to build this
thing that's for doing computation. Let
me understand kind of the the primitive
elements of what what is involved in
computation. At the time, I remember
going to the I was at Caltech at that
time, going to the Caltech bookstore and
buying sort of all the books about
computer science that existed at the
time, which was maybe a foot and a half
of of of books. But um uh the um so I
kind of was was interested in sort of
figuring out what was the essence of
what one had to do in computation and
building that into a system. I built
system called SMP which um uh was sort
of my first big effort in a large
computer system that came out in 1981
and then in sort of a different branch
of my life I started my first company.
Um then I went back to kind of doing
doing basic science and um uh I was
interested in sort of what seemed like a
very straightforward basic science basic
basic science question which is uh how
does it come to be that there are
complicated things in the world? How
does how do complex things arise from
natural processes? And I thought you
know I know all this fancy mathematical
physics. I'm trying to explain the shape
of a snowflake or something. this will
be straightforward. I thought it wasn't.
So then I thought, well, what can I do
that is sort of an alternative to using
things like mathematical equations and
trying to work out things with
mathematical equations. And so I
thought, well, what what is the
foundational thing that one is doing
when one makes a theory for things?
One's basically specifying rules for how
things should work and then one seeing
the consequences of those rules. So I
started thinking, well, what what kinds
of rules? how can we make sort of
general kinds of rules and the obvious
thing is use the kinds of rules that are
embodied in programs. So I started
thinking well okay what can can we write
programs that will reproduce what
happens in the natural world and uh then
the next question was well you know the
programs we're used to writing are big
complicated things that are set up for
some particular purpose we have in mind
but what about programs in the wild what
about programs which are just sort of
picked at random enumerated very simple
programs what do such programs typically
do and so that got me into asking that
question and so I started looking at
very simple programs. Here's an example
of of one. This is a creature called the
cellular automaton where the idea is
there's a there's a line of cells. Each
one is either black or white. And in a
series of steps, you go down the page of
figuring out the color of a new cell
based on the color of the cell above it
and to its left and right according to
that little rule at the bottom there.
So, you know, what happens here is
something very straightforward. You have
a a very simple rule. you have a pattern
which starts off in one black cell and
you get to uh very simple behavior. So
you might think that's what's always
going to happen. Okay, here's another
example, slightly different rule,
slightly more complicated pattern of
behavior. Keep going a little while
longer, you'll see something like this
where you get a nice pattern that will
keep going and make it make this whole
nested pattern. But then the question
is, well, is is that all that can
happen? Well, then the thing to do is do
a computer experiment. Just find out
what happens with all possible rules of
this type. So, that's an easy thing to
do. Actually, I should I should just do
it in well, let me just show it.
Otherwise, I could just use Wolf from
language and just type type it in and do
it in real time. Maybe we'll do some of
that later. Um, so anyway, this is this
is what one finds. This is just looking
at each each picture here is a different
possible underlying rule. So they're in
a sense different artificial physicses
and the question is what do they all do?
So many of them do very simple things
but my all-time favorite science
discovery is the one numbered 30 there
rule 30 and if you look at what it does
has a very simple uh kind of rule for
how it's constructed but yet you started
off in just one black cell it makes this
pattern that seems kind of complicated.
When I first saw this I kind of thought
well if I run it long enough it will
resolve. I can use some fancy method
from statistics or or cryptography or
reormalization group or whatever else to
kind of show that this this pattern
that's being made is really simple
because after all it came from the
simple rule. But actually that isn't
really how it works. And there's the the
longer version of that same pattern. You
can see a certain amount of regularity
over on the left. Um but something like
the center column of cells here is for
all practical purposes completely
random. It's actually the random uh we
we used it as a random sequence
generator in Morphe language and
Mathematica for for many years. But so
what are we seeing here? It's kind of a
a very for me at least it was a very
intuitionbreaking
thing to discover because even though
the rule is simple, the behavior is very
complicated. It's not what we're used to
from something like engineering where we
say we want to make a complicated thing,
we have to kind of set things up with
very complicated rules and so on. And
sort of I I my kind of uh uh expectation
was this is sort of the secret that
nature ends up using over and over again
to go from even very simple underlying
rules to very complicated overall
behavior. So you can kind of ask
questions about um what what can you
conclude from this? Why does this
happen? What can you conclude from it?
And so on you can keep looking around
sort of the computational universe and
you'll find all kinds of different
complicated behavior uh that that
arises. So one thing that's sort of a a
fundamental feature of this kind of
behavior is the following thing. So
let's say you know in in doing
traditional mathematical science a
typical kind of thing to say is oh I got
the equations for the two-body problem.
Let's say okay given those equations I
can work out what will happen with this
two-body system at any point in the
future. I just fill in the the value of
my time parameter and I know the answer.
And so you might think, well, you know,
this is a this is some pattern that
we're seeing produced here, but if I
just was smart enough, I could figure
out what's going to happen after a
billion steps, let's say. Well, turns
out that that's not something you can
do. It turns out that although you can
work out what will happen after a
billion steps with this particular rule
by just running a billion steps. Oops,
the decoder is not receiving right. What
do we do here?
It's back. Okay. The um the uh
um so you know you can you can figure
out what's going to happen after a
billion steps where it's running a
billion steps and seeing what happens.
The question is can you jump ahead? Can
you find some clever technique that
allows you to jump ahead and see what
will happen without running all those
steps? And the point is there's a
phenomenon I call computational
irreducibility that basically says in
many of these cases in general you can't
do that. The only way you can find out
what's going to happen is to kind of
just run all the steps explicitly and
see what happens. Why is there any
phenomenon like that? Well there's a
there's another principle that uh I kind
of realized which I call the principle
of computational equivalence. So when
you look at a picture like this or you
think about some system in nature, you
can think about it as performing a
computation. You know, you've set up the
underlying rules. Maybe there are rules
that you just write down. Maybe they're
rules that come from some piece of
physics. But in any case, as the system
behaves um it it um uh it is it is
effectively doing a computation. it is
it is is working out it's taking its
initial conditions and it's running
those rules doing a computation to
figure out what the output will be. So
you can ask the question how do
different kinds of how do the
computations that different kinds of
systems do how do they compare? There
are some systems like I don't know some
something like this where it's it's
obviously doing a very simple
computation but what the principle of
computational equivalence says is that
above some very low threshold
essentially all systems will be
equivalent in the sophistication of the
computations that they can do. So that
idea has the following consequence. So
if you if you say well that I've got
this system it's doing its little
computation but I with my brain or
computer or mathematics or whatever uh
you know I should be much more
sophisticated but actually the principle
of computational equivalence says that
isn't how it works. Instead all these
systems are equivalent in the
sophistication of computations they can
do. And so that means if we are trying
to we're trying to out outthink a
process like this, we're not going to be
able to do that. We we will be stuck
kind of just doing the same
sophistication of computation as this
does. And that's basically why this
phenomenon of computational
irreducibility shows up. So okay, that
that's that's the underlying story of
computational irreducibility. Um I will
say the um uh turns out and it took
about 50 years for me to sort of
straighten this out that actually that
original question that I had about the
second law of thermodynamics is all
about computational irreducibility in
the end. So if if we take uh you know
something gas molecules in the box
bouncing around becoming more random, we
can look at sort of a space-time picture
of that, we can kind of simplify it a
bit and we can end up with something
that's just one of these cellar
automaton systems where we just have a a
grid of cells and we're just updating
cells according to the values of of
cells on the on the row above. So in
this case what we're seeing is we're
starting off from some uh kind of
organized arrangement of cells and then
as the thing progresses it becomes sort
of it grinds that organized version of
of of things down into this seemingly
random mess. Well as you will know um in
uh underlying rules of mechanics are
reversible in time and so is the
cellular automaton. So in fact, if we we
can set it up so that we actually get
that sort of very organized
configuration um right in the in the
middle there. And um uh the um uh and
what we're seeing is as we evolve both
forwards in time and backwards in time,
we go from this sort of very simple uh
configuration to something that looks
like sort of random heat. Well, the uh
um
it's so why is it that um we end up
getting something that looks to us
random? Effectively what's going on is
that the actual underlying dynamics of
sort of the idealized molecules bouncing
around is doing a computation that in
some sense is encrypting the initial
data that we had and turning it from
something which we can readily see was
was sort of a simple configuration to
something which to us looks kind of
random. What does it mean that it looks
kind of random? Well, if we could
immediately do the computation, reverse
that computation and see, oh, it came
from this very simple initial condition,
then we would uh uh then we would not
believe that it was random. So, you
know, the the idea of entropy. Entropy
is essentially the log of the number of
states of a system that are consistent
with what we know about the system. So
in this particular case, what we could
know about the system if we could do
arbitrarily sophisticated computations
is oh that was a thing that came from
this simple initial condition. But
because we are computationally bounded
observers, we we there's a limit to the
amount of computation that we can do
that our measuring devices can do and so
on the um uh we we can't conclude that.
And so it what what we see what we say
is oh it just looks random to us. it's
consistent with being u any possible
configuration of of molecules in this in
this box. So the thing to understand
here is that that essentially the second
rule of thermodynamics ends up being
something that you can derive
from the sort of interplay between
underlying computational irreducibility
and our computational limitations as
observers of things. And so that that
ends up being that that pattern of
there's computational irreducibility
under inside. But when we're looking at
things as the kind of observers that we
are, we we end up concluding things
about the system just from the fact that
we are computationally bounded relative
to the computational irreducibility of
what's going on underneath. Now, I
realized that somebody said this is the
tagged as the Maxwell lecture, and that
makes me um uh want to um want to show
you something. Uh let's see. Um
sorry. Um
here we go. Uh
um
here we go.
So, I'm now um uh let me see if I can
find the right thing here. Oh, no.
That's that's not Maxwell yet. That's
that's William Thompson. I was going to
show you because I once I when I figured
out um how I think the second law works,
I got curious why had people not figured
this out before. And so, I tried to
trace the history of the second law. And
uh old Jamie Clerk Maxwell was a big
figure in the history of the second law.
And I really do would like to show you
just a few things from his work. Let's
see whether I can find these. Um,
now that's a that's fun. That's from uh
Kelvin from uh 1870s trying to figure
out uh motion. Hold on a second. Let's
see if I can find this. Sorry, I was not
uh quite prepared for this. I think this
is um is this Maxwell's? No, that's in
German. That's clearly not Maxwell's.
That's I think that may be Boltzman. Um
who was uh uh Am I going to fail to find
um find a nice Maxwell thing? That's
Boltzman. All right. Let's see. Can I
find something? No. Still Boltzman. Um
All right. I think we have to let's see
if I can um Yeah, those are the those
were the the sort of key figures and the
the origins of the second annex. And um
uh
is that oh yes that's from Maxwell
that's um okay this is this is science
history trivia but um um uh Maxwell
wrote about many different kinds of
things. He wrote famously a textbook of
electronamics which led to Maxwell's
equations. He worked on the second order
of thermodynamics in the 1870s. He also
he lived on a country estate in Scotland
for some part of his life and uh he had
a you know rolling hills there and he
ended up writing a paper called on hills
and dales which is a kind of an
interesting piece of mathematics that
talks about where functions have minima
and maxima and so on that's a picture
from that and I think I have another
thing is that more from Maxwell yes that
was Maxwell as poet um and uh I don't I
don't guarantee quality in this Um um
but it's uh um it was something. Okay.
Another another piece of science trivia
Kelvin um was uh uh
Kelvin one of one of Kelvin's success
stories was that when the transatlantic
cable was being laid, they tried a
couple of times. It was a big investment
thing to lay a transatlantic cable. They
tried a couple of times. They're in the
middle of the Atlantic and the cable
broke. And then what was then William
Thompson um uh was sort of brought in as
a consultant to try and listen with an
electrometer to the to the cable as it
was being laid and see how the
resistivity was changing and so on and
was saying go faster, go slower
depending on what was what was happening
in this cable. And then the first
successful transatlantic cable was was
laid. and um uh Kelvin started a company
making doing consulting on on cable
laying and so on and managed to buy
himself a yacht and other such things.
So that's a piece of trivia, but this is
this is I think related to that. All
right, back to back to the main um
thrust of things. I thought I had to I I
could probably find you some more um uh
Maxwell material. But um for me the um
uh this this kind of um uh this kind of
understanding of computational
irreducibility, simple rules, very
complicated behavior, impossible to
predict what will happen other than by
just explicitly running the rules. and
then seeing that that
that that sort of how that interacts
with us as kind of computationally
limited observers of things leads to the
second law. Well, okay. to tell a little
bit more of the of the personal story. I
um
uh
I was sort of started off studying
cellular automter and um all these kinds
of things back I mean this this picture
I first saw in in 1984 and this whole
idea of computational reducibility and
so on comes from from that time. Um the
uh then I ended up going back into
technology development in 1988. We
brought out Mathematica. Um and then few
years after that I went back into doing
basic science and ended up writing this
big book called a new kind of science
which is really about the study of
simple programs and what they do and how
that relates to uh studying things in
the natural world and elsewhere. It's
kind of the this this field of studying
kind of simple programs and what they do
I think is a very fundamental field of
science uh doesn't really have it hasn't
had a name. I've recently been calling
it ruology the study of systems based on
simple rules and it's something which is
kind of underneath mathematics in some
sense. It's something which gives one a
lot more raw material for making models
in in natural science. Actually, when I
wrote that book, New Kind of Science,
which came out in 2002, uh people were
saying, "Oh, but you know, it's been 300
years of of doing uh uh models and exact
science using mathematical equations.
You know, that's the way it will always
be." Actually, that hasn't been the way
it's always been. And in the last 20
years or so, there's been sort of a a
pretty complete transition from new
models that get made being made in terms
of mathematical equations to new models
that get made get made in terms of rules
that can be represented in programs. So
that's been kind of a a um kind of an
interesting thing to see. But anyway, I
I I finished that book in 2002. U few
years after that built Wolf Malpha. um
kind of the the uh wolf from Alpha was
sort of an interesting project because I
had imagined I uh I've been interested
since I was a kid in kind of organizing
information and trying to make it kind
of computable. Um and uh I had thought
the only way to do that would be to
build sort of a a complete brain-like
AI. But then from this idea of principle
of computational equivalence kind of
gives one the philosophical poke that
says there's no sort of bright line of
the intelligent versus the merely
computational. And so therefore I
concluded it should be possible to build
something just with computation that did
these kind of uh that sort of made
knowledge computable so to speak and um
so we started doing that around 2006 and
um uh somewhat surprisingly it turned
out to work. the the the sort of the the
key idea was to take sort of natural
language kinds of inputs and to
translate them into our symbolic
language, our wolf from language
symbolic language um where we can then
compute answers from that. And that was
kind of the thing in in the world of AI
before that time. People had kind of
tried to build question answering
systems for probably 50 years and it
always not worked. And the reason that
we were able to be successful is because
we already had this kind of very deep
computational capability that we could
plug into when we're dealing with kind
of simple natural language inputs.
Anyway, the um uh back to some science.
So
uh in um I'd been interested in so in in
the book new kind of science I mostly
talk about simple rules what they do
applications of that to places in
physics like like fluid turbulence
places in biology like the growth of
organisms and so on and I had one
section about how these kinds of things
might apply to fundamental physics and
um the uh my my friends the physicists
mostly hated that section. because that
was a time when they thought we have it
all straightened out. We're going to
just do string theory and it's going to
give us the sort of final theory of
physics. Um so for a while I was like
I'm not going to work on this because
the the market namely physicists doesn't
really want this. I'm going to work on
other things. I worked on wolf and alpha
and wolf language and and a bunch of
other technology kinds of things. But
then in 2018 I kind of made a little bit
of a a technical minor breakthrough in
thinking about how one could apply kind
of computational ideas to fundamental
physics. And then a couple of young
physicists including one who was uh
educated in Cambridge a chap called
Jonathan Gorard um were telling me you
know you you can't not continue you
can't not kind of uh pursue these ideas
about sort of computation as a as a
foundation for um uh for for physics.
And so I said okay help me do this and
um we'll try and do it. Well turns out
it worked much better than I could
possibly have imagined. And by early
2020, we had a pretty good idea of what
I think this sort of machine code of
physics is like. So let me try and tell
you something about that. It turns out
that the formalism that we developed for
understanding kind of the machine code
of physics also applies to a bunch of
other things particularly foundations of
mathematics uh foundations of machine
learning and also biology. I'll try and
talk about all of those things. So let's
talk about physics first of all. So
there's been this question that sort of
existed since antiquity which is is the
universe discrete or continuous? Is it
made of a bunch of discrete atoms or
does everything sort of flow like water
or something? And uh that was something
people didn't know for a long time. End
of the 19th century finally got
discovered yes matter is made of
discrete things made of atoms and
molecules and so on. And then a little
bit later it was clear that you know you
could think of light as being made of
photons and so on. things seem to be
made of discrete stuff. At the time,
beginning of the 20th century, most
physicists believed that space would
turn out to be discreet as well. But
nobody could figure out how to make that
work, how to make it consistent with
relativity and so on. And so by about
1930, people kind of gave up and
concluded that that space was just sort
of this background where you just put
things at different places in space. And
some mathematicians got into the act and
talked about, you know, space-time
continuum manifolds and things like
this. And it was kind of locked in that
sort of space is just this background
thing that can be represented as a as a
continuous kind of uh kind of thing.
Well, I don't think that's actually how
it works. I think that instead space is
is discreet. It's it has internal
structure and in fact everything about
the universe is just features of the
structure of space. And so, you know,
the electrons and quarks and whatever
else, they're all just sort of features
of the structure of space. It's a little
bit like in a in a fluid, for example,
you would have uh um you know, you could
have a vortex in the fluid that's still
made of those same molecules that every
other part of the fluid is made of, but
there's some definite thing that you can
trace that is that vortex. And that's
kind of the idea for how things like
particles uh work in in the structure of
physical space. But um the uh sort of
the the the idea of what what is the
universe made of? What is space made of?
Kind of the notion is there are discrete
points. One can think of them as kind of
atoms of space. And the only thing one
can say about those discrete points is
how they're related to each other. So
you can represent those relations by a
graph or a little bit more elaborately
by a hyperraph which allows you to to
kind of uh connect not just the two ends
of a of an edge in a graph but any
number of any number of ends and you can
think about these graphs and you can say
well well these graphs can evolve in
kind of a little bit like cellular
automaton rules. You might have some
rule that says whenever you see a piece
of graph that looks like the thing on
the left hand side, turn it into a piece
of graph that looks like the thing on
the right hand side, you start it off
from some very small graph and will
gradually grow this bigger and bigger
graph. Well, so what happens as a result
of that? In the case of uh let's say uh
molecules in a gas we know that these
molecules bouncing around underneath in
in the gas on a large scale they make
something which behaves like a fluid
obeys the equations of fluid mechanics
Navia Stokes equations or whatever um
that's what happens with some molecules
bouncing around the gas question is what
happens with one of these uh hyperraphs
and the rewriting of these hypographs
you keep going for a long time and
eventually you get this very big
hypograph
say about the structure of that
hyperraph and and how it works. Well,
what you seem to be able to say is that
the thing can be approximated sort of
has a continuum approximation which is
the Einstein equations. So what in fluid
dynamics would be what what in molecular
dynamics would be limiting to the
equations of fluid mechanics in the case
of these hyperraphs is limiting to the
equations that we know sort of apply to
spaceime namely the Einstein equations.
So it's all it's all a bit tricky
because you know you can get depending
on what rule you use you'll get very
different behavior. Here's an example of
a rule that um uh if you keep it going a
while it will kind of knit this thing
which is sort of obviously a
two-dimensional object. You can have
another rule here and it will knit this
uh kind of thing which has a curved
two-dimensional structure. Even knowing
what effective dimension the space that
emerges from this has is not quite so
trivial. I mean you basically can say
you can measure the sort of effective
dimension by saying let's start at a
node a point in the graph and let's go
uh kind of graph distance one graph
distance two and so on and let's ask as
we as we build out this ball of of going
out from a particular point in the graph
how many nodes will we have enclosed in
that um uh in in that ball and if the
number of nodes in that ball grows like
r to the d where r is the distance we've
gone then we say well that's
approximately d-dimensional like
d-dimensional space and um uh turns out
if you take that kind of formula the
first correction term um from that which
actually you might know if you know the
formula for the area of a circle um area
of a disc um on on the surface of a
sphere the first correction term depends
on the curvature of space so it's the
richly scalar curvature is the thing
that appears in the in the first
correction term and conveniently if you
happen to know the Einstein equations.
The Einstein equations contain that
exact same object, the Richie Richie
scaler and the Richie tensor and so on.
That's the beginning of how these things
start to connect. In any case, the main
main result is that from this underlying
structure that is just this discrete
thing of a hyperraph being rewritten uh
you get in the large scale limit uh the
Einstein equations for this for the
structure of spaceime. an infinite
number of footnotes to that statement
and uh some uh elaborate kind of
mathematical arguments and so on about
why that works. Can talk more about it
if people are interested. But any case
that's the that's the first very
exciting thing that you're starting from
this this very simple discrete system
and you're ending up with something
which seems to have the structure of of
uh of spaceime. Let me explain one an
example of one thing that you can see
two things you can see. So there are a
bunch of physical effects that people
know about which end up with very kind
of mechanical explanations in these
models. So for example, time dilation.
So in relativity, a thing that's going
fast, time seems to be running slower
for it than something which is standing
still relative to relative to the
observer so to speak. And so how does
one understand that in these models?
Well, the if you have a thing like a
particle that is made from a whole sort
of tangle of pieces of this network,
then that that thing can just progress
through time. It'll keep on sort of
getting rewritten as um uh as time
progresses. But you can also say, well,
how does it move? Well, in order to
move, it has to be able to recreate
itself at a different place in space.
And that takes a bunch of computational
effort as well. So the the what what
happens is if it is going to move then
it has to spend some of the some of its
computational capability so to speak on
recreating itself at a different place.
So it has less computation left over to
actually uh progress through time for
itself and and that's sort of the
mechanical explanation for time
dilation. You're using some of your
computation budget to move in space so
you don't have as much to dedicate to
kind of progressing through time.
Well, okay. I could describe some other
things like the origin of gravity and so
on, but but um well, actually, let me
show you here. Here's a um make this
work. Oops. I'll try again.
Uh
it's not good. Let's try that. Maybe
that will work. Yeah, maybe that works.
So, this is just sort of a a simple
example of um this network rewrite
process. You can think of this as the
very beginning of a a possible universe.
And the fact that the only thing that
matters here is what what is connected
to what the wiggling around and the
arrangement in in space is just for the
sake of human viewers so to speak. It's
not this not what is significant here.
Well, you can go on and and uh sort of
try and do this kind of discrete
dynamics for something bigger. These are
two sort of tiny black holes embedded in
the structure of space. And uh what will
happen is sort of the the the rewriting
of this network keeps on kind of
knitting together the structure of
space. It also leads those two little
black holes to merge and to produce kind
of ripples of gravitational radiation
that seems to agree pretty well with
what you would expect from general
relativity. So that's kind of
encouraging and uh sort of a a a first
clue to u uh to the idea that that there
really is sort of a computational um uh
machine code for for physics. Um the uh
there are many kind of predictions that
you get from this kind of setup. So for
example, one prediction is there's no
reason to think that the whole of the
universe is precisely three-dimensional.
Dimension is a sort of dynamical
parameter. So there can be regions of
the universe that might be 3.01
dimensional or 2.99 dimensional and
there are all kinds of interesting
things you might try to do to detect
that. Um it's mathematically difficult
to deal with because if you've learned
differential geometry or learn calculus,
you've learned calculus of one variable,
calculus of many variables, but you
haven't probably learned calculus of 2.7
variables because nobody's figured out
how that works. And that's something one
has to figure out to to be able to sort
of construct the mathematical
underpinnings for this. Well, okay. So,
another um big I could Yeah. Well,
another big um um feature of physics is
quantum mechanics. And one of the things
that happens in these models is that
quantum mechanics necessarily emerges.
It's not something that you have to
wheel in from the outside. It's
something which the structure of the
model implies that one must have quantum
mechanics and sort of the key idea of
quantum mechanics I suppose is that
instead of you know in classical physics
you take an object you know you throw it
it moves in a definite trajectory. In
quantum mechanics the idea is there are
many paths that get followed and we only
get to kind of figure out the
probabilities for different outcomes. So
what happens in these models is when
when these little rewrites happen,
little piece of network that looks like
this gets rewritten to one that looks
like that. Um there are the point is
there are many different places in the
network where those rewrites could occur
and that leads to sort of many different
paths of history that can be followed by
the system. So you can represent that
call these multi-way graphs. you can
represent that the many different
possible paths that can be followed in
the evolution of the system many
different sort of threads of history and
it turns out that um uh you can kind of
analyze what happens in this multi-way
graph of possible histories by take this
simpler example of something which has
many possible histories. You take kind
of slices across this at a at a fixed
level and you can then ask questions
like how are the different how are these
different branches of history how are
they related? You can make what we call
branchial graphs graphs that kind of a
maps of entanglements between different
branches of history. Well, you can take
sort of a continuum limit of this. you
can make kind of a space that is the
this branchial space that is the space
of sort of connections between these
different uh these different branches
that the the sort of story of what
happens in branchial space is kind of
the story of quantum mechanics. And um
what uh what turns out to happen is in
physical space the presence of energy
momentum deflects the paths of things
like particles. That's what gravity is.
That's what general relativity says
happens in quantum mechanics. The the
the sort of core result of quantum
mechanics is the path integral that
tells you that also ends up telling you
how the presence of energy momentum
deflects things not now in physical
space but now in branchial space.
There's a whole bunch of math that we
have not completely figured out about
how this in detail works. But basically
the picture is that what the Einstein
equations in physical space turn out to
be the path integral the core of quantum
mechanics in branchial space. So in a
sense, gravity and quantum mechanics are
the same theory but played out in
different kinds of space. And that's
reflected in in a bunch of things done
from the 1990s, the holographic
principles and things which people
hypothesize in the connection between
between
general relativity between structure of
spaceime and field theories. This kind
of gives you a way to understand why
that kind of thing would happen. Anyway,
so
well I could uh I'm not sure how how
deep in this particular rabbit hole to
go, but but the um uh so the the the the
thing that to me has been very
surprising is that from these very
simple underlying rules, you can end up
with things that correspond to general
relativity, correspond to quantum
mechanics, tell you how the second order
of thermodynamics works. One of the
things that is sort of a remaining
mystery there is okay we say we're going
to find this rule and it's going to
produce general relativity it's going to
produce quantum mechanics it's going to
produce certain features of physics and
so on but why why did we in our universe
get this rule and not another rule well
I was kind of confused by that for a
while and then I realized that just like
in quantum mechanics this a particular
rule is being applied in many different
places so you can go beyond that and say
what if you just apply all possible
rules pools in all possible places and
then what you get is this thing that I
call the rouad which is the entangled
limit of all possible computational
processes. So you can see a very simple
example of that. Here's like simple
touring machine that's just got a little
rule and it's just applying that rule
and going back and forward. Well, you
can make a multi-way touring machine
where you have several different choices
for what it can do at each step. Then
you can say well what happens if we just
look at all possible touring machines
and what they do and you would say well
what what is the object that you get
from following all possible from from
looking at the structure of all possible
touring machines and how they behave and
what you realize is that you get this
thing that in a sense represents all
possible computations. Well then so that
seems like a very messy thing. It's a
thing that has a lot of structure
actually. But um you can then say well
okay if that's the thing that exists
this thing that represents all possible
computations. What do we perceive from
that? We are presumably observers who
are embedded within this rouad object
and we are made from the same stuff as
the roulead object. But what do we
perceive in it? Well, turns out that
what you can see is that if we are
observers who have certain
characteristics, then it will
necessarily be the case that within this
rouad object, we must perceive certain
kinds of things. In particular, if we
are computationally bounded observers
and we are observers who believe we are
persistent in time in the sense that we
have this sort of single thread of
experience that goes through time. If if
we are observers with those
characteristics then it turns out that
it is inevitable that we will observe
the general laws of physics that we
actually observe. So to me this is
really surprising because it means that
instead of the laws of physics being
just something that's wheeled in as well
we happen to have these laws of physics
it's instead the case that one can
derive the laws of physics that the laws
of physics are necessarily the way they
are for observers like us. So, okay,
maybe I should um I I'll talk briefly
and maybe people can ask if if you're
interested in this the the um uh so that
that's kind of the in some sense the
deepest point of the rabbit hole talking
about physics then we can kind of um
come up and um uh talk about um talk
about other kinds of things. So, let's
talk about mathematics. For example,
let's say that we we're going to build
mathematics. We're going to start off
with certain axioms for mathematics.
We're going to say we believe these
things are true. Now, what can we what
theorems can we prove in mathematics?
So, let's say we have that as an axiom
that those two things are equivalent. We
can then apply those aims a bunch of
times to say here are a bunch of
equivalences between expressions and we
can keep going for a while. We can make
up a whole proof that shows that one
particular expression is equivalent to
another expression by just applying that
axiom. And that proof corresponds to a
path in this network. So proofs are
paths in this network. So then we can
look at some actual field of mathematics
like this is boolean algebra logic
propositional logic. And we're starting
off from the green axioms and then we're
sort of building out all possible true
theorems of of of logic. Keep going a
while longer. You get lots and lots and
lots of true theorems of logic. Most of
them are ones that nobody cares about.
there two red dots there for ones that
are given names in typical logic
textbooks. This is kind of a typical
thing that in metamatical space there
sort of you can build out this whole
structure in metamatical space. Um in
fact for example you know we humans have
written down three or four million
theorems in the in the history of
mathematics published theorems but you
can imagine building out this whole
space of all possible theorems and you
can start mapping out actually where do
sort of famous theorems of mathematics
lie in the space of all possible
theorems. Well
that's so you're kind of thinking about
what's the limit of mathematics as time
goes to infinity when there's sort of an
infinite number of theorems that you
prove. What's the what's the structure
that you get then? Well, one of the
things about about what happens when you
kind of grind mathematics down to down
to axioms is it's pretty complicated to
figure out things that are typical kind
of mathematics one studies. So, for
example, this is the this is a picture
showing the uh the lemurs that you have
to prove to prove the Pythagorean
theorem from set theory. So, it's really
complicated mess. Um, and so you might
wonder how come we can actually do
mathematics using something like the
Pythagorean theorem? Why don't we always
have to grind our way down to talk about
the definition of real numbers and all
this kind of thing whenever we're
dealing with the Pythagorean theorem?
Well, actually this is very analogous to
what happens in fluid mechanics because
you might think that you could never
make a higher level description of a
fluid just in terms of velocity fields
and things. You might think that instead
you would never be able to do fluid
mechanics. You'd always have to be
talking about what all the individual
molecules do to know what will happen in
the fluid. The fact that there is a
possibility of a higher level fluid
mechanics is is a you know is a is a
notable fact that same phenomenon of
kind of the underlying computationally
irreducible system when observed by
observers like us something that you can
then find this kind of simplified
description. That same thing I think is
happening in mathematics that the the
sort of the possibility of higher level
mathematics as opposed to always having
to worry about every detail of every
axiom is is happens for the same reasons
that we have kind of a a human level
understanding of fluids or of the
structure of space or whatever else. And
so while there are lots of interesting
conclusions from sort of the
correspondence between the structure of
mathematics and the structure of
physics, I should say that the that the
object that you get by looking at all
possible axiom systems is actually none
other than this rouad object that I
already mentioned. So in a sense,
physics is one kind of observation of
the rulad. Mathematics is another kind
of observation of it. And there are lots
of interesting correspondences between
physics and mathematics that one can
make from knowing that. So for example,
one of the you can ask things like what
is the analog of motion? Physical motion
being able to move something from one
place to another in mathematics. It's
basically that you can take uh something
like that's formulated in terms of
algebra let's say and reformulate it in
terms of geometry. It's this fact that
there are these correspondences between
different areas of mathematics. I think
that that that's sort of homogeneity and
meta mathematical space is what what
that what leads to that. All right.
Well, let me mention um uh just mention
maybe a couple of other things that um I
could also uh
maybe um I might mention actually in uh
well okay let let's talk about a quite
different field. Let's talk about
biology. So I got interested recently
actually in the 1980s I was interested
in sort of the foundations of biology
and didn't manage to figure out much
about them. And then last year I managed
to actually figure out some things that
I think think are kind of interesting.
Um this is an incredibly idealized
picture of biology. kind of on the on
the left is kind of a genome rules for
sort of the the development of an
organism and on the right is the
phenotype the organism just starting
from one red cell. It's another one of
these just cellular automaton uh
behaviors. And so we say okay this is
this is an organism and we want it to be
um uh let's say we want this organism to
have um
uh uh we're going to mutate the genome
for this organism. uh trying to make the
organism kind of live as long as
possible but not an infinite time. So
this is what we get by by every red dot
is one sort of mutation of the genome
and we're asking you know how long did
it live and you see those big plateaus
where it lives more or less the same
time and every so often it makes kind of
a breakthrough and figures out how to
live a bit longer. And if we look at
that sort of series of breakthroughs,
we see that it's kind of building on uh
progressively building on on um on what
it figured out so far. If we kind of
roll the dice another time, we'll get it
will it will behave in a different way.
You can kind of imagine that these
different stages or different steps, you
know, different things you find in the
fossil record where one set of critters
managed to be successful one way,
another set of critters managed to be
successful another way. Well, one of the
questions that's existed for a long time
is why biological evolution actually
works. Why it's possible to get sort of
usefully better organisms by just making
mutations of of things like genomes. And
I will say that the the picture here
ends up being very physics-like because
you can make these multi-way graphs that
show the sort of set of all possible
mutations that can happen. And then what
ends up happening is that the the reason
that biological evolution can work is
that the fitness functions, the things
that make organisms survive or not are
very a very coarse kinds of things. And
it ends up being a story very similar to
the story of the second law or for the
derivation of of higher level
mathematics and so on. It ends up being
another story of the interplay between
computational boundedness of something
like an observer and computational
irreducibility underneath. The
computational irreducibility is kind of
giving the uh uh is is is coming up with
the innovation so to speak that biology
has. But what's happening is that it's
it's possible to kind of channel that
innovation because the kind of thing
you're trying to achieve is is fairly
coarse. And if it wasn't the case, so
you might imagine every organism when
born has to immediately be able to, you
know, prove the reman hypothesis or
something. No organisms will make it
under those circumstances. The actual
constraints on organisms are much
coarser than that. And it's that
coarseness that makes it possible for
for evolution to work. So I find it kind
of interesting that the same underlying
kind of principles end up also telling
one things about in this case biological
evolution. Mention one other thing which
is about machine learning. So typical
machine learning setup with a neural
net. You um um this is just a neural net
was trained to take an a single number x
in at the top and then produce an f ofx
at the bottom and that corresponding to
that that function over on the right.
Well, it's it's kind of hard to
visualize what's going on here. You
know, you change the input, lots of
different activations, you get you get
certain output. It's it's a it's a
complicated mess what's happening. So I
got interested in how can we simplify
what's going on in neural nets,
understand that a bit more um uh a bit
more easily. You can make kind of a a a
grid. You can actually set it up so that
at every point on the grid instead of
doing something with numbers, you're
just doing something with a rule. Like
even a cellular automaton rule, you pick
between one of these two rules. At every
point here, you the the the pink ones
and the and the blue ones. One of them
is one rule, one of them is the other
rule. And then what you're trying to do,
for example, is to say, let's find an
arrangement of these different rules in
this array that make the behavior of the
system have a particular form. So in
this case, it's lib 50 steps and then
die out. Well, what you can do, you can
make one of these sort of fitness curves
or if you're doing machine learning gets
tipped upside down and it's a loss curve
um for for this kind of system and you
can say, well, okay, how does this how
does it work? What does it how do you
get the different um uh how can you get
it to learn this thing you want it to
learn? Well, what ends up happening is
sometimes it's very easy to explain what
happened. It it does something something
very trivial like like that. Um but much
of the time the the way that it manages
to do what it does is something that is
in the end sort of a p a result of
computational reducibility. Essentially
what's happening is you're getting um
you are you are producing a result that
is um like like like one of these things
here where it happens to have the
properties it has but it would be very
hard to predict that it would have those
properties. So essentially the picture
that emerges of machine learning is that
uh it's sort of a story of using pieces
of computational irreducibility and
putting them together in such a way that
one achieves whatever whatever objective
training objective one has. So kind of a
picture of it is if one is thinking
about how does one build some
computational system. One let's make the
analogy of building a wall. If one way
to build a wall is you make bricks. You
arrange the bricks in a nice kind of
engineering way. Another way to build a
wall is you just look for random rocks
that are lying around. You just see how
they fit together and see what um and
and build up your wall that way. That
second thing I think is what's happening
in machine learning that you are
basically picking up these lumps of
irreducible computation and arranging
them in such a way that you can achieve
the objective the training objective
that you have. So that means that if you
try to sort of interpret what's going on
inside, it's not going to work very well
because it's like saying, well, why did
you get that rock rather than another
one? Maybe I should just say a few
things about um uh maybe a little bit so
so that that's a little bit of some
science. There's a bit of bit of
progress I just made very recently in in
foundations of biology, but let me let
me not uh I I can talk about that if
people are interested. But let me um
let's go to uh uh talk a tiny bit about
technology and um uh one of the things
that um
in my uh you know I I kind of view the
big effort I've studied a lot kind of
computation in the wild computation as
happens in sort of the natural world and
so on but I've also spent a bunch of
time thinking about sort of how to make
computation something that is maximally
useful to us humans.
And so kind of the what I've been trying
to do for the last 40 years or so is to
build sort of a notation for thinking
about things computationally. So kind of
back 500 years ago or so now
mathematical notation was invented.
Before that time, people when they
talked about math were talking about it
with words and then you know plus signs
and equal signs and things like that got
invented and then that led to
development of algebra and calculus and
then mathematical sciences. And so kind
of our mission with with wolf from
language and so on is to u create kind
of a notation for computation that
enables kind of computational x for all
x and kind of for pretty much every
field. you know the the big paradigm of
the 21st century is the idea of
computation and for every field there
either is now or will be a computational
version of that field a kind of
computational X and kind of what we've
been trying to do is to provide kind of
the uh the language that allows you to
do computational X for all X and I I
suspect many of you have have used uh
our tech but people people are often
very um uh people often sort of uh don't
realized that um you know in in the
effort to uh uh we're really interested
in sort of making everything
computational. So you know you can make
a graph and you can say let me uh let me
compute something with that graph. Let's
say we can take that graph and just do
that and um oops the you know we can we
can make some computation on that graph
or for example I could say let's let's
capture an image
uh see if it will capture there we go
it's a good image there um so we could
for example take that image and um uh we
could edge detect that image or
something or we could say here's a good
thing to do we could Say, let us do um
uh um
let's see here we go. This um let's try
using there's a there's a built-in
function for identifying images, but
let's use an explicit neural net to try
and identify that image. Maybe it will
have to drat um it has to download the
neural nets. Oh, maybe it didn't take so
long. Let's see what happens here. Oh,
no. And this is appears to be a very
slow internet connection. Okay. Well,
it'll have to download this neural net.
But then what I was going to show you
was kind of what it looks like to kind
of explore the inards of that neural
net. But um uh the um Okay, this is very
very slow. Um the uh uh um not not our
fault. Um the uh Oh, it's almost there.
We might as well wait. Okay. Ah, it
didn't it didn't see the person the
[laughter]
um but we can try and figure out what it
did inside. I mean if we if we say this
thing uh let's say let's just take the
first five levels of that neural net and
then um uh that's another neural net and
then apply that to that image. we will
get probably some collection numbers.
Okay, let's make images out of those.
Uh,
and okay, so that's that's kind of
what's happening in the mind of the
neural net sort of partway through its
computation and and that's where it
figured out something crazy about what
that picture was of. But any case the
the kind of the you know one of the
ideas is being able to compute about any
kind of thing whether it's a piece of
geometry or whether it's a a sound or or
whatever it is. Um the other big thing
is kind of knowing things about the
world. So for example, we could say, you
know, give me a list of words. Um, and
we could say, for example, let's make a
word cloud of the first letters of
um words in English, for example. And uh
kind of kind of the point here is that
the um um you can read what is being
said here. We have a language which is
succinct enough that you can uh just um
uh you can you can use it as a notation
for thinking about things
computationally. You can kind of think
in the language. I'm sure we could say
we could pick some other human language
here. I know let's pick Italian
something. Um and it will do the
corresponding result for that. Um, and
then you know we can do things like
let's say we say uh we have a place like
Cambridge. Uh we'll know about
Cambridge. I wonder which Cambridge it
this it thinks it is. It probably knows
that. Um Oh, assuming Cambridge,
Massachusetts. Sorry. Um the you know
what I I know why that happened. Let let
me let me show you why that happened. I
am going to make that not happen because
the reason that happened is because I am
connected through VPN. If I do not
connect through VPN, it should know. Let
me let me disconnect from VPN and then
let's see what happens. Let's try it
again. Uh, now it might know where now
my computer might know where it is. So,
let's let's try this again. And,
uh, come on. Oh, now it has to actually
connect to the network. Oh, no.
Let's try that again. See if it
That's bad. What's going on?
Your network is troubled. No. Oh, well.
All right. Well, we can connect to Maybe
this will work if I connect there. Okay.
Sorry. Well, let's let's say let's just
use some natural language and let's just
say Cambridge, UK. See what that does.
Okay. Now, let's say let's see where is
that. Let's say um uh uh geographics.
Let's see if this is the right Cambridge
um of a disc. Let's say a uh two-mile
disc around the center of that
Cambridge. Let's see if it's going to
embarrass me again. Um Oh, no.
Yeah, that's the right Cambridge. Yeah.
Um
yeah
so but um uh the the point is to have
all sorts of knowledge of of the world
as it is and you know if you're doing
chemistry for example we could do um
actually let's let's do a let's do a
piece of I don't know we can make a um
uh caffeine molecule or something and we
could say make a um uh a 3D molecule
plot of that or we could do things with
uh with proteins and we can fold the
proteins. Oh god, don't tell me it's
[laughter]
this is I should have made more of an
effort to connect to a reasonable
network here. Sorry. Well, anyway, it
will produce a nice picture of a
caffeine molecule. All right. In any
case, the the um uh just just to say um
you know what we've been trying to build
is this kind of computational
representation of the world where we
have kind of a way of taking sort of
knowledge about the world and making it
something you can precisely compute
with. On the other hand, in modern times
there are also LLMs and neural nets and
so on. They provide a terrific kind of
linguistic user interface to this kind
of raw computation. And actually, I
could pull it up, except I have a very
bad feeling it's going to be slow if the
network is this slow. I could um pull up
our notebook assistant, which is a way
of having something that you can just
talk to in kind of natural language and
use uh use an LLM. And it's it's pretty
good. If you have a thing where you
wonder is there a computational way to
represent this thing that I'm thinking
about some thing that's a piece of
homework or some thing that's a piece of
research you're doing or something like
that try typing it into the notebook
assistant in even a pretty vague terms
and there's a good chance that it will
generate a piece of orphan language code
that will be it might not have correctly
understood what you wanted but there's a
good chance it did. you can read that
code, then take that code, compute with
it, and kind of build this tower of of
whatever it is you're trying to figure
out. So, that's a that's a very good way
to kind of get into this and to let's
see if this actually worked. Come on.
Come on.
Okay, both the notebook assistant came
up and the caffeine molecule came up.
That's good. Well, let me let me not um
uh tempt fate by trying any other
things. But um uh in any case, the so
big picture, I've spent a lot of time
kind of trying to take this paradigm of
computation and both apply it in
practice as a way to kind of build
computational X for all X and apply it
at a theoretical level as a way to
understand the foundations of a whole
bunch of fields. Uh one of them being
physics. I'm kind of really excited
about the things we figured out among
other things in physics. I kind of think
physics made a lot of progress about 100
years ago at a foundational level and we
really haven't had a lot of foundational
progress since then. I think we finally
have sort of unlocked a way to get more
foundational progress in physics. It's a
lot of work. Computational
irreducibility kind of gets in the way
because it's it's uh it's kind of
telling you there's this sort of
irreducible amount of computation that
you have to do. But also within any
computationally irreducible system there
are always an infinite number of pockets
of computational reducibility. Those
represent the things that we can figure
out the kind of scientific laws that we
can discover. And that's kind of the
mission is to is to find those things
and to make all the connections with the
uh with what we already know in physics.
Um a big two two big initiatives right
now. One thing we're calling
infrageeometry is kind of understanding
the mathematical underpinnings of what
happens when you have things based on
hyperraphs rather than based on
manifolds in uklidian space and so on.
Another big effort is kind of the
experimental implications of all of this
and uh trying to understand um well
actually it's a good LLM application
because um uh uh the there are all kinds
of very bizarre effects that you could
hope you would be able to identify in
these models and then maybe somebody
already did the experiment 50 years ago
but and they just sort of put it in a
footnote in some paper somewhere because
it was too weird to actually talk about
but that's something you can kind of
thematically search for with LLMs and
hopefully we'll find some of those
things. I think the cautionary tale that
relates I suppose back to our friend
James Clerk Maxwell um is uh in in the
1800s when Maxwell was around. Maxwell
didn't know that atoms were real. He was
he thought atoms were kind of a
hypothesis and he wasn't really prepared
to be very very uh strident in talking
about the atomic hypothesis. Boltzman
was much bigger on the atomic
hypothesis. But actually they could if
they had been able to sort of
thematically search the literature of
science. They could have known that
molecules atoms were real because Robert
Brown
botonist in 1827 had observed Brown in
motion little you know pollen grains
being kicked around by by something. And
so they because they were not able
because Maxwell for example uh didn't
know about this thing that had been done
over there in bot he was still he wrote
in actually a very bizarre piece about
atoms that was in which he was trying to
argue for why all atoms of a particular
kind like all atoms of hydrogen are the
same and he had some very weird kind of
sociological arguments for how that's
the way the world should be. Um, they're
very uh uh and I'm sure I have somewhere
I'll have a a copy actually. Okay, I'll
bring up let's let's just finish on a on
a Maxwell kind of thing. I just have to
find a little bit of Maxwellism. Um I
wrote a uh a piece about um about um
pull this up assuming it's not too
incredibly slow about the history of the
second order. Um and that's okay.
There's there's James Clerk Maxwell's
signature. Um and uh the um and that's
that's Conno. He had a very ornate
signature. Um he also okay one thing to
say about Conno that's perhaps
interesting. So Conno was the person who
originally mentioned the second order
thermodynamics in I think 1824 and he he
came up with it. He had this whole
theory of caro engines and so on. But at
the time people didn't know what heat
was and the the you know people knew
that heat flowed from one thing to
another and so they assumed what flows
from one thing to another well it must
be a fluid so they invented the idea of
caloric fluid and carnau's ideas about
about efficiency of heat engines and so
on were done on the basis of the caloric
theory of heat which was completely
wrong. The caloric theory the the the
correct theory of course is that heat is
the microscopic motion of molecules. I
have a suspicion which may or may not
turn out to be true that in modern times
we have a similar thing going on in in
cosmology and astrophysics you know it's
a big mystery what is dark matter
there's a lot more there seems to be a
lot more gravity in our in our galaxy
that can be accounted for from the
luminous stars that we see and so I
think the first mistake is dark matter
isn't matter in fact my guess is that
the history of science will bizarrely
recapitulate itself and that actually
dark matter is the space-time analog of
heat. Just as heat is the macroscopic
manifestation of microscopic motion
molecules, my guess is that dark matter
is the macroscopic manifestation of
microscopic structure, microscopic
phenomena in kind of the discrete
structure of space. But anyway, I just
let me just finish with something about
Maxwell. Let me find a good Maxwell
thing here. Um uh let's see. I think um
uh
okay, let's see. I hope this if this
network was only a bit faster, I would
be able to um to find some nice Maxwell
quote for you to finish on. Uh this is
about Clausius.
Um
and Boltzman, where is Maxwell?
Uh
um
sorry, I'm Oh, here we go. Here we go.
Here we go. This is
um
I think Maxwell's demon you might have
heard of. Maxwell's demon is sort of a
thing that can reverse
the increase of entropy by just getting
in there down at the individual molecule
level. And as as Maxwell explained, you
imagine this demon who has a cricket bat
that he's using to bash molecules at a
very microscopic scale. Um and uh let's
see where is this uh oh I'm sorry I was
should have been
no this I know that I talk about there
we go Maxwell's demon here we go let's
get to this so
um
uh yeah he was he always had a habit of
Maxwell always have a habit if you look
at Maxwell's original documents he
always um uh talks about thermodynamics
with a capital theta, capital delta. CS
was his abbreviation for thermodynamics.
I don't know quite quite why, but um uh
let's see. I've just got I've got to
find this. There's a If only this will
load. This is a um uh this is this is
some Well, maybe if we uh we should um
just
just have to wait for this to to load
in. Maybe we should we should stop here
and I hopefully we'll see some some nice
uh Maxwell material here. But um uh
maybe we can stop and I'm happy to try
and answer questions people have. Those
[applause]