&gt;&gt; Ladies and gentlemen welcome to Biola University.
And we might even have a few Biola students here.
Where are you Biola students?
[cheering]
Thank you very much.
I'm scripted because I think people
are concerned that I might ramble on,
so bear with me for a few minutes.
I gotta make some introductory comments.
It's so good to have all of you here tonight,
and welcome those of you who are live streaming
for this wonderful event.
This is the Cost of Freedom,
How Disagreement Makes Us Civil.
There are deep divisions in our society.
Divisions which we are reconciling
and struggling to go through.
And there's a contest over what freedom means.
Who matters most and who gets to determine.
That conflict drives wedges between people
could make our life together more difficult
in how we navigate disagreement,
and what kind of virtues we cultivate
even when we disagree deeply is one
of the most pressing questions our society faces.
We're very honored tonight for the very first time
at a university embracing a Christian tradition
to have Dr. Robert George, and Dr. Cornel West with us.
[cheers and applause]
And they will be more formally
introduced in just a minute.
And we're also so glad Pastor Rick Warren,
you're here too to facilitate this conversation.
So thank you for saying yes.
[cheers and applause]
These are three of our nation's leading thinkers.
They don't see eye to eye on everything,
but they're committed to cultivating conversations
about difficult topics that take
the quest for truth seriously,
while respecting differences.
This is a quest that's vital for those of us
in higher education to support
and promote in the broader society.
It's what we like to talk about here
at Biola of life with a firm center and soft edges.
Biola University's Torrey Honors Institute,
which is one of tonight's sponsor's exemplifies this.
For 20 years Torrey's been committed
to instilling undergraduate students
with a love for truth that comes through
dialoguing about great texts, and big ideas.
Students in our honors program don't always
agree with each other, sometimes they don't always
agree with the faculty that are teaching them,
but they learn through their discussions
that reasoning together can help
them discover unexpected friendships.
And that is the beauty of conversing
around those issues about which we disagree.
Our other sponsor is Biola University's
Templeton funded Center for Christian Thought.
Designed as a gathering place for scholars
from around the world to grapple
with the big issues and ideas of the day.
This round table, interdisciplinary nature
of these conversations encourages this open mindedness.
And I think one of the virtues
that the church needs, and our nation needs
more than ever before is the virtue of listening.
Not just listening in order
to prepare to respond to somebody else,
but listening in order to prepare
to learn from somebody else.
And this year Center for Christian Thought's
theme is Intellectual Virtue and Civil Discourse.
So it is a Torrey Program.
And the Center for Christian Thought
that are examples of the sort of intellectual
atmosphere Christian universities must embody.
Defined not by retreat,
not by safety, or closed mindedness,
but by curiosity, and discourse
that sometimes can be a bit uncomfortable.
That's why I'm proud to see Biola
hosting this conversation tonight
and forums like this that engage
the most difficult questions.
And I believe, with all my heart
that we can model a forum of culture engagement
that can be instructive to a divisive world.
If we as a Christ centered university
can balance truth and grace,
and live with that whole idea
of a firm center and soft edges
we can have a great witness.
Having convictions and having compassion,
it is not either or, it is both and.
Jesus came full of grace and full of truth
not half of each.
It's the Jesus way.
And I believe we need more winsome voices in this world.
So the three leaders that we'll hear from tonight
in just a few minutes, they each have
strong convictions to be sure.
And yet you'll see them modeling civility,
modeling conviction, modeling compassion,
even amidst their disagreements.
We have much to learn from them tonight.
So I am so excited about this evening, are you?
You guys ready?
Great night.
[cheering and applauding]
Please join me in welcoming Dr. Melissa Schubert
of our Torrey Honors Institute
who will introduce our three distinguished
guests this evening, Dr. Schubert.
[applause]
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
&gt;&gt; So sorry, took her notes.
That would have been really a big problem.
That's yours, and that's yours,
and this is mine.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
[laughter]
I'm so happy to join Dr. Corey in welcoming you tonight.
We are honored to be hosting all three
of our distinguished guests from whom we are eager
to learn, and two whom we are eager to listen.
Their collective accomplishments,
were I to spend time listing them all
could keep us from getting to the main event.
So forgive me for being brief.
Cornel West was the class of 1943,
Professor of African American studies
at Princeton University,
before leaving the school in 2011
to become Professor of philosophy and Christian Practice
at the Union Theological Seminary in New York City.
He's written 19 books, and edited an additional 13.
He's best known for his classic,
Race Matters, Democracy Matters,
his memoir Brother West, Living and Loving Out Loud,
and his latest book, Black Prophetic Fire.
He appears frequently on the Bill Maher show,
the Colbert Report, CNN, and CPAN,
and has appeared in over 25 documentaries.
West has also appeared in film.
He had a part in the Matrix.
&gt;&gt; Audience: Yeah.
[cheering and applauding]
&gt;&gt; And he has made three spoken word albums
collaborating with artists like Prince,
Andre 3000, and more.
[cheering]
Cornel West's passion, to bear witness
to love and justice in a variety
of media is nearly unparalleled.
Robert P. George is McCormick Professor
of jurisprudence and Director
of the James Madison Program in American Ideals
and Institutions at Princeton University.
He served as a Presidential appointee
to the US Commission on Civil Rights,
and is a member of the President's Council on Bioethics.
He's the author, coauthor on five books
including What is Marriage, Conscience and It's Enemies,
and The Clash of Orthodoxies,
Law Religion and Morality in Crisis.
George is a frequent contributor to First Things Magazine
for which he's also a member
of the Editorial Advisory Board.
And he's written widely for the New York Times,
the Wall Street Journal, Washington Post,
National Review, Touchstone, Boston Review,
City Journal and the Times Literary Supplement
to name a few. [laughter]
He's been recognized for his manifold accomplishments
with, again, to name a few, honorary doctorates of law,
letters, ethics, science, civil law,
humane letters, and diuretical science.
[clapping]
Rich Warren is a pastor of Saddleback Church
in Lake Forest, California.
He founded this church with his wife Kay in 1980.
And speaking of to name a few,
today it averages 30,000 weekly attendees
with more than 300 community ministries
to groups such as prisoners, folks with addictions,
people struggling with mental illnesses,
CEOs, single parents, and those with HIV/AIDS.
Dr. Warren advises leaders in the public,
private, and faith sectors on leadership development,
poverty, health, education, faith in culture.
Time Magazine named him one of 15 world leaders
who mattered most in 2004.
And in 2005 one of the 100 most
influential people in the world.
Warren's a pastor, global strategist,
theologian, and philanthropist.
Please join me in welcoming
our honored guests to the stage.
[cheering and applause]
&gt;&gt; Well thank you first of all for coming tonight.
It says more about you than it does about us.
Because it says that you're interested in learning.
All leaders are learners.
And the moment you stop learning you stop leading.
So thank you for being here tonight.
You are literally sitting in the presence
of genius in these two chairs right here.
I've had the privilege of lecturing
at a lot of universities around the world.
I don't know two more brilliant men
than the two men that are sitting right here,
Robbie George and Cornel West.
[cheering and applause]
They, I can't wait to hear what they're gonna say.
And I'm not even worried about
being the moderator on this,
because I'll just wind it up [laughing by guest lecturers]
and set it up and they'll spike it.
And so we don't have to deal a whole lot with that.
Each of us are gonna take a little introductory remarks
and then we're gonna start some questions.
And then we're gonna take actually questions from Twitter.
And those will be, if you'd like to send
a question in you can do that.
You may not like it, but the future
of the world is diversity.
And we've gotta learn how to get along together.
I do not believe in relativism.
But I do believe in pluralism.
Because the world is different.
We're all different.
You know when I started Saddleback Church,
I was thinkin' about that.
In the first two years of the church,
it was a lily white, young,
urban professional, yuppie church.
Today Saddleback Church speaks 67 languages.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Wow.
&gt;&gt; And actually in our values, S-A-D-D-L-E-B-A-C-K,
each letter represents a value.
A stands for second chance grace place.
But the A stands for all nation congregation.
And we want our church to look
like heaven's gonna look.
If you don't like getting along with other people
you're not gonna like heaven.
'Cause they're not all gonna look like you,
and be like you, sound like you, or smell like you.
So we gotta figure out how to disagree
without being disagreeable.
You can have unity without uniformity.
You can walk hand in hand without seein'
eye to eye on every issue.
And one of the two things that these two brothers
have done is they have shown, they've modeled civility.
Now let's just admit it.
Our society is getting ruder.
Would you agree with that?
And the internet is provoking this.
And the problem with criticism on the internet
is everything is permanent, searchable, and global.
And anybody can say anything about you,
and it's never goin' away.
And you just have to deal with that.
So how do you learn to get along with people
in a world that are lots of differences?
You know, because I,
did the prayer at two Presidents.
One was a republican, and one was a democrat.
I'm often asked are you left wing or are you right wing.
And I always say, I'm for the whole bird.
[laughs and laughter]
Have you ever seen a bird with one wing?
It flies around in a circle.
And I don't know about you, but it's my opinion
that nobody gets it right all the time, especially me.
And so sometimes they're right,
and sometimes they're right.
And we've just gotta learn from each other.
And so, over the past 12 years,
I was talkin' to Cornel about this backstage,
I've had the opportunity the last 12 years
to really learn to work with people
who I totally disagree with,
and who totally disagrees with me around the world.
12 years ago, actually this Saturday
is the 12th anniversary of the Peace Plan,
which Saddleback started.
I came up with the idea, the vision
actually sitting on the ground in South Africa 12 years ago.
And PEACE stands for, promote reconciliation,
equip ethical leaders is the E.
A in PEACE is assist the poor.
C is care for the sick.
And E is educate the next generation.
And I was tellin' Cornel that I've sent
out 24,869 of my members to 197 countries
doing the PEACE plan.
When you do that, you have to learn
to work with all kinds of people.
And there are bridge builders in life,
and there are wall builders in life.
I wanna be a bridge builder.
And particularly, as an evangelist,
you know you can't win your enemies to Christ,
you can only win your friends.
Before people are gonna trust Jesus,
they wanna know, can I trust you.
You know before anybody ever asks is the Bible credible,
they wanna know, are you credible.
Can I trust you?
And if you're credible, well then maybe
I'll listen to what you have to say.
And so, tonight we're gonna talk about freedom.
We're gonna talk about civility.
We're gonna talk about disagreeing and agreeing
and all of those things combined.
Now these two guys,
there are a lot of differences between the two.
But they're more similar in ways that you imagine.
First they both love the Lord.
They both love the Lord.
Second they're both patriots.
They're both Americans.
And third, they're both brilliant.
They both taught at Yale.
There are a lot of other things that they've done together.
So while they have different perspectives.
&gt;&gt; We're both pretty good lookin'.
&gt;&gt; Oh, stunning.
[laughter]
Stunning.
You know I didn't wanna,
[laughter]
so you know,
let's listen, listen to,
Robbie why don't you tell us
a little bit about your opening statement.
&gt;&gt; Thank you Rick.
And I just wanna say how blessed Cornel and I are
to be here with our dear brother Rick,
Pastor Rick, my dear friend,
and with the Torrey Honors College, and Biola University.
I wanna thank the president.
I wanna thank Melissa.
And everyone who's been involved in arranging this visit.
I was here a little over a year ago Cornel.
And I had a wonderful time.
I met with students, I met with faculty.
I gave a little lecture.
And at the end of it they said,
we've got one request, Brother Paul, one request,
what's that?
Can you come back.
And I was about to say, I'd be delighted to,
and he said, and bring Cornel West.
[laughter]
I said, if Cornel West knew what was goin' on here
he'd be beatin' the door down to get here.
So I invited Cornel to join me in coming out here.
And I'm just so grateful to him for agreeing to come along.
We've just had a wonderful day.
[cheering and applause]
we had a wonderful day meeting with the faculty
a group of faculty members with whom we discussed
John Henry Newman's great work,
The Idea of a University,
a book that's truly prophetic.
A book that we should return to at this time
given the condition of so many
of our colleges and universities.
They may be flourishing in many ways.
Many of them are in pretty good shape financially.
The place where I teach is in very good shape financially.
But are these places in good shape
in terms of the mission of the university?
The values that they are exemplifying and imparting?
Well that's not so clear.
And so we need to return to Newman's ideas
about what liberal education means
about the importance of pursuing truth for its own sake.
That's what we've gotta get back to.
And Newman teaches us such important lessons there.
And it was just wonderful to enter
into discussions with those members
of the faculty that were joined with us.
Then we went into one of the other buildings
and we met with students to discuss
John Stuart Mill's great work on liberty.
Another prophetic work that is so important
for us to return to today.
A work that discusses the importance
of freedom of thought and expression.
Not just as abstractions, as abstract rights.
Well, you know I have the right to say whatever I want,
you shouldn't shut me down.
Not just as abstractions,
but as essential conditions
in the enterprise of truth seeking.
We should value freedom of speech, Mill teaches us,
not because there is no truth,
but rather because there is a truth
that needs to be pursued.
That we need to pursue.
That we need to appropriate.
And it's only in conditions of freedom,
where the mind is free,
where people are free to enter into discussion,
and dialogue, and debate that we can pursue the truth.
So it's been a wonderful day.
And we're just so grateful to everyone
for coming out to hear us this evening.
Now to the evening's business.
It's sometimes said, the most powerful bond
in the human world, is the mother child bond.
And I believe that.
That's probably true.
But I wanna call attention this evening
to another very powerful bond that is too often over looked.
It's a bond that we need to appreciate
in order to make that bond happen in our discourse,
in pluralistic societies like the United States
of America where people disagree.
And I call this the bond of truth seeking.
The bond of truth seeking.
What I have in mind is this,
let's ask ourselves the question,
why do we enter into discussion and debate when we do this?
Why do we do it?
It's a question that goes all the way back to Plato,
and his depiction of Socrates
and his interactions with his interlocutors
in the Gorgias, and in some of his other dialogues.
Why do we do it?
Do we do it for victory?
Do we talk for victory?
Do we talk to show off, make a spectacle of ourselves?
Do we talk to impress people,
like at cocktail parties, or maybe in a freshman class
or something like that?
Why do we enter into dialogue, discussion, debate?
Well the reason that we ought to be doing that
is for the sake of the truth.
Now if I'm just trying to defeat you,
my interlocutory in a debate,
to show how much smarter I am,
or to gain publicity for myself,
or to show off,
or to become a public figure, or a celebrity,
that's not worth much.
In the end those goals end up,
even if you achieve them, being ashes in your mouth.
What you should be about with your interlocutory,
the whole point of discussion and debate
is to arrive at the truth together.
And when we understand that as the point,
and we understand the value of the truth,
that the truth is not merely instrumentally worthwhile
because it can be useful for other ends.
But truth itself is inherently, intrinsically worthwhile.
It inherently enriches and ennobles us.
That's why we should be appropriating truth
as much as we possibly can.
When we recognize that,
then we will not see our interlocutor
as an enemy to be defeated,
but rather, even if we disagree,
even if we strongly disagree,
as a friend with whom we are engaged
in a common project with a common goal.
What's that goal?
Trying to get to the truth of whatever
the matter is under discussion.
It may be a profoundly important matter.
It may be a matter of justice
and human rights on which we disagree.
The human condition is such,
we are poor, fallible, frail, fallen creatures.
We can be wrong even about important things.
We can be wrong even when we're trying to be good.
Even when we're trying to do the right thing
we can line up on the wrong side.
And the only way that we can have a hope
of being on the right side
is to think as critically and carefully as we can,
and engage with people who don't
see it just the way we do.
Listen to their arguments,
not in a merely notional sense,
but with an open mind.
The president was absolutely right about that.
That is so critical.
And when we're doing that with each other,
we are forming that bond of truth seeking.
Yes, the method might be dialectical,
it begins from disagreement.
We might not reach agreement.
That's actually not the most important thing.
Agreement is not the most important thing.
Truth is the most important thing.
And we are now working together as friends
in a common enterprise, albeit a dialectical enterprise
of exchanging reasons, disagreeing,
but in a common enterprise of trying
to get to the truth of the matter.
And there's a beautiful analysis.
We discussed this today with the students
in the Torrey Honors College.
Beautiful analysis provided by John Stuart Mill
in the second chapter of On Liberty,
the chapter devoted to freedom of thought and discussion,
where Mill says there are two possibilities
when you are engaged in discussion
and debate with someone you disagree with.
One possibility is that he's right and you're wrong.
Now if he defeats you in the argument in the sense
of showing you the error, the fallacy,
the problem in your logic,
the error in your premise,
that's a defeat you should welcome.
Because he's just deferred upon you a great benefit.
He has moved you, or helped you to move from error to truth.
And if truth is what we think it is,
especially as Christians,
for whom truth is God's truth.
As Christians, people who are devoted to the one
who tells us he is the way, the truth and the life.
If we have the appreciation of truth that we ought to have
as human beings, and especially as Christians,
then we will realize that that friend,
because he cannot be an enemy,
that friend has conferred upon you
an inestimable blessing and benefit.
But Mills says, what if it's the other way around?
What if actually you're right and he's wrong?
Well Mills says, you still shouldn't shut down his speech
or refuse to engage with him.
Because even if he's wrong,
if he's an intellectually serious person,
someone who is thinking about this the way you do,
and we can all make errors.
None of us is 100% right about things.
Alright, so if we're engaging with him,
and he raises questions that cause us to think.
He shows us why people of reasonable good will
are not all on one side.
Even if he's in error, we have learned more deeply,
we've been able to appropriate,
and not simply notionally to understand,
the truth of the thing we believe.
We're not left just in the same position,
believing the truth as a proposition,
we've got a deeper appreciation in understanding the truth
because we've understood why the very best,
strongest arguments against what we believe,
nevertheless fail, despite their strength,
despite the reasonableness of the person
who is engaging with us.
When two people, or more, are involved
in that kind of enterprise,
they are bound together by that bond,
by that truth seeking.
That's a foundation for friendship
that's stronger than anything.
Friendship always involves common projects.
Even on Facebook,
where we have our Facebook friends.
There's the common projects
that we're discussing on Facebook.
It's a virtual friendship.
But it's still a friendship because
we're integrating ourselves together around common goals.
Alright and sometimes they're good goals,
sometimes they're bad goals,
but they're common goals.
But when your common goal is this highest and best thing.
When your common goal is getting to the truth,
and you're united in that enterprise,
you've got something much stronger binding you together
than whatever the disagreement is that separates you.
And that friendship itself is an integral
aspect of our wellbeing and fulfillment.
So now we have not only truth in common,
but we have the friendship in common.
We form this bond of friendship
that arose out of seeking a good together,
seeking a common good.
That bond is itself an aspect
of our wellbeing and fulfillment
because we human beings are not
merely intellectual creatures,
we are also relational creatures.
And I've learned a great deal from
my brother Cornel West here.
He's still wrong about some things,
but I've learned a great deal,
[laughter]
from him. [laughter continues]
But one of the things I have learned
is just how powerful that bond of truth seeking can be.
And how deeply it can unite two people
in the bond of friendship.
And at the end of the day,
it's not about whether you reach agreement.
Even if the disagreement maintains.
It stays in place.
The bond created by friends dedicated to the truth,
working together to get to the truth
is the most powerful thing.
So that's why I bless the day that Cornel
and I began this enterprise together.
And I hope that by our own actions here
and in other places, other people will see
just how much there is to be gained by civil,
and more than simply civil,
carefully listening discourse.
Where we're not just tolerating each other.
Yes, I'll listen,
I'll sit here and not interrupt you.
That's civility.
But really listening to what the other guy has to say
with the thought that, you know,
it's not just that I have something to teach,
I've got something to learn too.
And I have something to learn,
even if I'm right about the thing being discussed,
and my interlocutor is wrong about the thing.
Cornel.
Oh, yeah.
&gt;&gt; I just wanna say, what Robbie just was talking about
is the difference between resolution and reconciliation.
They are not the same.
You can, if you have a marriage, it's,
it needs to be reconciled.
You can reconcile without,
before you resolve all of the differences.
&gt;&gt; That's right.
&gt;&gt; And you can be reconciled to another person
without resolving all of your differences,
and that's exactly what you were just saying.
&gt;&gt; And I wanna say something about it.
Disagreement is no impediment to love,
and it's no impediment to joy.
&gt;&gt; Thank God, or none of us would be married.
&gt;&gt; That's right, yeah.
[laughter]
There is nothing, for me
that is as joy inducing as seeking the goal
of getting to the truth about important matters,
with an interlocutor, with a friend,
with a dear brother who shares that goal.
Where we've got a common bond that is now uniting us.
At some point you will find,
if you do this seriously with serious interlocutors,
at some point you will find,
you have gone beyond merely
exchanging reasons and arguments.
At some point you will suddenly discover,
you'll be in the midst of it before
you realize what's going on,
that the two of you are thinking together.
You're not just exchanging reasons,
you're thinking together.
Last night in our seminar,
Professor West and I are teaching
at Princeton, wonderful seminar,
we have 18 terrific Princeton undergraduates,
just brilliant young men and women.
We were examining the work of the French existentialist,
Christian thinker, Gabriel Marcel.
And Marcel talks about the relationality of human beings,
and the importance of tolerance,
and the importance of dialogue.
But then he talks about another level
that goes beyond simply, in a friendly way,
exchanging ideas, and he calls this, communion.
Communion.
We human beings should go beyond
friendship to communion.
When you are no longer just exchanging
reasons and arguments,
as beneficial as that is to each other right,
to the common project.
When you go beyond that to the point
where you're thinking together.
Thinking together doesn't mean agreeing necessarily.
It means thinking together about the project.
Pushing each other along about the project.
Thinking together in a way that gets you
on the same trajectory even if you don't,
in the end, end up at the same place.
That is communion.
And it's a rare thing, but an important thing
for human beings to reach that kind of communion.
&gt;&gt; Brother West.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
Well first I just wanna say that I'm so blessed to be here.
That this day has been a very special day
at Biola University, is one of the best
kept secrets in the country in terms
of the quality faculty, and the quality students,
and the depth of the conviction.
Anytime I get a chance to be
in dialogue with brother Robbie,
Professor George it's always a joy.
I have a very deep love for my brother,
that we've been through hell and high water together.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Robert: It's true.
&gt;&gt; We're two of the, two highly misunderstood,
misconstrued brothers in the country
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Robert: That's so true.
&gt;&gt; That was truth.
It's very, and it's true.
We've got deep disagreements and we struggle it out.
But it's always in the context of love.
And let me, my dear brother Warren in the flesh,
it's just a beautiful thing to see you
and salute the ways in which you and sister Kay
have been such forces for good here and around,
around the world.
Still full of fire.
Wanna salute the captain of the ship,
President Barry Corey,
the two brothers who picked us up at the airport,
brother Matthew, and our dear brother,
what's our dear brother,
[laughter]
Paul.
&gt;&gt; Oh Paul.
&gt;&gt; How could I forget Paul.
[laughter and applause]
Professor Matthew Wright and Professor Paul Spears.
But I do wanna say this,
that I wanna begin on a note of piety,
because I think that in our very dark
and bleak moment in the cold and cruel world
in which we find ourselves,
and our fundamental attempt
to be in the world and not of it,
ought to begin with an acknowledgment
of the sources of good in our lives.
I am who I am because somebody loved me.
Somebody cared for me.
Somebody attended to me.
And what are the ways in which I can build
on what has been given to me,
as gift horizontally, as gift vertically,
grace, to keep alive that tradition because I come,
you were listenin' to John Coltrane when you came in.
And I hope it wasn't just background music.
[laughter]
'Cause John Coltrane is a part,
and a voice, and a figure in one of the greatest
traditions in the modern world.
Which is a musical tradition that in the face
of catastrophe mustered the courage
to bear witness to compassion.
In the face of being terrorized for 400 years
decides not to terrorize others,
but fight for freedom for everybody.
As Frederick Douglas says,
so learn the truth as John Coltrane and as Curtis Mayfield,
as Aretha Franklin, as Erykah Badu,
as Toni Morrison, James Baldwin.
We can just call the roll as it were.
And it's a human tradition.
But it's one that I have been blessed
to be a part of, not simply because
I showed up in a particular family,
that West family that's nothin' but a love caravan.
[laughter]
I wish you could meet my father.
I'll never be one half of the human being he was.
And then on the Shiloh Baptist church
on the chocolate side of Sacramento, California.
Willie P. Cooke Caravan of Love as well.
Well, we live in a moment,
probably the most commodified, commercialized,
marketized culture in the history of the world.
Every nook and cranny shot through with obsession
with money making and profit taking.
30 years ago that was not the case.
We are still the same human beings,
with the same ugly proclivities,
but just less gas in our spiritual tanks
in the present moment.
Spiritual malnutrition is much more pervasive.
And by spiritual malnutrition I'm not
just talkin' about an emptiness of soul,
but I'm talkin' about and indifference
to the suffering of others.
A callousness to those who are catching hell.
Great rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel used to say,
"Indifference to evil is more insidious than evil itself."
Or William James, probably the greatest,
most lovable, and adorable of all
the public intellectuals in America in the last 200 years,
he say, "Indifference is the one trait
"that makes the very angels weep."
It's the very opposite of what it is
to follow the way of the cross,
as opposed to the dominate ways of the world.
And so anytime we talk about civility
I wanna begin on a spiritual note
and talk about a piety.
And by piety I'm not talkin' about blind acceptance.
I'm talkin' uncritical deference to doctrine or dogma.
I'm talkin' about a way of life
in which you acknowledge those sources of good in your life,
the wind at your back,
so you remember so you can revere something bigger than you,
and you have the courage to resist
in the name of familiar kingdom of God,
a beloved community.
But even if you're not Christian,
there's some other good things to fight for.
Love, democracy, freedom, and so on.
But we never wanna lose sight of the specificity
of our Christian identity and Christian faith.
And what is that specificity.
One, the quest for unarmed truth and unconditional love.
But it's always a fallible quest.
And that unarmed truth,
the condition of truth is to allow suffering to speak,
25th chapter of Matthew, the least of these.
The elderly, the children, the widow,
the fatherless, the motherless,
the physically challenged,
the poor, the workers,
gay brothers, lesbian sisters pushed to the side.
Any group of human beings that our society
easily loses sight of their humanity
and forgets, even if only for a moment,
that they're each individual made
in the likeness and the image of God.
But also, not just that unarmed truth,
but unconditional love.
And I think one of the saddest features of our day,
is American culture is more and more
beginning to look like a Hamlet like condition.
And Hamlet as you know,
is the most sophisticated, philosophical
protagonist in all of modern literature.
Written by the greatest borrowed in the English
that most of, the language that
many of us dream in, Shakespeare.
[laughter]
I know we've got some Spanish brothers and sisters,
so I don't wanna be culturally imperialist about this.
[laughter]
If you're dreamin' in the language of Cervantes
that's a beautiful thing too.
[laughter]
That's beautiful too.
Oh yeah.
The language of Gerber in German or whatever.
But the important thing is,
Hamlet suffers from the inability to love.
And Dostoevsky in The Brothers Karamazov says,
"Hell is defined by those who suffer
"from the inability to love."
Well American culture more and more
becomes a joyless quest for pleasure,
insatiable pleasure, never get enough of it,
endless, bottomless,
and the inability to really be committed to love.
Because love is a form of death.
And you have to learn how to die
in order to learn how to love.
That's why the New Testament says what,
Christians must die daily.
Die daily.
When a culture's joyless quest for pleasure
is a denial of death,
that's why we can easily deny
those locked in a social death.
We can deny those locked into civic death.
Those wrestling with psychic death,
spiritual death.
We were talkin' before about wrestling
with the issue of mental illness
and you and Kay have been magnificent in your courage.
I've been prayin'.
&gt;&gt; Thank you man.
&gt;&gt; Magnificent in your courage.
But the ways in which it's so easy
to lose sight of the precious humanity
of those wrestling with the mental illness.
I mean I've been to jail so many times,
and at least one out of three
of the brothers and sisters in my cell
are wrestling with mental illness.
And unable to get medication.
And they tend to stay in there longer than me.
And I stay in there long enough.
[laughter]
I'm ready to go, I'm ready to get out.
[laughter]
But in talking about,
disagreement we're not just talking
about something political,
we're not just talkin' about even something civil,
we're talkin' about something spiritual, you see.
Something profoundly spiritual.
And for Christians it is inescapably spiritual, you see.
And in the end of course,
it's an acknowledgement of having
a hermeneutical humility.
And an intellectual humility.
Acknowledging that you could be wrong,
and there's a good chance that you are at times wrong.
But you're still willin' to stand in your truth,
and try to speak your truth,
and opt for a deep integrity,
rather than a cheap popularity.
[applause]
Because so oftentimes in America,
to be popular is to be well adjusted to injustice.
&gt;&gt; Audience Member: Oh!
&gt;&gt; See that's not the kind of popularity
Christians ought to be interested in.
To be popular being well adapted to indifference,
that's not the kind of popularity
Christians ought to be interested in.
The benchmark of the Christian way of life,
of the way of the cross,
is there go some of those strange folk
who look like they're fools in the eyes of the world,
who are still tryin' to love against the grain,
knowing that justice is what love looks like in public.
Just like tenderness is what love feels like in private.
And you say, oh, those are those strange ones.
That's the way it was in the early church wasn't it.
Those are those strange ones still talkin' about love.
Obsessed with that Palestinian Jew named Jesus
who was enacting, embodying that love.
You say, yes, that's right, you got it right.
That's right, you got it right.
That's what we're about.
So in that sense I do wanna begin
on that pietistic note and that spiritual note.
Because all in I think Reinhold Niebuhr
put it so well when he said, "Any justice
"that's only justice soon degenerates
"into something that's less than justice."
&gt;&gt; Robert: Good point.
&gt;&gt; Justice must be rescued by something
much more deeper than justice, which is love.
Love of truth, love of neighbor,
and familiar love of enemy.
And we won't go into that now,
but I think that's very, very important.
'Cause it means then even your foe
is part of the human family,
and in some ways an extension of your own humanity.
Because for most of us, I know in my case,
that I was a gangster before I met Jesus,
and now I'm a redeemed sinner with gangster proclivities.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah that's it.
[laughter and applause]
&gt;&gt; Pray for me, pray for me.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; You know, I knew moderating this was gonna be easy.
[laughter]
I had all these questions here,
I have a hundred questions just on
just what you guys just talked about.
You know when you talked,
you we're sayin' about, with gangster proclivity,
one of the things,
we have a program in our church that was started
in Saddleback called Celebrate Recovery.
And it is a Christian 12 step based on the beatitudes.
And one of the things that makes it
different from Alcoholics Anonymous,
is at Alcoholics Anonymous you stand up,
and for 40 years, you may not have had a drink in 40 years,
you'll stand up and say,
"Hi, I'm Joe, and I'm an alcoholic."
You're making your primary identity with your weakness.
We don't allow people to do that in Celebrate Recovery.
We stand up and say,
"Hi, my name is Joe, and I'm a follower
"of Jesus who struggles with alcohol."
Big difference.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; My primary identity is not in my sin,
and it's not in my weakness.
It's in my relationship to Christ.
Now, was that good or what?
What these guys just said.
I mean thank you all, God bless you, have a great evening.
We'll see you later. [laughter and applause]
Alright that was just unbelievable.
Wow.
I really have a lot of questions.
But let's just forget these questions,
and let me ask you this,
[laughter]
Robbie talked all about truth.
And Cornel talked all about love.
Let's talk about the interplay between these two things.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Mm.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Oh yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay, lets just talk the,
okay, because I'm thinkin' here,
my mind is just reelin', I'm thinkin',
there's a verse in Isaiah where it says,
"Truth is dying in the streets."
&gt;&gt; Yes, yes.
&gt;&gt; "Truth is dying in the streets.
And I know we all believe that.
Truth is dying, but there's also a verse over in Timothy
where it says, that in the last days,
"men will be lovers of pleasure,
"lovers of selves more than lovers of God."
We know that's true too.
Now the Bible tells us that Jesus
was full of grace and truth.
He's the only ever one that had this balance.
Full of grace, and full of truth.
And Ephesians tells us to speak the truth, and love.
So I want you to both,
and don't give me a slogan answer.
Go ahead and go deep on this.
Where do you see the interplay between truth and love.
Because some people use love to fudge on the truth.
And some people use truth in a very unloving way.
So let's talk about that.
&gt;&gt; Well number one, we've gotta be serious
about what the truth is about love.
We have to have the true understanding of what love is.
We, look,
sometimes intellectual historians
divide up the epochs and put names on them.
So sometimes the medieval period
is called the age of faith.
And the enlightenment period is called the age of reason.
Well if the medieval period is the age of faith,
and the enlightenment period is the age of reason,
what age do we live in?
We live in the age of feeling.
The age of feeling.
Feeling is the touchstone of everything.
The measure of everything.
And what do we do with the concept
of love in the age of feeling?
We reinterpret, we retranslate love into a feeling.
Love is a matter of feeling,
and love is a matter of respecting people's feelings.
Or stroking people.
Or making people feel good.
Because feeling is the touchstone of everything.
Well whatever that is,
that's not the Christian understanding of love.
Christian love is not a matter of feeling.
It's a matter of volition.
It is the active willing of the good
of the other for the sake of the other.
And I'll tell you something.
That makes it hard to love.
If it's just a matter of feeling, that's not so hard.
Well with some people it's hard.
But you know, it's hard to love some people,
'cause you can't feel very good about them.
But it kinda makes it easy on us to just treat,
bein' nice to everybody, and strokin' everybody,
and sayin' oh yeah, I'm okay, you're okay.
Remember that book I'm Okay, You're Okay.
Not exactly the purpose driven life.
You know, put very well known [laughter]
books sold a lot of copies.
&gt;&gt; I'm not okay, and you're not okay.
But that's okay, 'cause God says we're okay.
&gt;&gt; And we're in big trouble.
[laughter]
So once we understand the truth about love,
we understand that loving is a lot harder
that you think it is because sometimes
love involves tough love.
And this is where disagreement again
comes into the picture.
Because when we disagree with people
sometimes we have to tell them hard truths.
We have to be open, as brother Cornel said,
to the possibility that we're wrong
and in need of revising our view,
maybe we need to hear a hard truth
comin' from the other side,
but sometimes we need to deliver hard truths,
when it would be easier to say nothing.
Or to go along with whatever the trends
in the culture are, a culture that is,
as Cornel says, loves pleasure and prestige,
and status, and these fleeting things.
Or it'd be easier just to stroke people
and say, I'm okay, you're okay,
or certainly you're okay whether I am okay or not.
But that's not loving people.
And sometimes we really have to deliver a message.
Now sometimes when Christians say,
well look I've gotta speak the truth in love,
but I do have to speak the truth,
other people will respond to that by saying,
you Christians are just guilty of prejudice.
And you hide your prejudice behind the idea
that you should hate the sin and love the sinner.
They wanna tell us that by rejecting the sin
we are rejecting the sinner.
And we're all too often so intimidated,
or so unwilling to bear the consequences of truly loving,
because it really is hard, that we go silent.
Or even capitulate.
But that's not love.
What our obligation in those situations is to do,
is to say, no matter what you call me,
no matter what the consequences are for me,
I am going to speak the truth in love.
And I'm gonna speak the truth because I love you.
If I tell you, you shouldn't be doing that.
You shouldn't be going down that road.
If I criticize your ideology because I think
that ideology is destructive and contrary
to human wellbeing, contrary to your wellbeing,
you are gonna be called names.
I'm gonna be called names if I do that.
But that's what speaking the truth
in love really is all about.
It means getting, first of all,
to the truth about what love is.
It's not being a feeling.
And then the responsibilities
that come with truly loving,
which can be really hard because it can bring
the wrath of the culture,
the dominant power in the culture down upon you.
But that's what we're called to do.
I mean Jesus didn't say,
come and follow me and you're gonna be really rich.
Come and follow me, you're gonna be really popular.
Come and follow me, and man,
things are gonna go good for you.
&gt;&gt; He said, "if they hate me, they're gonna hate you."
&gt;&gt; That's right, and he said,
"If you wanna be my disciple,
"take up your cross and follow me."
Now what does that actually mean?
In practice?
That means being willing to take the slings and arrows
that come with other people thinking
really badly of you because you're out of touch
with the dominant ideology of the time.
But still we've gotta do it.
Can I tell a little story on Cornel
since I have the microphone?
&gt;&gt; You know he's often called the prophet.
Which is someone called to speak the truth.
&gt;&gt; You know but I'm not a prophet.
I am a, my momma's child, and daddy's kid.
That's all.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; You got the prophet the non prophet--
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; I gotta tell a Cornel story since he told
about how many times he went to jail.
[laughter]
So I was elected Chairman of the US Commission
on Religious Freedom, but this is not a story about me.
And I was gonna be sworn in by Chief Justice Roberts
at the US Supreme Court in the marble temple.
It's magnificent.
I invited my family.
It was a wonderful honor and opportunity for me.
But I, since this was gonna be a human rights job,
chairing the commission,
I wanted my dear friend and brother Cornel West
to come and hold the Bible for me when I was sworn in.
And I wanted a proper Bible.
So I asked, and they graciously granted my request.
I asked the people at the Harriet Tubman house,
in Auburn, New York to let me borrow
Harriet Tubman's Bible for brother Cornel
to hold for me to be sworn in on.
Well that's not what the story is.
Now we get to the story.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Richard: Sorry you're times up.
Go ahead Cornel.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; We're walkin' up the steps to the marble temple.
Of course they've got a good deal of security around there.
And one of the guards looks over
at one of the police officers,
looks over at Cornel, gives him the look.
And I'm thinkin' to myself, what's goin' on here?
And Cornel looked over at me and he said,
"You know, brother Robbie,
"this is the first time I've ever been
"to the Supreme Court where I wasn't
"comin' here to be arrested."
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; That's true, that's true.
&gt;&gt; Richard: That was speakin' the truth.
&gt;&gt; That's right.
&gt;&gt; Richard: Speakin' the truth.
&gt;&gt; He was there as an honored guest of the Chief Justice.
We had a wonderful time in the chambers.
We had a beautiful ceremony.
We got photographed with Harriet Tubman's Bible.
It doesn't get better than that.
That was great.
&gt;&gt; And the fact that it was tied to Brother Robbie
keeping track of precious human beings,
be they Muslim, be they Jews,
be they Christian, be they Baha'i faith,
and others who are wrestling very vicious persecution,
and how do you keep track of them.
But for me, when you talk about love and truth though,
it has so much to do with courage.
And we used to sing this song in my church,
must Jesus bear the cross alone,
and all the world go free,
know there's a cross for everyone,
and there's a cross for me.
And you can't talk about that cross
unless you're talkin' about unbelievable courage.
And you see, we live in a culture,
a superficial spectacle where people
are more and more convinced that the highest
level of attainment is to be smart and have big dollars.
And the worst thing in the world
is to aspire to be simply the smartest person in the room.
[audience member laughs]
Let the phone be smart, you outta be wise,
[laughter]
compassionate, courageous.
But in a market driven culture,
courage has to generate some short term gain,
or some short term pay, or it's held at arms length.
You see.
And so you really can't talk about telling the truth,
unless you're willing to be courageous.
I mean the greatest modern Christian thinker
in my view, was Soren Kierkegaard.
He said to be a Christian is to do what?
"to live dangerously."
See most Christians wanna be safe.
They want security.
You see it's blessed assurance, it's not blessed security.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Good line.
I'm gonna Tweet that.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; But it's very important.
&gt;&gt; They've already done it.
&gt;&gt; They've already done it, that's right.
&gt;&gt; It's not rational certainty, it's blessed assurance.
You're standin' on the promises not,
not premises.
Not logical premises, not geographical premises.
So you gotta be free enough to be courageous,
to be led and to learn how to die.
To learn how to die is to what?
Critically examine yourself.
It could be Socratic, it could be prophetic, or whatever.
To render yourself accountable to the higher standards
in the same way John Coltrane,
he's rendering himself accountable to Johnny Hodges,
Charlie Parker, and he knows he can't aspire,
he can't go beyond them.
They're the higher standards.
And yet what does he do?
He creates new levels in his standards
because he's critically examining himself.
He's learning how to die in order to learn how to love,
and gives us, Love Supreme.
Deep.
[laughter]
Not me, Coltrane.
Not Coltrane, the tradition.
Not just the tradition,
the best of what it is to be human.
Black people have no monopoly on it,
but when you've been wresting with social death,
and civic death, and psychic death, and spiritual death
for 400 years, and hated so intensely,
you can teach the world somethin' about love,
if you are courageous.
Thank you Martin King.
Thank you Stevie Wonder.
Thank you Fannie Lou Hamer.
Right now, the moment in Baltimore.
Rage, catastrophe.
How will the rage be filtered?
Through love and justice, or hatred and revenge?
Crucial question.
Not just for black people.
Not just for Baltimore.
For America.
And without that courage, then the love and the truth
is suspended, and what kicks in?
The ways of the world.
Hatred, revenge, envy, resentment,
domination, oppression, exploitation,
the same old story that the cross was trying to interrupt.
[audience murmurs]
The cross trying to disrupt.
Brother Oscar Owens knows what I'm talkin'
about for West Angeles.
We've been talkin' about this in Union Seminary
for 35 years with James Washington and others.
Same story, but new circumstances, new conditions.
And I thank God we've got a younger generation
who are just tired of the obsession
with smartness and dollars.
They want something deeper.
[applause]
They want something more real.
They want something more livable.
They want a stronger armor.
The sixth chapter of Ephesians is no joke.
[laughter]
You've gotta thicken that armor.
Put it on.
Get on the battlefield.
And love.
And learn how to die.
And then offer it all to the glory of God
'cause it's not about you,
it's not about your ego.
It's about somethin' much, much grander.
That's it, it's a mystery.
&gt;&gt; What marcel calls--
&gt;&gt; Exactly it is a mystery.
&gt;&gt; In other words not a problem to be solved.
It's something to be entered into,
and explored more and more deeply.
It can't be exhausted.
It's not like, you know figuring out
whether the planet Pluto exists or doesn't exist.
That's a problem.
Scientists put their mind to the problem,
they use the technology they have,
to solve the problem, does it exist or not exist.
The important questions about leading a human life,
what it means to be a human being
are not problems that can be solved.
Too much of modern thought is premised on the idea
that the great existential questions
are problem to be solved.
&gt;&gt; Richard: Good question.
&gt;&gt; Ultimately to be solved by the application
of therapeutic methods.
We live not only in an age of feeling,
but an age that tries to transform
existential, spiritual issues into
therapeutic problems. &gt;&gt; Personal fulfillment.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly.
&gt;&gt; And the tremendous authority of science,
and the fetishizing of technology.
&gt;&gt; Which is not to say that science is a bad thing.
No science is a good thing.
Not saying technology is a bad thing.
Technology's a good thing.
But technology is not gonna give you salvation.
Science is not gonna give you salvation.
It's not going to answer the deepest
longings of the human heart.
And when we think it will,
we are just setting ourselves up
for a profound disappointment, alienation and cynicism.
&gt;&gt; You've both quoted, "Deny yourself take up the cross."
&gt;&gt; Yes, yes.
&gt;&gt; Which is the exact opposite of what society teaches.
In those days nobody took up the cross,
unless the Roman's were gonna nail 'em to it.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Yeah, I know.
&gt;&gt; He's saying come and die.
In fact, it's interesting,
the very first words of Jesus, in his public ministry,
are three words, "Come and see."
Jesus goes out to the Jordan river.
He's baptized.
The next day he goes out to the Jordan river again.
John turns to two of his disciples, Andrew and John,
and says, "There goes the lamb of God, follow him."
And Andrew asks the first question
of Jesus in his public ministry.
He said, "Where you going Lord?"
And Jesus gives a simple question, answer,
"Come and see."
&gt;&gt; Cornel: "Come and see."
&gt;&gt; Now that's about a low level
a commitment as you can get.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Yeah, "Come and see."
&gt;&gt; You don't have to check, sing anything,
sign anything, sacrifice anything, just come and see.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Just come and see.
&gt;&gt; And that's where we start with people.
But we don't leave them there.
We move, the whole business of sanctification,
the whole business of spiritual formation
is moving people from come and see, to come and die.
Which is what you were talkin' about.
Now I wanna go back to this issue,
'cause both of you, both talked about humility.
And being humble in our,
the fact that we might not be right.
I believe in the inerrancy of scripture.
I do not believe in the inerrancy of my interpretations.
[murmurs and clapping]
Now I could be, I could get those wrong, on occasions.
So how does, let's go to humility and civility,
and put those things together.
I think humility is maybe one of the most
misunderstood character qualities.
A lot of people think humility
means goin' around puttin' yourself down.
Oh, I'm nothin', I'm no good, I'm nothin', I'm junk.
Jesus did not die for junk.
You wanna know how valuable you are, look at the cross.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: That's right.
&gt;&gt; Jesus did not die for junk.
You are deeply flawed, but you are very valuable.
You are deeply flawed, and you are a sinner
and I'm a sinner.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we're lowly, dust of the earth,
yet made in the image and likeness
of the divine creator and ruler of the universe.
Both of those are true.
&gt;&gt; So let's talk about humility.
I think humility is not denying your strengths.
Humility is being honest about your weaknesses.
And Paul says, "Follow me as I follow Christ."
But he says, "I'm the chief among sinners."
And he could be very honest about saying, "Follow me."
because he was also very honest
about all the stuff he did wrong.
And he writes it down for posterity.
So talk to me about how humility and civility go together.
Both of you.
Cornel, why don't we start with you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah I start off reflecting on humility
as a response to an ontological condition.
And what I mean by that is,
we are the kind of beings who are crack vessels.
We are the kind of beings who are fallen and finite,
and therefore it's on the one hand,
just an acknowledgement of the sheer
facticity of who we are.
So people who run around thinking somehow,
that they're entitled, and have assets or something
because they're better, they're not just arrogant,
but they're living a lie.
And therefore, they're in denial.
I mean look at, for example,
the legacy of white supremacy,
or we could talk about any other,
anti Jewish, anti Arab, anti Muslim,
ideologies, or anti women, or whatever.
But let's just look at the legacy of white supremacy.
It is an ideology that tries to convince persons
that somehow they're better, and superior than others,
and it's just not true.
Now of course, it's alive.
But it's a lie.
You see, it can operate.
But it's just not true.
You're living a life of mendacity in that sense.
So what Christianity comes along and says,
is I'm gonna remind you from whence you come.
Made in the image and likeness of God, elevated.
Sanctity.
We say dignity now, but that comes from the stoics,
of the pagan brothers and sisters.
[laughter]
But for Christians it's sanctity.
And we're trying to sanctify the world
to the degree to which this kingdom of God
can work through us as crack vessels.
And at the same time, an acknowledgement
that we can't do it alone.
We gonna need a whole lot of help,
a lotta aid, a lotta grace.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And hence the humility.
&gt;&gt; Well that's that verse where Paul says,
"work out your salvation with fear and trembling,
"for it is God who works in you."
Now notice it doesn't say work for your salvation.
It says, work out.
When I go to a gym, I'm not goin' to get,
to create muscle, I'm goin' to strengthen
the muscle that God gave me.
I didn't get that muscle as a gift.
So work out means develop what you got.
So while you're workin' out, God is workin' in.
That's what you're saying.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: That's nice.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; You could Tweet that one,
'cause I'm gonna Tweet yours.
[laughter]
You know I always say,
the first time you quote something, you say,
"Now, Rick says,"
then the second time you use it says,
"It's been said."
[laughter]
And then the third time you use it, say,
"You know, I've always thought."
[laughter]
If you use it three times, it's yours man.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; No but it's gettin' at the truth.
&gt;&gt; Well to relate to the humility virtue
to the main subject matter of this evening's conversation,
intellectual humility,
I would say that the key to that
really is recognizing our fallibility.
Understanding that though we are rational creatures
we've been endowed with this remarkable,
literally God like gift of reason, of rationality,
our reason is imperfect.
Theologians call this the consequence,
or the noetic consequences of sin.
That sin not only weakens our will to do the right thing,
it darkens the intellect.
As a natural law theorist it pains me to admit that.
But it is actually,
actually true, yeah,
[cross talk]
Well it's somewhere--
&gt;&gt; You heard if first right here.
[laughs]
&gt;&gt; So we have to recognize that we are of fallen creatures,
and that we can be mistaken about things.
But let me tell you what intellectual humility
in the current context is not.
It's not supposing that,
I must yield or bow,
give up my own judgment about right or wrong,
or good or bad, or true of false, or just or unjust,
to bring myself into line with the dominant
ideology of the secular culture.
That's not intellectual humility.
I don't know what that is.
That's conformism.
That's going along to get along.
Or getting along to go along.
It's not what intellectual humility is.
Intellectual humility recognizes fallibility,
and so it's willing to enter into conversation,
into dialogue with somebody who's got some reasons
to give against your view, or against your interpretation.
Now that applies to people when we're interacting
with people who've got a secular argument
against Christianity, to an atheist who wants to engage us.
We should be listening to him.
We are fallible.
We could be wrong about the God question.
I said that at Biola.
We could be wrong about the God question.
I don't think we are actually.
&gt;&gt; Richard: I'd bet my life we're not.
&gt;&gt; We're all bettin' our lives that we're not.
But we need to be willing to listen
and not just sit respectfully and listen.
But actually hear what somebody,
who will actually defend the secular,
or atheistic point of view.
Listen to what he has to say,
think about the credibility of what he's saying,
and then say what we have to say in response to that.
Now those are two very different things.
Actually listening and trying to learn,
and being open to the possibility you're wrong is one thing.
Just capitulating to get yourself in line
with cultural orthodoxies is another thing altogether.
That is not intellectual humility.
&gt;&gt; Well that's,
that's also the new terminology,
the new definition of tolerance.
Tolerance used to mean, I treat you with respect
and dignity even if I totally disagree with you.
I will treat you with respect and dignity,
and as Cornel said, you're made in God's image,
and I'm gonna treat you with that kind of value.
Today tolerance, for a lot of people means,
all ideas are equally valid.
Well that's nonsense.
The person who says the moon is made of cheese,
and the other one says the moon's made of rock,
are not equally valid ideas.
All ideas are not equally valid,
and that's what you're saying,
is that humility is not saying,
well whatever you wanna just believe.
&gt;&gt; Yeah that's right.
I mean even when it comes
to the interpretation of scripture.
Scripture does require interpretation.
And you're right,
we may believe that the scripture's telling the truth,
but we can't be absolutely certain
that we're interpreting the scripture correctly,
which means we have to be in dialogue with each other,
and with--
&gt;&gt; Richard: And with the church.
&gt;&gt; With others.
We need the church, exactly right.
But, if we are driven to a particular interpretation
of scripture, not by anything internal to the scripture,
or the Christian tradition itself,
or in virtue of the correct use
of the philosophical tools that are available
to us to bring to bear to interpret
more accurately what has been said.
But rather, again, if we're being driven
to a particular interpretation
'cause that will get us in line
with a secular cultural orthodoxy,
that whatever that is, it's not Christianity.
It's simply deforming the witness
of the church to make it conform,
so we can hang onto the consolations of Christian faith,
such as they are,
without having to actually witness
to the Christian faith which is a scandal
to the world and always has been.
[audience member clapping]
&gt;&gt; Cornel. &gt;&gt; I mean part of the problem
&gt;&gt; Has been though, this is where I wanna defend
my secular brothers and sisters,
that we needed the pluralizing,
and secularizing of public discourse
because so much of the record of institutional religion
has been one of intolerance,
if not outright persecution.
So that the secular folk had, [applause]
and we gotta keep in mind, most of those secular folk
came through religious traditions,
came through Christian's traditions,
were taught to love the truth,
and discovered, lo and behold,
the churches are less interested in the truth than power,
because they had adjusted themselves to monarchs.
They had adjusted themselves to elites at the top.
Whereas Jesus had just told them to be love struck.
Period.
Not color blind.
Not concerned about what your politics are.
Not concerned about what your sexual orientation is.
Not concerned about what nation you are.
You supposed to just love these folk.
You say, wow.
That's serious.
Now that means, [laughing]
that means in a broader sense that all of us
are gonna be failures because you gonna have
institutional expressions of this
that reinforce, not just hierarchy,
but power, domination, and so forth.
So the secular folk had to come along and say look,
we gotta create a public space
where people can enter with respect
and without humiliation because these state churches,
and these institutional religious practices
don't create this public space.
That's what liberalism was.
Now I'm not a liberal.
But I appreciates the insights of liberalism,
visa vie kings, and monarchs, and visa vie state churches.
The American revolution was what?
An attempt to ensure a pluralism
in public life, and public discourse,
for religious, non religious, for Mormons,
for agnostics, and so forth and so on.
That was an achievement in the species.
The problem of course,
was that it was also tied to empire and imperialism.
It mistreated indigenous peoples.
It enslaved Africans.
It reinforced patriarchal households,
oppresses sisters of all colors.
But it still created this space.
And then we have to become,
we have to build on being love struck.
&gt;&gt; Richard: Yeah, yeah.
&gt;&gt; As we connect to those issues of patriarchy,
and racism, and imperialism, and so on you see.
&gt;&gt; But two points about that.
&gt;&gt; Would you accept that formulation brother--
&gt;&gt; If you'll allow me a distinction.
&gt;&gt; Okay, okay.
&gt;&gt; Let me tell you what the distinction is.
There's a distinction between a secular public sphere
that is a civil public sphere
in which all citizens can enter on terms of equality,
and vie for the allegiance of their fellow citizens.
And then there is secularism,
which is a world view, a pseudo religion
that competes with the great traditions
of faith and other secular systems.
The trouble with our dear secular brothers and sisters,
and we work with them everyday,
and we love them as we must as Christians.
And many of them are quite lovable,
and so it's not too difficult.
The trouble is--
&gt;&gt; Cornel: And some of them are very wise.
&gt;&gt; They're not proposing, in so many cases,
a secular and civil public square,
but rather the establishment of secularism as the governing
public philosophy of the United States.
&gt;&gt; I'm critical of that.
&gt;&gt; And the record of secularism,
and we as Christians should be the first to criticize
the flaws, and the errors of Christian history,
of the sins committed &gt;&gt; Of our own past.
In the name of the church, by officials of the church,
by Christians ourselves. &gt;&gt; absolutely.
We should be the first.
But let's not deceive ourselves into thinking
that the record of secularism is pure.
The record of secularism &gt;&gt; oh no.
is horrific. &gt;&gt; Oh no.
It gave is fascism.
It gave us communism.
It gave us eugenics.
It was the great and the good.
It was the leaders of the powerful corporations,
of the great foundations, even the mainline churches,
that embraced the dogmas of eugenics.
Expressed by no less an establishment figure
than Oliver Wendell Holmes in his famous opinion,
in Buck against Bell upholding
the mandatory sterilization of an allegedly
feeble woman minded woman under a Virginia law
on the theory that three generations of imbeciles is enough.
That wasn't Christians that were embrace,
at least it wasn't traditionalist Christians
that were embracing that.
Although too many Christians of the mainline
fell in line with it.
It was the secular liberal elite
that went for it hook line and sinker,
and didn't abandon it until Hitler gave it a bad name.
And guess what.
It's now comin' back. &gt;&gt; Cornel: Oh Lord it's true.
But in a different dress, in a different rhetoric,
in the language of our autonomy, and choice,
and liberty and so forth. [applause]
So we have to be very careful.
&gt;&gt; Oh absolutely, absolutely.
And if we look at all of these traditions
as human traditions, and we know,
they're gonna have some ugly undersides
and some nice sides. &gt;&gt; That's exactly right.
But let's, but let, &gt;&gt; but that's why
&gt;&gt; We always have to be open to argument.
&gt;&gt; Let's look at one figure who sits
atop much of what we're talking about,
and that's the great Anton Chekhov.
Now Chekhov is in some ways secular,
because he's agnostic.
He's a medical doctor.
Tending to the poor during the day,
and writing some of the greatest plays.
I'm told you're gonna have The Seagull here May the 8th.
I wish I could be here.
But I will be here in spirit for that Chekhov play.
But, he goes through the Russian orthodox church.
He fundamentally committed to the notion,
condemnation of non forgiveness for all.
There's probably more in Chekhov's corpus
than there are in many churches.
&gt;&gt; Robert: I agree with that.
&gt;&gt; In terms of love.
But he can't accept the Christian consolation,
even though he's fundamentally,
not just committed, he enacts and embodies
the Christian compassion.
He goes to church on Sundays.
He's moved by the passion.
And he simply says, it's too beautiful to be true.
So he's got a deep Christian sensibility you see.
He reminds me of Simone Weil.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Simone Weil, that's right,
the great French thinker.
That's right. &gt;&gt; That's right.
&gt;&gt; She's a Jesafile.
She's in love with Jesus, but she can't accept Christ.
&gt;&gt; In the end she,
everyone wonders, and she doesn't accept baptism.
&gt;&gt; She will not, &gt;&gt; in love with Jesus,
She goes right to the edge, &gt;&gt; And doesn't accept baptism.
In that sense.
So is Chekhov then in some sense secular?
Yes.
Does he represent so much of the great insights
of our own tradition in terms of love.
Yes, he gets out of Christian churches,
Russian orthodox version right.
And he exemplifies levels of humility,
truth telling, acknowledgement of his own fallibility.
And of course such a great writer.
[cross talk]
&gt;&gt; Believe and point out, even the secularism
in our society today had Christian roots.
And we've got this cut flower syndrome,
where you cut off the roots.
Flower looks good for awhile,
but it's eventually gonna go.
You know, liberalism--
&gt;&gt; Robert: It's invading the capitol.
&gt;&gt; Liberalism has changed in its meaning.
When I was a kid, liberalism would say
to our government as we were going overseas,
don't impose western values on other cultures.
Let them be there own.
That would be classic liberalism.
Okay, don't impose our values.
Now because I'm in the PEACE Plan,
because I've been in dozens, and dozens,
dozens of countries,
I've seen it now where the government is saying to people,
we're not gonna give you aid unless
you agree with us on abortion,
and on all these other issues that they've got.
And now they're, &gt;&gt; Robert: Homosexuality.
They are imposing their values.
It's the exact opposite of what it was 50 years ago.
&gt;&gt; No, that's absolutely true.
And you're right that we are depleting
the capital that was built up
by Judeo Christian civilization.
We're not paying anything in.
We're just living off the capital.
And I think in the long term that's really quite scary.
Even in the medium term, that's really quite scary.
But I think, Professor West is absolutely right
to bring Chekhov into this.
And what we've got in Chekhov is not
a sort of standard issue, liberal secularist
at all of the sort that we would recognize today.
We've got a man with a prof...
And a great genius, an artistic genius
with a profound Christian sensibility.
I think it would be fair to say,
tell me if you would agree with it.
I think it would be fair to say
that the following proposition is true.
No Christianity, no Chekhov.
Without Christianity &gt;&gt; oh that's true.
There could not be Chekhov, and the contributions
of Chekhov. &gt;&gt; Of Chekhov.
So the make--
&gt;&gt; Chekhov knew the difference between hope and optimism.
&gt;&gt; Yes he did.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; That's a big deal.
&gt;&gt; And in some sense the Blue's idiom
was the idiom of the 20th century.
It was the most barbaric, and beastly,
and brutal of all recorded time.
150 million fellow precious human beings killed.
And the blues that was created by black folk in America.
Not just the music, the idiom, catastrophe,
catastrophe, whatcha gonna do about it.
Will it be compassion?
Will it be wisdom?
Will it be revenge, hatred?
Chekhov is a poet of catastrophe.
But he situates it into everyday life.
The misery of everyday life.
But it is catastrophe.
But it's so much love coming in.
But the difference between Chekhov and the Blues
is that the Blues is in some sense still American.
&gt;&gt; Hm.
&gt;&gt; See we Americans, you know, we romantic folk.
It's like that green light at the end
of F. Scott Fitzgerald's great novel, The Great Gatsby.
Gatsby still believed in the green light.
[laugher]
That's America.
Tomorrow will be better.
Tomorrow will be, just wait til tomorrow.
We ascribe metaphysical status to the future, to futurity.
Whereas Chekhov was was not American.
Even the Blues say, like, get up in the mornin',
whether it's bad but what,
tomorrow morning will be better.
&gt;&gt; Chekhov's not saying the sun'll come out tomorrow.
&gt;&gt; Exactly, he's Russian, and that sense.
&gt;&gt; On the other hand each
[laughter and applause]
each culture has its contribution to make.
And God bless the Russian culture.
It's given us such magnificent works of literature,
and poetry, and drama, and so forth.
But I think we've got our contribution to make as well.
And I wouldn't want America to give up that sense of hope.
I would say hope more than optimism.
When it degenerates to mere optimism
it's not worth anything.
&gt;&gt; Optimism is psychological.
Hope is theological.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Hope is theological, a theological virtue.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And it cannot really exist apart
from the other theological virtues.
Without love and faith, there is no hope.
Just as without hope, there can't be love and faith.
&gt;&gt; But most American culture is about optimism.
It's not about hope.
&gt;&gt; We're gonna have to take some questions
from the internet in just a minute.
But I wanna ask one more of Cornel.
&gt;&gt; Mm hm.
&gt;&gt; 'cause thins thing's called agree to disagree.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; How do you define freedom?
And what does freedom mean to you?
&gt;&gt; How do I define freedom?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, what does it mean to you.
And take as much time as you need on that.
&gt;&gt; It's a wonderful question.
See I think there is no such thing as freedom
without it being over against some constraints.
So that liberty does not reduce the licentiousness.
It's just license in that way.
But freedom for me, is so rooted in the,
well put it this way, the early Karl Barth
defined the Gospel as radical love,
and freedom and radical freedom in love.
So that I wouldn't wanna define freedom
independent of the love.
And I wouldn't wanna define freedom
in just an individualistic mode you see.
I would wanna define freedom as us being, yes,
individuals with a certain sanctity,
but always against the matrix of family,
community, tradition, and then God, and kingdom.
&gt;&gt; Okay so there's some fundamental
values that are holdin' up freedom.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean--
&gt;&gt; Well, love is not really a value though.
Love is a way of life, a mode of existence.
Value's a little bit too textbook like in that sense.
It doesn't cut deep enough.
You know what I mean?
That's the existential point in that sense though, yeah.
&gt;&gt; Our founders talked about ordered liberty.
The American experiment in republican government
was an experiment in ordered liberty.
And they drew precisely the distinction
that brother Cornel drew between liberty and license.
License is the freedom to do what you want,
when you want, however you want,
with whomever you want, no matter the reason.
Ordered liberty is liberty morally ordered.
Ordered to the good.
Empowering us, enabling us, removing the constraints
in our way so that we can go out
and accomplish our vocations,
the things that we are called to do.
The things that are fully in line
with the integral wellbeing of human beings.
To pursue our own, say artistic ventures,
or our political causes, our communion,
our brotherhood together.
It's freedom for service, for service really.
So I think we have to bear that understanding in mind.
Now why did they call it an experiment in ordered liberty?
Or an experiment in republican government?
It's because past efforts, earlier efforts
to form republics, to give up authoritarian regimes,
give up kings, give up strongmen,
give up Cromwellian type rulers had all failed.
Had all failed.
And the temptation was to think that
human beings simply can't be governed by themselves.
They can't be governed as republican citizens.
They always have to be subjected to government.
So when the very first federalist paper,
the publius, that's the pseudonym,
tells us that the real question that this constitution
that was being proposed places is,
can human beings be governed by reflection and choice,
or is the fate of human beings
always to be governed by accident and force?
They knew that question did not have a definitive answer.
And so they proposed a constitution as an experiment
to see what the answer would be.
Like scientists doing an experiment
to see what the answer would be.
If the constitution survives,
if we live by the constitution,
if we maintain republican government,
we will have proven that--
&gt;&gt; And yet they divided the power
because of the fallibility of man.
&gt;&gt; Oh yes, if you look at the 10th Federalist paper
it's all about how depraved human beings,
you know, as a Southern Baptist you'll appreciate this.
It's all about how depraved human beings are,
therefore they can't be trusted with power.
You need power to check power.
Lincoln at Gettysburg, when he reflects on the question,
why did we do this, why did we fight this war,
why did we not simply let the south secede?
Why all this carnage and bloodshed,
far more than anybody except perhaps Sherman
ever imagined it would be.
The war has gone on longer than anybody thought.
The carnage has been more astounded that anybody thought,
as he'd say in the second inaugural address.
Well what was the reason?
Here was the reason.
To see, to establish, to ensure that government
of the people, by the people, and for the people,
all governments of the people right.
But government by the people, and for the people.
In other words republican government,
does not perish from what,
the North American continent, no.
From the earth.
He was recalling the founders idea
of an experiment in ordered liberty.
We needed to pay the heavy cost,
the terrible carnage of the war
in order to ensure the republican experiment could continue
in the hope that it would be vindicated,
and that we would show that government
of the people, by the people, for the people could endure.
If it had failed, Lincoln feared,
this is why he fought the war,
if it failed here, because of secession
leading to further secession,
leading to a disintegration of the American experiment,
leading to an American Napoleon,
if that happened the message for all time,
in the indefinite future,
that people across the world would take from it,
is that republican government is a noble dream
that can never work.
We're dependent on kings and authoritarian
rulers and strongmen.
&gt;&gt; But see this is where though the thickness
of evil and the darkness of history comes.
'Cause even given the majestic words,
and the magnificent experiment in democracy
that we associate with the USA.
First, it's on somebody else's land.
You see what I mean?
It's on somebody else's land.
So you got [applause]
an indigenous population in that same constitution.
Talk about savages and so forth and so on.
Secondly, the slave issue that you
don't get in the US constitution.
There's no reference to it, just the slave trade.
So you got denial.
And you end up fighting an ugly, barbaric civil war
over an institution not invoked in your constitution.
&gt;&gt; Richard: That's goin' back to not wantin'
to hurt their feelings in the south.
&gt;&gt; It comes back you see.
Now Lincoln, part of the genius of Lincoln,
and of course Lincoln was someone
who was able to grow,
because he was for sendin' black folk out
of the country up until 1862.
'Cause he just felt they couldn't live together.
De Tocqueville makes the same point
in the last chapter of the greatest text
written on democracy in America.
You see, this is how deep white supremacy cuts.
Lincoln was just honest about that.
Like you say, his best friend was a slave holder, right.
&gt;&gt; Lincoln's best friend was a slave holder.
&gt;&gt; Lincoln was just honest about that.
And Lincoln just felt,
look I love black folk, but I got a lot of cousins.
[laughter]
And I know them very well,
and I'm tellin' ya what they think about Negroes.
So Lincoln's just honest.
And this is a man with one year of formal education.
So we want all the students here
at this wonderful place to graduate.
But Lincoln never went to college,
but at least two went through him.
That's self education.
Wisdom, Shakespeare, Bible.
You see what I mean.
That's, we were just blessed to have him
at that particular moment,
when the country almost went under.
But then what happens after the death of Lincoln?
Here comes slavery by another name called Jim Crow.
[audience member whistles]
&gt;&gt; But were we not blessed to have our founders?
They were fallible, they were frail.
They made terrible mistakes.
Jefferson was a slave holder.
Adams and Hamilton were profoundly
against slavery of course.
So it was a mix.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Washington.
&gt;&gt; Washington owned slaves but he freed them in his will.
But aren't we blessed by the experiment
in ordered liberty that our founders gave us?
What if it didn't happen?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's true.
That's true.
I mean that's part of the dialectical tension.
Because on the one hand their efforts
did facilitate the creation of a social order
that was fallible, open to revision,
with amendments and so forth.
And that's very important.
And the checks and balances, very important.
But at the same time the scope and the depth,
the depth of the suffering that went on
between 1789 and 1865.
So you had this constitution that was
a pro slavery document in practice,
no matter what the words said, you see.
All of that suffering,
and we don't calculate 'cause we're not
engaging in just the calculations,
so that it's,
I do support the democratic experiment called the USA.
I just recognize that it was also an adventure in empire.
And I also recognize that it was a night side
that we continue to have to deal with
all the way up to Baltimore.
&gt;&gt; The compromise on slavery made the constitution
and the republic possible.
That doesn't mean we affirm slavery.
Obviously we do not.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; The people on the anti slavery side,
on the racial justice side, who agreed to the compromise,
the Adams and the Hamiltons, others.
Franklin eventually became a strong opponent of slavery.
He had owned a slave earlier in his life.
Became an opponent. &gt;&gt; Cornel: Yeah, yes, yes.
Why did they make the compromise?
Why were they willing to do it?
Because they needed, they thought
they needed to vindicate the idea of republican government
and they could do it in such a way as to put slavery,
in Lincoln's words later,
on the road to extinction.
You know, there wasn't the option of immediate abolition.
It was not an effective option.
Those of us that work in the pro life movement,
Rick and I are involved in that,
often people say, well look you know,
America's a bad place because
it's got such a terrible record on abortion.
We need to abolish abortion immediately.
Well that's not a practical reality.
So some of us say, no no no.
Let's do the incremental steps.
Let's do the work step by step
to roll back the abortion license
just as Lincoln and the other anti slavery people
went step by step to roll back
the institution of slavery.
Sometimes you can't have the ideal just right here and now.
But you gotta be moving in the right direction.
Putting in place a system of principles
and institutions that holds the most promise
of justice down the road.
I don't think you disagree with that.
&gt;&gt; Well no, I understand what you're sayin',
but you're talking now in prudential terms.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And we understand prudence and practical wisdom,
very important.
But at the same time you and I agree that still,
this righteous indignation of what those
who have to pay the cost of that prudential compromise.
And we both, we agree with that.
&gt;&gt; Robert: I agree.
&gt;&gt; Not think for example,
think for example though,
just briefly in American history,
[applause]
what if the 180,000 black soldiers
did not join the union army?
What if the confederacy had won?
Then we'd said, well it's 1789,
we gotta move step by step,
and sooner or later we movin' in the right direction.
But the confederacy won.
So how many steps we gonna take
down this long road before black humanity is affirmed?
You see what I mean?
That's also a perspective that we have to wrestle with.
&gt;&gt; But what's the alternative?
The question is always, what's the alternative?
You know, what's the better strategy?
If we got the practical goal of eliminating
a great evil, slavery in it's day,
or what I believe abortion is in its day.
If we have that goal we need
the most practical strategy that will get us there.
Do you remember Douglas, Frederick Douglas'
great tribute to Lincoln.
Now Douglas wasn't always favorable toward Lincoln--
[crosstalk]
&gt;&gt; a slave I owned from Illinois after
that first inauguration.
That's brother Douglas right there.
That was brother Fred.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; When Lincoln died.
&gt;&gt; But he was talking about Lincoln's support
of the fugitive slave act.
Which was one of the most barbaric
acts in the history of the country,
and Lincoln supported it.
But go right ahead..
&gt;&gt; But when Lincoln died.
[laughter]
you're makin' it easy.
When Lincoln died Douglas paid tribute to him.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Yes, yes he did.
&gt;&gt; He paid tribute to him,
and I can't quote the exact language,
but I'll give you the flavor of it.
He said, reflecting on Lincoln's career
and his achievements, he said,
from the pure abolition viewpoint,
Lincoln was slow, dull, hesitant.
Not moving forward as quickly as we would have liked.
And yet, judged from the point of view of statesmanship,
as we must judge him, Douglas said.
Douglas came down on one side of that question.
Do we judge him from the pure abolishion point of view,
or from the statesmanship point of view?
From the statesmanship point of view.
He was swift, effective, determined.
He was taking steps that would be
the best steps available to put slavery
on the road to extinction.
John Brown was not going to eliminate slavery.
&gt;&gt; No but John Brown said,
we got more than a problem,
we got a catastrophe on our hands.
That was his witness.
Now unfortunately he was killin' innocent people.
I think anybody who kills innocent people--
&gt;&gt; But that effort was not gonna end slavery.
If slavery was gonna end,
it wasn't gonna be by John Brown inciting slavery.
&gt;&gt; No but John Brown said,
the only way you gonna end slavery is bloodshed.
And it turned out to be that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, but not John Brown's method of bloodshed.
&gt;&gt; Not the method, but he just said,
there will be bloodshed and war.
And it turned out to be.
&gt;&gt; You know I think the, this is a very profound question
that these guys are talkin' about right now.
And that is, how much do you compromise
when people are really suffering?
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Yes, absolutely.
&gt;&gt; Do you just go slow?
Do you go as fast as you can?
Do you go strategic?
I asked this question in another format eight years ago
when McCain and Obama were runnin' against each other.
And I did a civil forum at Saddleback.
And I asked-- &gt;&gt; Cornel: Yes.
And one of the questions I asked them was this,
does evil exist?
And if it does, what do you do with it?
Do you ignore it?
Do you compromise with it?
Or do you eliminate it?
And they both gave very different answers.
But, and I'm not gonna go into that right now,
but the bottom line is,
there's a difference of opinion on that.
And how do you,
right now for instance,
Christians are being beheaded by ISIS on a daily basis.
Do we go slow on that?
&gt;&gt; Robert: No.
&gt;&gt; Or do we got fast on that?
I'm just asking, how fast do you go
when people are suffering?
&gt;&gt; Cornel and I have joined together.
We were out ahead of this.
What, a year ago,
before most people had heard about ISIS.
I knew a bit about it because of my work
on the Commission on Religious Freedom.
And I put out a call
for decisive action against ISIS early on.
Military action, I called for the destruction
of ISIS as a fighting force.
And one of the very first people to join me
without my asking him to do it, was Cornel West.
Now neither of us is saying that
we should be reckless in the committing
of US military forces to this project,
and just go in an unthinking way,
and just bring as much force as we can possibly
bring to bear as quickly as we can,
because it's not gonna work.
But doing nothing is also not an option.
&gt;&gt; Richard: Yeah right.
&gt;&gt; So what we need to think about is,
what is the most effective strategy
knowing that we're not gonna be able to end this thing.
Especially now that we put if off for more than a year,
and delayed and let ISIS gain more and more territory,
and more and more prestige and support
in that part of the world.
We know we're not gonna be able to eliminate
it now in a single strike.
So we need an intelligent, well thought out plan
to get to the ultimate goal of eliminating
ISIS as a fighting force.
&gt;&gt; Okay let's take some questions from the internet.
Let me get out my,
my phone here and we'll get some,
some questions.
By the way,
hang on here.
Alright here's a question number one.
How can the oppressed disagree civilly
with their oppressor, and why should they?
&gt;&gt; Well I would say that,
the question is how does the oppressed
respond to oppression with integrity,
honesty, decency, and courage.
&gt;&gt; [Female Audience Member] Yes.
&gt;&gt; So as a Christian I do hate the deed,
and still love the doer.
But I don't like the doer.
[laughter]
Oh no, no no no no no.
No no no.
So that, but it depends on what the context is.
If there's a context, in which there's a public space
where the oppressed can enter without humiliation,
or being disrespected, then that's wonderful.
If the oppressed enter that public space,
and there's still disrespected,
that over, and over, and over again,
then we're moving toward a serious clash and conflict.
Because we begin to exhaust,
it's like Mandela in South Africa right.
They explore every possible non violent option available.
Then in 1957 Mandela says,
we're finally the spirit of the nation.
And we're gonna, armed struggle,
but it's armed struggle against property.
Now I think that's very interesting.
Even in Baltimore you see,
if you look at the response of the attack on property,
versus the attack on human beings.
You say to them, [applause]
it's like oh my God, this is outta control,
this is the worst thing that can,
wait a minute this brother just got shot.
This brother just got, broke his back.
Wait a minute.
Well somehow we got to make sure
that the tears of the mothers,
of the sisters, of the daughters and sons
who are shot or mistreated by the police
have the same status as the tears
of the police's wives when the police are killed.
So even the President.
See, brother Obama upset me.
He been upsettin' me for a long time.
[laughter]
Long time.
God bless him.
&gt;&gt; Don't go there Cornel.
&gt;&gt; But no, but I mean, you get the President
comes out and calls these brothers
and sisters thugs and criminals.
&gt;&gt; [Female Audience Member] Yeah, yeah
[laughter]
And I said to myself, well wait a minute.
If you wanna talk about criminals
you can start with Wall Street in 2008.
[cheering and applause]
How come Holden didn't prosecute one Wall Street executive?
You wanna talk about criminals,
you could talk about drones
and what happened on the killing list.
So in that sense let's be broad in our conception.
But by using that kinda language it makes it difficult
to stay in context with the humanity of the folk,
even when they're doin' the wrong thing.
But the violation of property for me,
just doesn't have the same status.
I'm with Mandela.
Do you agree with this in terms of property versus human,
human life. &gt;&gt; Oh there's no question.
Okay.
&gt;&gt; Human life matters much more than property.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely, absolutely.
&gt;&gt; I also, I'm not to happy with Obama myself.
&gt;&gt; Oh, for good reason, yeah, for good reason.
No, indeed, indeed.
&gt;&gt; You know, I honestly think,
and I actually told this to Benjamin Netanyahu,
that I believe the model for peace
in the middle east is actually in Rwanda.
'Cause somehow they figured out a way
to get people who were killin' each other 20 years ago,
every time I go to the West Bank or whatever,
I see more fences goin' up, more walls,
more an eye for an eye, and we're killin' each other.
And it's blindness.
When I go to Rwanda, I see,
this family killed everybody in this family
except these two people, and yet,
they're livin' next to each other
without armed police, without barbed wire.
Somehow they figured out how to do reconciliation.
Even South Africa.
I admire Mandela.
But Mandela did not bring reconciliation.
He brought peace.
And he brought a peaceful transfer of power.
But he did not bring reconciliation,
'cause there's not reconciliation in South Africa.
Not compared to for instance, Rwanda
where you actually have people
who literally were hacking each other up,
or one group hacking another group,
and they are, I've been in reconciliation rallies there,
where these two people would give
their testimonies to each other.
And part of that is,
is I was talkin' to Kagame one time, and he said,
I said, what do you thinks the secret.
He said, "Leaders absorb the pain."
he said, when they came,
when the freedom fighters came back in to stop
the genocide, and they were vastly over numbered
by the genociders, and he says,
you walk in a room and you're whole family's been killed,
and your mom is layin' on the floor,
she's dyin', she's been raped,
and there's the guy who did it, and you've got the gun.
What are you gonna do?
And he said, "We made a law.
"You may not kill them because
"we believe in the rule of law."
And he said, "We're gonna actually
"take them through a justice system."
And that's why actually Rwanda has the second highest
prison population next to America.
Now they did outlaw the death penalty,
and said if you admit your crime,
we will give you time off,
and if you show us where the bodies are.
But absorbing the pain, was a big, big difference.
And I think that that's a method.
Let's get onto the next question.
&gt;&gt; No that's very hard to do.
[cross talk]
&gt;&gt; Question number two.
What's an issue that each of you
changed each other's mind on,
as a result of dialogue together?
&gt;&gt; Well,
[laughter]
[cross talk]
Cornel has a very,
&gt;&gt; Richard: Where you gonna eat tonight
&gt;&gt; I'll go first 'cause Cornel has a very long list,
and I want him to choose the right one.
[laughter]
[drowned out by laughter]
&gt;&gt; Humor makes a difference in a friendship though.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; One of the very first things,
I don't even know if Cornel remembered talking about this.
One of the very first things that we talked about,
we were on a college campus,
we were meeting in Princeton.
Cornel was interviewing me for a magazine.
It's a long story about that. &gt;&gt; Cornel: Brother Andrew.
Brother Andrew, that's right.
And one of the things we talked
about was affirmative action.
Race based, or ethnic based preference policies
in admissions to universities like Princeton
where we were teaching, or in employment,
or in government contracting.
And I've always been quite critical
of those kinds of programs because
they strike me as inconsistent
with the basic principle of equality.
And there's some other problems with them as well.
But Cornel asked a set of questions
that made me think a lot more deeply about that.
And Cornel softened my kind of wholesale,
general opposition to those sorts of things
when he raised some questions about,
whether we would really want it to be the case,
if this simply was the way the numbers worked out,
that at a university like Princeton University,
we didn't have any more than the smallest,
token representation, two, three,
four, five black students, would our campus be,
not be worse off by virtue of the effective absence
of people from the African American community.
And when you think about that question,
the answer is of course we would be worse off with that.
Now how we handle that exactly,
what do we have quotas?
You know and how do we choose which groups
get the benefits and which don't.
Pacific Islanders yes, Sicilians no.
How do we do, there are a lot of problems
I still see with that.
But I see this is a much more complicated,
and difficult issue than I did before
I engaged with Cornel on the question.
And this is something I now wrestle with
in a way that I didn't before.
&gt;&gt; Richard: That's a great illustration.
&gt;&gt; If I could say just quickly,
what I was deeply impressed by when I got a chance
to know brother Robbie was the ways
in which he would always defend
our precious conservative evangelicals.
Not just Christians, but evangelical anythings,
Muslims, others in the Princeton context.
Where a kind of secular sensibility is predominant.
And I'm always deeply impressed by that.
I think what has been reinforced in our conversations
is that is the degree to which,
I have always been very critical of big banks
and big corporations that are unaccountable.
The one percent who own 42% of the wealth in the country.
And I remain very critical.
But I think my suspicion of big government
has been deeply reinforced by dialogues
with brother Robbie, and the hierarchy,
especially given its powers of surveillance,
and the possibilities of FBI, and other agencies
reinforcing the kind of violation
of rights and liberties.
And the possible creation of an American fascism.
You get big business, big banks controlling politicians,
and then big government coming together
keeping track of everybody, and the
dissenting voices but not just
pushed aside-- &gt;&gt; that warning goes
&gt;&gt; back to Eisenhower.
&gt;&gt; Hm?
&gt;&gt; I said that warning goes back
to Eisenhower &gt;&gt; oh, that's right he said
&gt;&gt; that in his speech right before he left the Presidency.
You're absolutely right.
&gt;&gt; You know, who's the biggest beneficiary
of big government, well it's big business.
&gt;&gt; Alright here's our, we got time?
Yeah, we got time for this.
&gt;&gt; Good.
&gt;&gt; Here's a question for Cornel.
How do we?
How do we that are living in a painful,
living in a painful truth convince
our brothers and sisters out of their apathy to our pain?
[audience murmuring]
&gt;&gt; Examples are the go cart of judgment.
That's what Immanuel Kant says
in the Critique of Pure Reason.
On page 178 of the Norman Kemp [drowned out by laughter]
&gt;&gt; He gives us the page, did I tell ya, genius.
What'd I say, he names the page.
&gt;&gt; No, no no that's not genius,
that's just readin' that text over, and over,
and over again.
&gt;&gt; Richard: Yeah right.
&gt;&gt; That's all.
But what I mean,
but what the important point here is,
is that all we really have is,
our attempts to be imitators of a Jesus
who we have a relation with that facilitates our courage
to love in a world of overwhelming hatred and revenge,
and domination and exploitation.
How do we love always through that darkness?
You see, and it doesn't make any sense.
It seems to be groundless.
It's characterized by an objective uncertainty.
De Kerchove talks about it is the most absurd
way of being in the world and yet it is the mot
magnificent way given the joys of serving others,
and given the relations of a God
who in some ways continues to weep
given the condition of the world.
&gt;&gt; Robert: Amen.
&gt;&gt; Alright, here's number four.
Are there intolerable opinions?
If so how should we spot them and respond to them?
If not, now do we tolerate evil opinions?
&gt;&gt; You wanna take that one?
&gt;&gt; sure, sure.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Or we can just pass it up and go onto number five.
&gt;&gt; No no no no no.
Brother Robbie, he's got an answer for that.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; I think--
[Richard] That was very Jesus like of you to do that.
[laughter]
You take that one.
&gt;&gt; I'm something of an extremist on this.
I will confess, an extreme supporter
of John Stuart Mill's principles of liberty
in chapter two of On Liberty.
I've been a critic of Mill's general harm principle
articulated in chapter one of On Liberty.
I can't give you the page number.
Cornel's got it memorized.
[laughter]
But in chapter two when he talks about liberty
of thought and expression.
And my view is,
that especially in the university context.
Especially in the context of a university
that is non sectarian like Princeton University,
that doesn't make a faith commitment upfront,
take a stand, but presents itself
as an institution that is welcoming all points of view,
providing a forum for the engagement of ideas.
So the kind of university in which I spend my days.
I think it's very important that we be willing
to listen to anybody who's willing
to come into the university context
and present reasons and arguments.
In other words do business in the currency
of academic discourse, the currency reasons and arguments,
even if I deeply oppose,
if I abominate the position being articulated.
Professor West and I have a famous colleague, Peter Singer.
Peter Singer not only believes in the legitimacy
of abortion through the entire nine months.
He believes in infanticide.
The killing of infants.
The moral permissibility of the killing
of infants even after they're born.
Now this to me is an outrageous abomination.
In a sense that is an intolerable, intolerable idea.
The idea that any human being,
any member of the human family
can be directly targeted for killing, you know,
that to me is just an intolerable thing.
And yet, I would be the first one in line
to oppose the eviction of Peter Singer.
This scandalizes some of my conservative
pro life friends to oppose,
to oppose evicting Peter Singer from Princeton.
Now there are some people who feel about me,
some people feel about Cornel,
the way I feel about Peter Singer.
Now, and that's because Professor Singer
is prepared to make arguments,
and give reasons for his position.
So if he's willing to do that, I am willing to listen.
And I am in fact, willing to listen with an open mind.
Now none of those arguments has cut any ice with me.
I've listened to them respectfully.
&gt;&gt; Richard: But he has the right to persuade you?
&gt;&gt; It's not just the right to say it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; In the university context,
in the context of truth seeking
he's got the right more than to say it.
As terrible as I think it is,
he's got the right to have me listen
and thoughtfully consider what he has to say.
Our devotion to truth should be so powerful
that we are willing to do that.
Because it is conceivable that even an opinion
that strikes us, and me, and probably strikes
many of you as so abominable could be right.
And even if it's wrong,
which I'm quite confident it is,
we have something to learn about
the basis of our belief in the sanctity of life
from confronting the very best reasons,
that a very intelligent person can adduce against
the sanctity of life position.
Professor Singer makes, leaves us in no doubt
that what he is aiming for is the destruction
of the basic sanctity of life principle
that's part of our Judeo Christian heritage.
So now, does that mean that I'm in favor
of simply unlimited speech?
No, and I don't think anybody really is.
What I'm against is abuse,
hurling epithets, incivility,
a grunt, or a name calling episode
is not making reasons and arguments.
It is not the currency of academic discourse
to simply, verbally assault someone, or brutalize someone.
But if someone's willing to make arguments
and provide reasons, and cause us to think,
then I think we've got to tolerate it
in the rich sense of toleration.
Not just letting him speak, but listening to him.
&gt;&gt; But, and that comes because,
yeah, you can clap for that.
[applause]
That comes because you have confidence in the Gospel.
And that you believe in a free market world,
may the best idea win.
We got the best idea.
It makes sense.
A lot of Christians don't, aren't confident,
that what they actually believe is the best idea.
And so their reticent to pull back on,
and or they want to stifle off competition.
I'm not afraid of competition.
Bring it on.
Because, and that's what this Center for Christian Thought
does is to bring it on.
Okay and that's what our apologists at Biola do.
Bring it on.
Because we're not afraid of these things.
You know, probably 10 years ago,
I was in China, and actually had a state dinner
in my honor, and people saw.
And the Politburo was there,
and they were honoring me for,
I won't go into the whole background on it,
but I got into debate with the members
of cabinet of the communist party in China.
In fact, I was actually sitting next
to the Director of Religious Affairs,
who's the guy in charge of persecution.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Wow.
&gt;&gt; And so, and as I began to talk to him,
and I said, see the problem with you guys
is you want the economic success of the west
without the ethical, and moral,
and theological underpinnings.
I said, you want freedom of markets,
but you don't want freedom of speech.
You don't want freedom of information.
You don't want freedom of religion.
You don't want all these other freedoms.
If all you have, you impose capitalism
on a society that you don't have a Judeo Christian ethic,
what do you get, you get Russia.
You change communists for oligarch,
and you just get another set of thugs,
controlling who's got, which is exactly what happened.
Is a few guys have all the wealth.
You've got to have that moral ethical basis.
That's why we go back to this cut flower syndrome.
If you cut off the roots,
is America a Christian nation today?
I would say no.
Was it founded on Christian principles.
Undoubtedly.
Because we have two sets of founders,
not just the political founders,
we have the pilgrim founders.
And they came here for religious liberty.
And that's why the first freedom,
and you know, and Robbie and I have been
on panels on this before.
The first freedom is freedom of religion.
That's why we call it America's first freedom.
It is the first paragraph, first phrase
of the first sentence, of the first paragraph
of the first amendment.
Freedom of religion comes before freedom of the press.
It comes before freedom of speech.
It comes before the right to assemble.
It comes before the right to bear arms.
Because if I don't have the freedom to believe,
and that's what you're giving Peter Singer,
you're giving him the freedom to believe
what he wants to believe.
And I support that.
Because if I don't have the freedom
to believe what I want to believe,
what I feel is true,
then I don't need the freedom of speech.
I don't need freedom of the press.
I don't need freedom of assembly,
'cause I don't have the freedom of conscience.
&gt;&gt; But I think the problem is, is that,
see it's one thing to say, is I would say,
that I would fight for the right
of brother Rush Limbaugh to be wrong
[laughter]
because I have a libertarian sensibility
in my own Christian witness.
But it's another thing, when you look at the structure,
see if you have a corporate media
that is able to transmit all kinds of lies about people,
with very little accountability
because they have big money.
So they could, let's say MSNBC could lie
about brother Robbie, big money.
How's he gonna account,
how's he gonna render them accountable?
You know what I mean?
Or Fox news can lie about different folk.
And all of 'em involved in lies.
I mean MSNBC is neoliberal propaganda,
milk toast, spineless, democrats.
[laughter]
See what I mean.
And much of FOX propaganda
for republicans. &gt;&gt; You are an equal opportunity
&gt;&gt; offender, I like that.
[drowned out by laughter]
&gt;&gt; FOX news you get, you know,
a lot of mean spirited republicans.
That doesn't mean all republicans are mean spirited.
But that's the propaganda machine to make big money.
Right back to the money making again.
At that point you say to yourself,
well yes we have to be libertarian.
Yes we will defend our popular voices and so on.
But the structure's one in which,
if the money interests are gonna shape
the very framework in which we engage in our discussion,
then what happens to the culture?
It becomes more debased.
It becomes more and more dumbed down.
And it just becomes a matter of--
&gt;&gt; I have a hard time arguing against that
because we saw it recently from my point of view in Indiana.
The Indiana Religious Freedom Restoration Act,
which was a perfectly good valid bill,
that was guilty of none of the crimes
of which it was accused, was smeared,
by the media almost universally,
and by big business and the corporate structure.
The entire elite establishment
came down on that law depicting it
in an entirely false light.
Most Americans were led to believe
that the law was a monstrous license for discrimination,
when it was absolutely nothing of the kind.
And yet, the forces that knew
that these were spectacular lies being told
lacked the resources to actually get their message across.
Now we're in a little better shape, I think,
than we were prior to the creation of the internet,
because there are ways to communicate with people
going around NBC, CBS, ABC, PBS, MSNBC,
FOX, New York Times, LA Times,
Chicago Tribune, Wall Street Journal, and so forth.
So there's something there.
But the problem that Cornel puts his finger on,
really is a problem.
When there is a monopoly viewpoint.
When there is an established cultural orthodoxy,
and the major media of communication
are with the program and not letting
alternative arguments be heard,
and alternative voices be heard,
we're in big trouble.
We can congratulate ourselves, pat ourselves on the back
for being a culture that recognizes free speech.
But only one side's being able to communicate.
&gt;&gt; Cornel: Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; Okay last question, 'cause we're runnin' out of time.
But this, just bring it on home here.
Should universities be a safe place?
You know we've heard about--
&gt;&gt; No that's the last thing they need.
&gt;&gt; We're gonna protect your feelings,
and political correctness and all.
&gt;&gt; Brother Cornel was preachin' about this
on the plane on the way over here.
You cut loose brother.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Know that when students decide to go to university,
they're coming to learn how to die.
They're coming for critical scrutiny.
They're coming for critical self examination.
And anytime you let a certain assumption go,
that's a form of death.
And there's no development of maturation
or growth without that death taking place.
So when you graduate from Biola,
and you get that diploma,
that beautiful smile, and the sparkle in your eye,
your momma and daddy sacrificing
inexplicably for you to graduate.
[laughter]
And if you're the same person you were
when you were a freshman you wasted their money.
[laughter and applause]
If you didn't learn how to die you wasted their money.
[applause]
it's critical process.
So the last thing you need is a safe place.
You want to be unsettled in such a way
that you have access to a great set of traditions
of earlier voices, in the past,
who themselves were unsettled,
but had the courage to pursue a quest for truth,
and for knowledge, small case, small t,
and thereby allow you to become
a more mature, a more loving, a more compassionate person,
even as in the end you will fail.
Samuel Beckett is right.
Try again, fail again, fail better.
And they put your body in the coffin,
and they gonna say, what a majestic failure he was.
[laughter]
Oh, he was, but he still fell on his face.
Thank God we got a God that loves us,
that can still embrace us.
&gt;&gt; All I can tell you is,
if you're a student and you're looking for safe space,
don't come to the classroom where Cornel and I teach.
'Cause that is not a safe space.
Whatever your views are,
I don't care if they're Christian,
if they're secularist, if they're Muslim,
if they're Jewish, if they're Marxist,
whatever your view is,
that is going to be challenged.
It's gonna be challenged with the very best
arguments that can be mustered against it.
If you look at, I'm teaching this semester,
in addition to my seminar with Cornel,
a civil liberties course.
My civil liberties course covers
all the hot button issues, affirmative action,
religion in public life, abortion,
marriage, death penalty, targeted killing.
You're not supposed to say assassination right.
Targeted killing, all of these issues.
Now if you look at my syllabus,
you will find that no matter where you are
on any of those issues,
you're gonna find powerful arguments
in those readings against your position.
They're gonna trouble you.
They're gonna disturb you.
They are going to make you worry about your view.
I think as teachers, that's our job.
It's not to make you feel comfortable and reinforce you--
&gt;&gt; Richard: Or to feel good.
&gt;&gt; Or to feel good, it's certainly not to make you feel good.
It's to make you feel,
yeah kind of pulled apart, you know,
intention, wondering what's up here.
Maybe I'm not thinkin' the right thing.
That really is our job.
We want kind of the development
of critical intelligence.
Not again, now not because there is no truth.
You know that all three of the fellas sittin' up here
in front of you are people who are strong
believers in truth, and strong opponents
of the idea of moral relativism.
It's not because there is no truth.
It's precisely because, if we're going to get
to the truth of the matter,
we must on any given issue,
understand and appreciate the most compelling
arguments to be made on both or all sides of the question.
If we're not doin' that, we're not thinkers.
We are ideologues.
We are dogmatists.
We are not thinkers.
And even as Christians it's important
for us to understand that our faith is a thinking faith.
Our faith is a thinking faith.
[applause]
So our critical intelligence is in play
in the very activity of living the Christian life.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; You know,
Cornel just keeps comin' back to death.
And you keep comin' back about what it means to live,
and those intentions together are,
it is life through death, which is the resurrection.
That is what we are. &gt;&gt; That's the cross.
&gt;&gt; That's the cross, that's the cross.
&gt;&gt; Years ago, the famous bishop,
Catholic bishop Fulton Sheen went to a leprosy colony,
and he was visiting lepers in the colony.
And he went over to talk to one young guy
who was sitting on the ground,
and just a loin cloth around him.
He not only had leprosy,
but he had evidently several other skin diseases,
'cause he had open sores on his body
that were oozing and pusie.
And he said he leaned over to talk to this guy,
and he was wearin' a cross.
And the chain broke.
And he said the cross fell into this open sore
on this man's thigh, the ooze and the pus.
And he said,
at first he was revolted.
And he said, I stepped back,
and it just kinda made me sick to my stomach.
And then he said, all of a sudden,
I was overwhelmed with compassion.
And I reached into the sore,
and I took up the cross.
I heard that story when I was a university student.
And when I heard it I thought,
that is the finest definition I've ever heard
of what it means to follow Christ.
To go out into the sores of life,
where people are bleeding, and hurting,
and don't know the truth,
and are dying in the streets, and take up the cross.
And if we don't do that, I doubt our Christianity.
Let's thank these guys for a great evening.
[cheering and applause]
Thank you guys.
&gt;&gt; Group hug.
&gt;&gt; Love you.
So great to see you.
&gt;&gt; Love you guys.
Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you.
[applause continues]
&gt;&gt; God bless you all
[applause continues]
&gt;&gt; Great job guys.
&gt;&gt; God bless Biola. &gt;&gt; Great job.
God bless Biola University.
[applause continues]
&gt;&gt; Announcer: Biola University offers
a variety of biblically centered degree programs
ranging from business, to ministry,
to the arts and sciences.
Visit Biola.edu to find out how Biola
could make a difference in your life.
[bright music]