Ken Winters: In a moment, A Celebration of Genius continues with two hours devoted to one
of Bach's greatest interpreters, Glenn Gould.
A Celebration of Genius: the 300th anniversary of the birth of Johann
Sebastian Bach.
Hello, I'm Ken Winters. Over the next two hours, we'll be privy to a highly
idiosyncratic examination of the life, times, and music of Bach, by one of his
foremost interpreters, the late Glenn Gould. When Gould died so tragically
young in 1982, it was a loss not only for music, but also for the world of ideas.
Like his performances of Bach's keyboard works,
Gould's thoughts on the composer and the Baroque could at times be equally
eccentric and equally illuminating. For a world-renowned pianist, Glenn Gould's
repertoire was surprisingly limited. It was confined largely to a small handful
of composers, though giants all of them: Mozart, Beethoven, Richard Strauss,
Schoenberg, and of course Bach, and while one has the feeling that Gould respected
all these musical masters enormously, in Bach one senses that Gould detected a
kindred spirit. His individualistic performances of
Bach's music seemed at times not so much interpretations as quasi-collaborations:
piano playing for four hands and obbligato humming. Glenn Gould's comments
on Bach and his works have been selected from a number of radio and television
programs which Gould either appeared on or produced himself. He can be heard solo,
and in conversation with composer and critic Curtis Davis, former CBC music
producer James Kent, University of Toronto German department head Professor
Hans Eichner, BBC music critic Humphrey Burton, and John McClure, head of the
classical music division of CBS records. These excerpts span nearly two decades,
and if the quality of the sound sometimes leaves much to be desired,
the soundness of the insight should provide more than ample compensation.
Glenn Gould could have chosen any number of careers. His scholastic records show
he could have been a creditable scientist or mathematician.
He could have been, in fact he was, a first-rate writer and broadcaster, and he
might have made a fascinating and provocative university professor.
Fortunately for lovers of music, Glenn Gould concentrated his enormous talents
on that discipline, and fortunately for admirers of Glenn Gould, his interest in
recording has preserved for future generations his performances of Bach and
other composers, as well as his personal opinions of that music. Here then are the
notes, both verbal and manual, of Glenn Gould the well-tempered polymath. GG: I
wanted to be involved in music. I don't think I particularly cared whether it
involved being a concert pianist. I don't think that for a long time I had a very
clear idea of what being a concert pianist meant. I don't think many of us
do ever, you know,  and if we did we never would become one. I didn't really constitute the
case of a child prodigy in any sense really. I made my debut when I was about
14 which was pretty late in life as those things go, you know. As a matter
of fact, I truthfully played in public on the organ before I played on the piano,
and this was kind of a funny thing, because the organ is supposed to be a
tremendously complicated and formidable instrument with all kinds of keyboards
here and more keyboards down here, and yet it seemed to me one of the greatest
senses of satisfaction to play particularly old music - Bach and Handel
and music before that, in fact - music of two or three hundred years ago, on the
organ, and through playing the organ I think that to this day it's that music -
music of Bach and Handel and so on - that is perhaps the closest music to me.
CD: What are the earliest recollections that you have of hearing the music of Bach?
GG: Hmm... my own performances - I'm not sure. No I wasn't all that precocious - it's simply
that I wasn't much attracted to multi-voiced things until I was a teenager.
I was definitely homophonically inclined until the age of about 10, and then I
suddenly got the message, and Bach began to emerge into my world and has never
altogether left it. Because one of the great moments of my life, and it was not
with a Bach fugue, but it was with a fugue and its relevance is entirely fugal, was
when I was exposed to my own performance of the Mozart Fugue K.394,
the C major one the..[sings fugue subject], which is a wonderful academic study in how to
write a fugue and obey the textbook, and never quite get it off the ground. But I
do like it. I was learning it - I was early teenager I don't remember exactly how old - and
suddenly a vacuum cleaner was struck up beside the piano, and I couldn't quite
hear myself play. I was having a feud with the housekeeper at this particular
time, and it was done on purpose, but I couldn't quite hear myself. I began to
feel what I was doing - the whole tactile presence of that fugue as
represented by finger positions, and as represented also by the kind of sound
that you might get if you stood in the bathtub and in a shower and shook your
head, you know, with water coming out of both ears, and it was the most luminously
exciting thing you can imagine, the most glorious sound. It took off. All of the
things Mozart didn't quite manage to do, I was doing for him, and I suddenly
realised that that particular screen through which through which I was viewing this
and which I had erected between myself and Mozart and his fugue was exactly
what I needed to do and exactly why, as I later understood, a certain mechanical
process could indeed come between, you know, myself and
the work of art that I was involved with.
One of the most extraordinary things about history's most extraordinary
musician, is the fact that this man's music, which exerts such a magnetic
attraction for us today, and against which we tend to measure much of the
achievement in the art of music in the last two centuries - that this music had
absolutely no effect on either the musicians or the public of his own day.
And the strange thing about Bach is that he doesn't at all fit our conception of
the misunderstood genius who was years ahead of his time. He was certainly
misunderstood, but not because he was ahead of his time, rather because,
according to the musical disposition of that day, he was generations behind it.
And Bach, as he grew older, not only made no attempt to reconcile his thought with
the temper of his times, but in fact withdrew into what must have seemed to
his contemporaries surely as a maddening nostalgia for the glories of ages past.
For Bach, you see, was music's greatest nonconformist, and one of the supreme
examples of that independence of the artistic conscience that stands quite
outside the collective historical process. The age of Bach, speaking in a
very general sort of way, was what we can now call the age of reason, or perhaps an
age of reason - there have really been quite a lot of them. It was fundamentally
an age in which man struggled against fear, against pre-determinacy. It was an
age in which he asserted confidently the wonders of science and of human
initiative. It was at times an age of hubris, of defiance for the gods,
but at its most poetic, it was still an age in which the wonderful utilities of
science, and the proud genius of man, could coexist with the magical, mystical,
fearful rites of belief. And so the art and the poetry and the
music of the baroque at its best is touched with this feeling of compromise, this
conciliation between the will of man and the inexorable power of fate. But even
during the lifetime of Sebastian Bach, this vibrant spiritual compromise which
gave such anguish and purpose and passion to his music, became for other
artists of his generation ever more difficult to achieve, and slowly but
surely fact and logic - the explainable and the predictable, became the basis of
philosophic premise, and by the time of his death the world was a very different
place from that into which he had been born. It was a world which longed to be
logical, a world for young men and for young ideas. [demonstrates opening of Mozart's Symphony No.1 K.16]
When Bach died, it was not he, but rather his sons, who were considered to be the
masters of music - masters of a music so very different from that which their
father had known. It was [?] composers like the teenager Joseph Haydn who were
soon to lay the groundwork for a new musical style, in which all of this
scientific optimism, all of this naively logical philosophic thought of
their generation would find a counterpart in an art in which the aim
would be not the communication of man with God, but rather of man with man - in
which those traits of Sebastian Bach which parallel in music the realisation of
the incredible richness and indefinable complexity of the human estate could
find no place. It had become an age in which the focus of musical activity had
moved from the church to the theatre, in which the new art would rationally
reflect a rational world - in which you would be required to deal with
probabilities, and not to participate in mysteries. And, for a new age, new musical
forms: the symphony and the sonata were the instrumental forms which this
aggressive new humanity built to express itself.
These reforms, which were based primarily upon the simplification and the
clarification of the system of what we call tonal harmony, and to these forms
came a whole new conception of the role of the musical theme. They used the theme
not as something which just was: which permeated every facet of a work as it
did in Bach's music, but as something unique, something singularly eventful - for
something belonging to the moment. This was also the age in which the concepts
of a clear symmetrical musical architecture became paramount. For Bach's
sons, the theme was essentially an isolated event, related - propelled into a
relationship really with other themes, other isolated events by the device of
what is called harmonic modulation: by the family ties of one key to another.
And these family relationships were the background against which this new
musical architecture built its structures.
Now Bach, unlike his sons, wasn't really searching for concise harmonic
definition: for the joining relationship of themes. His harmony, his sense of
architecture, was immensely complex - infinitely richer than that of his sons,
really, fraught with the kind of adventures that hadn't existed in the
musical language since Gesualdo in the 16th century, and which didn't exist
again until Schoenberg in the 20th, and while his sons' music, with its
symmetrical pleasure, its measured form, seems to relate somehow to the
probabilities of a rational artistic creed, Bach's music, with all its
eternally undulating flow, harmonic motion, with all its vast linear
complication, seems to suggest somehow the suspended perpetually transient
unknowing condition of man.
One doesn't come to expect great surprises in the music of Bach. One comes
across great moments, indescribable technical achievements, but one is not
led to expect, in the course of a work, any moment, any pronouncement in which
the whole work is not involved. In Bach's music, it's the constancy of events, the
bcontinuous line of development, the certainty of motion which we come to expect
and to love. Essentially for Bach, art was a means of expressing that state of
belief in which experience could be natively guided, in which only the
obstructions and temptations of the world could thwart the immutable
totality of existence, in which, however, the necessity to fend against these
temptations provoked the drama of human life. It is these temptations and
the constant effort which is required to expel them with which the text of the
Cantata No.54 is concerned. The title of this cantata, which Russell Oberlin
is going to sing with us in a moment or two - Widerstehe doch der sunde -
roughly translates as 'Stand Firm Against Sin' or something like that, and is very
probably by Bach himself. Certainly, its musical realisation is given an
intensely urgent and poignant expression. Its very opening chord is one of the
most striking in all of Bach's harmonic arsenal. [demonstrates]
In fact, coming as it does at the beginning of work it's just about
unprecedented, [demonstrates further]
and both of the outer movements of this cantata are full of that wonderful and
torturous art of intense cross-relation and suspension which Bach always
reserved for those subjects [demonstrates]
on which he felt most keenly, most deeply.
KW: If in Glenn Gould's view, Bach was the keeper of the flame, so to speak, of
traditional tonality, Bach's use of keys and their relationships to one another
prompted Gould and former CBC music producer James Kent to engage in an
impromptu musical and intellectual parlour game, one which might well be
called 'forgive us our digressions'. GG: The current trend in fan mags out Hollywood
way is to include the sort of interview where the interviewee, be they star or
starlet, are subjected to a certain series of identification association
quiz test such as, "Natalie Wood, if you were a platypus what sort of platypus
would that be Natalie Wood?" You know, I played this game once over dinner with
some friends, and there was a lady present whom I had not met before, and I
thought I'd sized her up rather well, and so toward the end of dinner we began
playing this game. And she seemed, you know, fairly direct, honest, straightforward,
outgoing, well brought-up, and so I said, "you're a C-major person", and I tell you
there was sufficient umbrage taken to, you know, make me stop with it for many years. It was
incredible. She thought that she was an F- sharp major person. Of course you can't
be much further from C major than that. She thought she was introverted, inner-
directed, troubled, ambivalent: none of the things that C major would suggest.
And it really brought home to me that these funny old associations that
composers had - that Scriabin had and perhaps even Chopin had, with key and key
signature do mean something. I don't know quite what they mean. I'm not a believer
in it, but I'm sufficiently open to ask you what it does mean? KH: Oh, what key do you
associate yourself with Glenn? GG: Hmm.. I think I'm F minor, or perhaps B minor,
one of the two. The key of B minor, for instance, played a role for Bach. I don't
quite know how great a role because I haven't got any statistics handy, but Bach does
represent the democratisation of the key and the key signature if ever a composer
did. He self-consciously wrote in every key to prove as an instrumental feat
that it could be done, and there was no reason with improved technology why it
shouldn't be done. Yet B minor is the key of the Mass, it's the key of 'Es ist genug'
from the St. John Passion. I think it's the key of 'O Sacred Head Now Wounded'
from the St. Matthew, and of many other statements which seem to wrap up his
Christ-love, you know. C minor similarly for Beethoven, E-flat major for Richard
Strauss, the Eroica key, the Heldenleben key - god help us all, the Enoch Arden key.
There does seem to be this peculiar sense of affinity for a certain mood
establishing itself in a certain key. I mean for instance, you know it always
occurred to me that if this democratisation of the Bach key system
is what it's cracked up to be, then technically one should be able to take
any movement from any suite, transpose it to any other key in which another suite
has been written, and have it fit without its seams showing. But I wonder if that's
really so: I mean, can you take this and turn it into C minor and make this out of it: [demonstrates Overture in the French Style in B minor BWV 831 V Sarabande]
GG: Did you find any difference in that? KH: Yes, it doesn't seem to be nearly as
brilliant in the C minor. GG: Really? Despite the fact that it's higher?
KH: Despite the fact, it seems a little gloomier to me, really than
B minor. B minor seems to me a happier, more incisive, more aggressive, more
outgoing key than C minor. GG: Much of what we derived from key relates to what
you could call certain primary experiences of keys as contained in
national anthems, in hymns and folk songs, in the primary listening
experience if you can call them that. So I went through Groves [music dictionary] the other
day, and I'm having to tell you that there are only two national anthems in the
world which contain more than three flats or three sharps in their signature:
those of Byelorussia and Lithuania, and think in terms of what that basic
presupposition as to the texture of a key could do for Slavic gloom as, you know,
betrayed through the - oh, I don't know the - the Byelorussioan tone poems of which we're all so familiar.
Name one, please! But you know, if you think in terms of the fact that most
people are familiar with national anthems that are in C major, or as in our
case in G major or F major for O Canada, it does somehow suggest to me that that
will grow on one, grow on all of us as a primary reference. That will be something
incredibly open, commonplace and everyday, and direct, and that as you proceed
through the cycle of fifths, as you move from G major to D major to A major to E
major, or conversely from C to F to B-flat to E-flat, you move away from that
primary experience, and perhaps in the secondary, in the tertiary experience,
there is a notion that somehow embedded in that experience is something
anti-folk, something composer-directed, something infinitely tactily
involved, you know, and that maybe that's why people like Scriabin and Chopin,
who had very strong tactile senses, or were great instrumentalists as well as great
composers, wanted to write in F-sharp major and in A-flat major, all those you
know, sort of dirty old man sexy keys. I don't know, but that's that's the closest
I can come to suggesting that maybe it is a basic
source of reference to what's being listened to in our society. If we think
in terms of B-minor, we are thinking of two things, perhaps. I don't know -
again this whole area is new to me - and I think we're proceeding in a most
gloriously unscientific way about it all. But it's due first of all to a conditioning
of B-minor per se, which is a two-sharp key relationship with D major. It is also
due to a conditioning of the fundamental note B, which in terms of our English
national anthem reference is a pretty sexy key, B major. Now, if you put this
together, you get in B minor a kind of, what can I say, lofty directness.You get
a confluence of two capabilities: one the capability to be relatively fundamental
and basic and world-concerned, as in D major, which is a simple two sharp key;
the other a much more complicated tendency to introduce accidentals, to introduce
enharmonic elements within the national experience. You put those two together,
and you get a sort of lofty professorial, national collective concern. Maybe
that's why B minor is the key of the B Minor Mass, is the key of 'Es ist genug', is the
key of you know, sort of worldview statements, for Bach at any rate. I
don't know if it was for Brahms, but I speculate that it could be as much an
allegiance to principal tone phenomenae as it could to the basic key or key signature
itself. In which case, it is the suggestion of modality, of
pre-tonal memory. It's a Jungian thing, I suppose, in that case.
Bach's music provides us with the grand summation of all the techniques
practiced by the great masters of North European music since the early
Renaissance. He stands at the very end of a long line of German and Dutch and
Flemish masters who tried to create harmonic vitality out of what must
surely at one time have seemed the shrunken limits of major-minor tonality
which began in the early 17th century. Bach's
harmonic thinking belongs to that concept of the tonal universe in which
all of the anxious transition of musical history had been involved a century or
two before his birth, in which this new system of tonality
first proved victorious over the complex relations of modal harmony. Certainly all
of the elaborate melodic techniques which Bach used were essentially those
which had been developed, and in some cases perfected, by the great masters of
the late Renaissance. In fact, Bach's linear devices, his vast resources of
fugue and canon, were essentially techniques that required the widest
possible harmonic references - techniques which would necessarily find the
stringent economy of eighteenth-century tonality a
challenging but infuriating discipline. And one of the qualities which gives
Bach's work its extraordinary poignancy is the fact that we can practically see him
struggling to restrain the limits of his incredible linear imagination, in order
to fit, and even to save, the disciplining harmonic progressions of tonality. For
Bach, as a German, stands between the two rival tendencies of early Baroque music:
that of the north, of the Dutch and Flemish tradition, in which the
contrapuntal styles, the melodic developments of the work were
essentially based upon vocal prerequisites; and that of the south, of
Italy, in which the florid diversions of instrumental style were allowed to
create their own sources of technique. Bach somehow managed to coordinate both
approaches to the art of music. We find him
in his earlier years writing fugues that had subjects like this one: [demonstrates subject of organ fugue in D minor BWV 565]
subjects which would be quite impossible to attempt to sing. But on the other hand,
here's a fugue which Bach wrote the very year of his death, 1750, and in
it we can see that not only the harmonic style is infinitely more complex, but
also that it would be possible to sing. This is music conceived in linear,
in vocal terms: [demonstrates Contrapunctus 11, Art of the Fugue]
GG: In fact, all the tendencies which were rapidly crystallising in the musical art
of Bach's time were the exact opposite of that which is represented by that
example, and by this one, this glorious example from the Art of the Fugue. [Contrapunctus 7]
GG: By no means all of Bach's writing is as intense or as arduous as The Art of
the Fugue. When he adopts the instrumental principles of the Italian
concerto style, he brings to them a certain stability, certain German-ness.
They become in his hands as vital and as purposeful as that heartiest of the
offshoots of the Reformation, the German chorale: [demonstrates]. If that sounds just
vaguely familiar, that is not really a chorale I played. In fact that, reduced to
its harmonic basis, is the opening of the first theme of the fifth Brandenburg Concerto. [demonstrates]
It's rather remarkable, I think, that even here in this most sophisticated, most
Italianate of the forms of Bach's day, the concerto, we find in the structural
pillars of his writing that same harmonic purity and clarity of thinking
which marks the great sources of German chorale writing. By the way, this little
gadget on which I just played that fugue is, in case you're wondering,
not exactly a piano and not exactly a harpsichord. It's a neurotic piano that
thinks it's a harpsichord, and I'm going to close it now because it's also too noisy.
That same theme by the way of the Brandenburg shows clearly, I think, the
great differences in harmonic thinking that existed between Bach and his more
progressive colleagues. The theme wanders constantly back and forth across
the key center axis of D major, which is the key of the work, and each time we
feel a conclusion coming on, something else happens to delay it. This is the
sort of harmonic plan that Bach's sons wouldn't have been caught dead adopting.
For them, the satisfaction of the musical structure was in getting through to the end,
in termination and achieving finality. for Bach,
it wasn't finality that mattered in music, not really. It was simply the joyous essence of being.
Mention has already been made of some of the non-German elements in Bach's
musical offerings: chiefly the northern Flemish and southern Italian models
which Bach adopted, incorporated, and inevitably transcended. Another foreign
influence made itself felt, as well as heard, in Bach's compositions. The French
style, characterised by numerous dance tunes then popular - some would even say
rampant - at the hyper-cultivated court of the Sun King Louis XIV. Why in so
many of Bach's works, Loures, Gavottes, Courantes, Allemandes and Gigues
should constitute so much of the musical vocabulary of a man who never travelled
beyond the borders of his native land obviously intrigued Glenn Gould. His
curiosity was set to rest, in part at least, by examining the broad spectrum of
France's cultural influence on that loose confederation of states, duchies,
and principalities we know as Germany, in conversation with Professor Hans Eichner,
head of the German department at the University of Toronto.
GG: Professor Eichner, what would a reasonably well-educated, reasonably
articulate, and very staunch burgher like Johann Sebastian Bach know about the
world beyond his particular city? HE: He would certainly know a fair amount about
France. The French influence was very strong at that time, particularly at the
small courts where Bach spent a good deal of his life. As you know, Germany wasn't
really a nation state at that time. It consisted of hundreds of small
principalities and every petty duke or petty count wanted to have his own mini-
Versailles. This would involve a French cook and French clothes, and as far as
Bach is concerned, of course, it would involve imported French musicians,
whom he would talk to. GG: Well, there are all sorts of intriguing moments in his
letters in which 'justements' and 'en effets' and so on you know, creep into what must
otherwise have been fairly stolid prose, or reads like it anyway. HE: Well, the fact
that every petty duke and petty count wanted to have his mini-Versailles I
think had an extremely important influence on the development of music.
People always wonder why music flourished just in Germany just at this particular
time, and I think one reason is quite simply that having an orchestra and
putting on operas was part of the process of conspicuous consumption. So
there was a ?-esque motif at work. That's very interesting. HE: And I'm
quite sure if the dukes and bishops and counts had been as interested as
the English landed aristocracy in good horses and good hounds, Germany would have
produced the most marvellous racehorses. but Haydn might have become a goldsmith.
GG: You know, it's always struck me that that French music particularly - I'm not
competent to to talk about French furniture or French literature even - but
French music was a very odd model for anyone to take, and I'm not wholly
convinced, in fac,t that that any major German composer did take French music as
a model. I think they took the practices of the French musical establishment
rather than French music itself, because French music that was more or less
contemporary with Bach was incredibly arbitrary stuff. I mean it would be like
trying to export Shostakovich to Tanganyika or Carl Orff to New Orleans or
something. It's just something that is totally opposed to the whole harmonic
fluidity which, as I take it, was really the basis of post-Lutheran German music,
you know. I mean, French music was terribly static at that time and proud
of its staticity - how do you say that? Proud of its static quality, yet it had a sort of
IV-V-I and occasionally not quite but almost that relentlessness that hasn't
been touched by anyone until the Beatles came along and did much the same thing
for much the same arbitrary and wrong-headed purposes, it seems to me.
Would a person like Bach have conditioned his enthusiasm for things French,
or for things Italian for that matter, with a notion of what it meant spiritually to
be a German? HE: Hardly at all. By and large, a German didn't really have a
fatherland, and to someone who wasn't a nobleman,
who wasn't at least a large landowner, it really made no difference who the petty
prince was who determined your life. If the duke or count or bishop took a real
interest in his people, there might be close personal ties, but nothing in terms
of modern nationalism - nothing that I would really care to call political.
He would be very intensely aware of his Protestantism. Anti-catholicism
was a fashion in central and northern Germany, but there again, a great deal of
the German anti-catholicism was actually imported from France. GG: How does an
attitude of that kind manifest itself in in the literature of the time? Like most
Canadians I'm blissfully ignorant about German literature. How does it show up, and
in what forms? HE: What you notice immediately is that at least until the
late thirties, the literature is imitative of French examples, and German
literature doesn't really come into its own until quite a bit later - the late
sixties, the seventies. But there was a religious counter-current that was that
as a reaction to the prevailing rationalism, the prevailing enlightenment
atmosphere, pietism had developed which was inner-directed, which drew on
German rather than French models. And Bach of course knew this literature
extremely well. He'd used pietist poetry over and over again for cantatas.
It's terrible poetry! It is really quite appalling, the kind of poetry
that now strikes as not only as sentimental but as slightly hysterical.
But then it happens so very rarely that great music is written on the basis of
good poetry. GG: Yes, sort of a one centuries early and poetic version of pre-Rafaelite
painting or something of the sort. That's fascinating.
KW: If Glenn Gould revered Johann Sebastian Bach above all other composers, his
reverence fell far short of out-and-out idolatry. In Gould's admittedly prejudiced
opinion, even Bach could display musical feat of purest
kaolin [soft whte clay - I have wondered for 34 years what he means by this] especially when he left off working and reworking a piece until it
was both musically euphoric and intellectually impeccable, and turned to
keyboard improvisations, an exercise Gould ranked on a level with that of a
bored business executive doodling on a desk blotter. Gould no more believed that
great music could be composed extemporary
then modern science believes in animal reproduction by means of spontaneous
generation. And for the same reason: it provides a comfortable refuge from
rationality. The great heroes of antiquity had no more implacable a
nemesis than Bach had in Glenn Gould. Or one nearly so deft, witty, or so
maddeningly amiable in delivering a verbal slap on
the unreflective wrist. GG: Music has the frustrating habit of proving in the end
to have been about nothing in particular. It allows a great latitude for
indulgence to its author and to its listener, and we sometimes are tempted to
objectify the musical experience in a manner that would never occur to us when
dealing, for instance, with the written word. For if by comparison we find in the
daily paper a story defaced by typographical errors, blurred by ink
splotches, and distorted by makeup editor's cuts, we can still manage to
piece together a reasonably comprehensive account of the item
concerned, simply by making connections which our experience with language and
with human motivation conveys to us as reasonable. We know that given time, the
reporter and his editor would have hoped to make it a coherent account, and it
doesn't upset us unduly if we must allow that their deadline was hard upon them
before this could come to pass. It's even possible for us to derive a certain
amusement from paragraphs where the syntax is as elusive as used to be the
case in the press conferences of - now let me say this - Dwight Eisenhower.
And the reason is simple enough. Like those Sunday painters who confess to
not knowing much about art, but to knowing nonetheless what they like, so it
is with the written word. We all improvise with it continuously, we're all
of us on terms with the artist, which if you think about it was Nikita
Khrushchev's problem in a nutshell. But it's not easy for the layman to enjoy
that camaraderie with the musical profession, for ever since the
Renaissance, the explosion of instrumental styles in music has
obliterated for all practical purposes whatever chant forms and folk modalities
once served to cement a relationship between audience and artist. And
consequently, the laity have long been convinced that the making of music
is a game, regulated by such arcane devices that they couldn't be expected
to understand in any event. What they do expect is that the composer must know
the score, as a plumber knows sewage systems - must know it not as an intuitive
experience but as a thoroughly reasoned argument, even if the probes and cavils
of that argument are not apparent to them, and that whatever extemporaneous
elements are involved must be subjected to the laws of musical rhetoric. It's an
attitude that bears special watching today because this is the age of the
debatable motive, of concern with whether and to what degree our thoughts and our
works derive from a conscious industry, or result from concealed and
unacknowledged desires. So the relationship between an organised and a
spontaneous structure depends first of all on those preconceptions which we
bring to our analysis of them. An improvisation is not necessarily a work
which gets by with a minimum of formal coherence. There are such works, and we'll
discuss some of them later, but the more intriguing aspect of improvisation is
the way in which it derives from, and relates to, the disciplines of a notated
context. After all, the primary difference between music made up on the spur of the
moment and music carefully and conscientiously written down is not in
the nature of the materials used, but rather that under the duress of the
improvisatory situation, a musician can't possibly be as thoughtful and as
perceptive about the choice and disposition of his material. For when
improvising, or even when dealing with hastily written down pieces, one simply
has no time to exercise with patience and through many drafts carefully
worked-out contrapuntal inventions. No one has ever been able to do that, not
even J.S. Bach. In the Musical Offering, his massive treatise on a theme supplied
him by Frederick the Great, Bach opens the work with a three-voice fugue or
ricercare as he calls it on this occasion,
apparently similar in manner to one which he improvised at Frederick's court
and in the King's presence, and with which he acknowledged his
dissatisfaction by later dedicating [?] work as an apologia. Here it is, in its
second written down version, and as though Bach were more interested in
recapturing the mood of that courtly occasion, rather than in salvaging his
reputation for contrapuntal extravaganzas, it's still rather
disjointed and episodic, still lacking a firm sense of direction, still
fundamentally improvisatory in design.
Having put his theme through many canons and a four-movement sonata, Bach,
at the end of the work, tries it again as a fugue subject, and this time creates a
monumental six-voice setting in which the security and tautness of the
counterpoint are miraculous, and which not even he could have improvised.
If the improvised fugue can never compete as a technical achievement with the
carefully contoured written one, it's not because it lacks academic pretension.The
contrapuntal devices may not entirely succeed, but an improvisation drawn upon
any academic model will inevitably, even ostentatiously, mimic the criteria of its
notated cousin. And there are many such criteria: here's just one of them:
Victor Borge: I imagine when he wrote this one he was thinking of something else!
GG: Victor Borge improvising his way through one inescapable cliche of
Baroque style:  the this-could-go-on-forever-and-probably-will diatonic
sequence. Sequences like that, which are identical repetitions of a phrase with
only the pitch altered, are able to circumnavigate the chief relations of
the home tonality almost indefinitely. They're among the most useful crutches
for the improviser whose inspiration is temporarily curtailed.They serve him
much as an automatic pilot serves an aviator: they won't get you down to
the field or up over the weather, but they will at least keep you going until
you can think of something to do. Borge's sequence was a very broad spoof
of a sequential tradition which appears again and again in Baroque music, even in
highly organised forms like the fugue, and it wasn't only minor masters of the
Baroque who made use of such episodes: even Bach in his early years often did,
and the presence of such sequences in many of his instrumental fugues reminds
us of the high improvisatory quotient in his first style. Bach, after all, was an
indefatigable improviser, and here in the fugue from his E-minor Toccata, it shows.
These devices are, of course, in themselves anti-architectural, because
nothing about them is either problematical or central to the work.
They may indeed perpetuate a fragment from one of the primary motive strands of
the piece, but they don't clarify it or increase our knowledge of it.
They're devised primarily to kill time. In most quasi-improvised music, the
melodic materials are chosen to minimise mechanical problems, rather than to
impose new and unpredictable intervallic situations. Hence, scale passages,
arpeggiated figures, and a generous supply of ornaments are the improviser's
melodic stock-in-trade. Materials of this sort predominate in improvisatory formats,
whether the extemporaneous flights of jazz men, the showtime amalgams of
cocktail pianists, the cadenza tradition in concerto playing, or a few years back,
those coy fantasias on a theme submitted by the bald-headed gentleman in the
third row aisle, or the lady with the feather in the gallery with which Alec
Templeton or Grace Castagnetta finished off their act. It's this rather
lackadaisical approach to problems of structure which prompts the familiar
caricature of the improvisatory tradition. It's undoubtedly the
inspiration for those pre-raphaelite paintings which show us a heaven-
storming virtuoso agonizing before his instrument in the twi-lit bric-a-brac-
filled garret, the reproductions of which turn up nowadays on Austrian cookie tins,
or as cosmetic ads in the New Yorker magazine.
But this melodic thrashing about is by no means exclusively a 19th century
tradition. In Bach's day, we find that kind of improvising in the recitative,
especially in the instrumental recitative which he was fond of
incorporating into many of his early compositions. [demonstrates]
This sort of improvising is essentially a performer's, rather than a composers
prerogative. It relies upon the invention of
agreeable melodies rich, but not really complicated textures, and a heavy overlay
of sentimentality - the latter designed so as to conceal by dramatic initiatives
the lack of carefully worked out developmental ideas. I suspect that the
therapeutic aspect of improvisation has in fact served many earlier composers as
well. Within every creative person, there is an inventor at odds with a museum
curator, and most of the startling things that happen in music are the result of
some momentary gain by one at the expense of the other. The freeform
extension which improvisation implicitly commends supplements and lends
perspective to the controlled compositional experience which underlies
musical theory. It brings one back to an encounter with certain from primeval tenets
of the idea of music. It reminds one that the will to communicate is antecedent to
the urge to formulate communication, that for the composer even as for the
listener, there are limits to immediate comprehension, to a complete
understanding of the 'why' of his process, and that that very deficiency argues a
certain tolerance in their relationship. Above all, it suggests to us the
importance of distinguishing between sentiments inspired by genuine reaction
and impression, and those aroused by the need to react and to feel impressed. And
in offering that remarkably humbling experience to the jaded sophisticate,
improvisation performs perhaps its most important function.
KW: Glenn Gould's international career took off in 1955.
Appropriately enough, it was the music of Bach that helped propel him to instant
superstardom - the technically daunting Goldberg Variations. That was in 1955.
Nine years later, Gould had all but given up live concert appearances. The reason
was not so much that Gould enjoyed concertising less: he'd never liked
it in fact, but that he valued perfection more.
Luckily, the medium he now took up, recording, was entering on the dawn of a
technological revolution, one which Glenn Gould took full advantage of. Now he
could make music sound the way it did inside his mind's ear, rather than
relying on swarms of spectators and adrenaline-influenced inspiration. GG: In
January 1950, I took part for the first time in a CBC broadcast and made a
discovery that influenced in a rather profound way my development as a
musician. I discovered that in the privacy, the solitude, and if all
Freudians will stand clear, the womb-like security of the studio, it was possible
to make music in a more direct, more personal manner than any concert hall
would ever permit. I fell in love with broadcasting that day and I've not since
been able to think of the potential of music, or for that matter of my own
potential as a musician, without some reference to the limitless possibilities
of the broadcasting and recording medium. For me the microphone has never been
that hostile, clinical inspiration- sapping analyst some critics, fearing it,
complain about. That day in 1950, it became, and has remained, a friend. In fact,
most of the ideas that occur to me as a performer relate in some measure to the
microphone. Now I know this sounds like a minute observation capriciously expanded
into an imposing theory, but it isn't. The microphone does encourage you to develop
attitudes to performance which are entirely out of place in the diffuse
acoustic of the concert hall. It permits you to cultivate a degree of textural
clarity which simply doesn't pay dividends in the concert hall: this sort of clarity:
GG: That was the third fugue from Bach's Kunst der Fuge, The Art of the Fugue and
it was recorded at the organ of All Saints Kingsway Anglican Church in
Toronto. What I like about that recording is that because of the gloriously
eccentric registration which that Casavant instrument offered, the
contrapuntal strands of the music are each allowed to have a life of their own.
They're not embalmed in reverberation, as organ recitals in many churches tend to
be. We were, of course, very fortunate in being able to record in a church which
possessed remarkably light reverberation. But that recording goes
even further: the microphones were placed hard up against the organ chests so that
the pipes could speak, as they say, and perhaps even wheeze occasionally as well.
There was no attempt to glamorise the sound: to surround it with a halo of
resonance, or to mic it so distantly as to suggest that one was listening to it
from far back in the congregation. There was, in fact, no attempt to capitalise on
a sense of occasion - on relating our performance of the Art of the Fugue to
that church, on that winter afternoon, and hence to create for the listener an
artificial sense of participation in the occasion of performance. Our aim was to
ignore the occasion of recording and to concentrate instead upon the likely
circumstance of playback: to think about the living-room studios, automobiles,
transistors on a sand dune, in which, or through which, that recording might
conceivably be heard. When you do ponder these circumstances, it's a uniquely
humbling experience because you realise that the mood and atmosphere in which
the playback transmission is received can never be exactly the same on any two
occasions, and that consequently it doesn't make sense to involve the
listener in atmospheric situations - to make them relate to a particular moment
in time, and to share the occasion with the performer. In the last few years,
there have been a great spate of recordings which have attempted to do
just this: the so-called live recitals transcribed complete with
irreverent hush as maestro makes his entrance, catarrhal  distress from the
third row in the gallery, and a pickup so discreet the microphone seems wedged
into the spotlight control. But I don't believe that that is what recording is
all about. I don't think that the concert is any longer the focal point of musical
activity. It may well be a touching and sentimental gesture to preserve it in
memory, but it also seems to me innocent of any musical justification.
Humphrey Burton: The concert hall as we know it ... GG: is dead, is dead.
HB: Well, the Festival Hall is doing quite good business in London, the New York
Philharmonic Hall is doing quite good business... GG: Well, I don't know whether you're a gambling man,
but don't put your money on it that it'll still be doing good business in the year
1999. HB: You mean the people won't want to go and listen to a Tchaikovsky
concert even, or...? GG: I'll be very disappointed in the audience
that I think is growing up now if they do want to go and listen to a Tchaikovsky
concert. I say this with nothing against Tchaikovsky. I say it only with the idea of
Tchaikovsky concerts would to me be an absurdity in 1999. HB: You'll have to
develop this straightaway. KW: The slightly bemused gentlemen just being informed of
the concert hall's demise is BBC critic and commentator Humphrey Burton. In 1966,
he and Glenn Gould engaged in a television debate on the future of live
concerts. Gould, who'd given up performing in public just two years earlier,
obviously relished his role as the not- so-angry young iconoclast. The program
aroused almost as much controversy as Gould's more eccentric excursions at the
keyboard. Not surprisingly, the program was repeated several times. Once again,
apologies are in order for the murky sound. All I can say is, "please don't
adjust your sets - the trouble is permanent." GG: It is not, in my judgement,
possible to find in any concert hall today, no matter how well engineered that
hall may be (and very few built today are well engineered as you very well know) - it
is not possible to hear a performance of a Beethoven symphony as splendidly
executed as you can hear it on a recording. And you can take that phrase
'splendidly executed' to mean anything you want. First of all, it's not possible to
hear it as well played: it cannot be done, because at some point, no matter how
energised that performance may be, no matter what special festive occasion may
have given rise to it, the horn is going to miss a note, there's going to be a
string tutti that's not coming together, and this may have nothing to do with a
lack of rehearsal time, although it may well have to do with just that. But it
isn't possible to look for that kind of perfectionism in performance that
you will find on any decent recording that you buy.
That's the first thing. Secondly, it's not possible, no matter where you
sit in that hall, whether you sit in the loges, or in the orchestra, or in the gods,
it's not possible to hear that performance with the kind of clarity and
the dissection of the instrumental involvement that you can hear it in your
home speaker. After all, a great deal of music that I as a performer would
play, if I in fact gave concerts (which thank God I no longer do) would be music
not written for an auditorium seating two or three thousand people, it would be
the music of Bach, it would be the music of Mozart, it would be the music of
Beethoven, written for palaces, written for churches, written for homes, and why
on earth should I try to play this in an auditorium that seats two or three
thousand people? And if so, is it not likely that I will accommodate some part
of my interpreter's purpose to the fact that it does seat two or three thousand
people? It becomes in fact a perversion of the music to do this. HB: You
have to overdramatise it? GG: Indeed. And I can give you an extremely good example
of that, Humphrey, because in 1957 I went to Europe for the first time and played
a number of concerts in the Soviet Union, and one of the pieces that I played on
every second concert, more or less, and on those concerts which I didn't play it, I
used it, or part of it, as an encore, was the fifth Partita of Bach, which is a
piece I happen to love very much. In that very same year, I recorded it for the
first and only time, and I happened to make that recording one week after coming
back from the Soviet tour, and I think if I could buy up every extant copy of that
recording and call them all in and reissue it afresh without jeopardising
my royalties, I would do so very willingly. It's a dreadful recording and
the reason for it isn't that it was bad as piano playing or anything of that
kind. Probably it was more pianistically contrived than any of the other Bach
recordings I'd ever done, but for that very reason it's bad. It's not Bach. It's
piano playing... HB: Can you demonstrate this? GG: Yes, I played it rather as though one were
to look at the score and say, "well now, how am I going to project this to that
guy up there you know 60 feet away in the third balcony", sort of thing. Well,
obviously one way you're going to project it is the way pianists
traditionally have projected Bach in concert: lots of crescendos, lots of
diminuendos, minor fluctuations of tempo that Bach never thought of, didn't
want, and that were no part of Bach's language or understanding of music. So
let me give you one example: the Allemande from this Partita.
This is the way, as I recall, I played it back in 1957 on recording, if you could believe it.
GG: Do you want smelling salts now? HB: Are those the smelling salts? GG: Yes, I mean it's
disgraceful, you know. One has to be revived after hearing Bach played like
that. On the other hand... HB: Play it how you think it should be. GG: How I think it should be? Well, it's obvious.
GG: This is not a piece about which one can have doubts because what I sacrificed in
version number one, in the recorded version, was the spine of the music. The
whole backbone was gone, and it was gone precisely because I knew perfectly well
as a travelling pro, so to speak, that if in fact I kept that backbone, it would
sound a little tedious in a concert hall. Because that great vast thing that needs
to be absorbed out there was going to - it wasn't going to project the clarity that
I wanted people to live off, you know. HB: It seems to me that your criticism against concert
halls is true, probably, for what you play. It doesn't seem to me to be
universally valid for music which was designed for concert halls. GG: Well, I think you
might properly make an argument for a music that was
specifically written for a concert hall. I think there might always be a festival
occasion about going to Bayreuth. I've never been there, but I can well imagine
that Wagner buffs, if there are such a couple of hundred years from now, may still
make pilgrimages to Bayreuth. I think you may find indeed that the Royal Festival
Hall, to name but one, has become a kind of museum, and that you go there to watch
a nice stuffed Strauss tone poem. HB: No, I go to hear Richard
Rodney Bennett's latest symphony or to hear some Stravinsky or Berlioz or
whatever. GG: You do now indeed, but I mean let's say 20, 30 years from now, I'm sure
that you will go there as a thinking member of the laity. You will go there to
view museum pieces. HB: Yes, but I happen to enjoy going to concerts I like to be part of a
group of people, I like the excitement of a concert, the atmosphere...
GG: I think it's a terrible admission about yourself that you do - this feeling of wanting
to get with the herd instinct, you know. HB: It's not the herd instinct. I just think
that it's fun, pleasurable to go and hear a piece of music...
GG: You're not going to tell me, surely, that you concentrate as well, that you
listen as acutely in a concert hall as you can sitting at home quietly,
or possibly with the family about, but in any case no major disturbances? You're
not going to tell me to concentrate? HB: I have a score on my lap. I do, of course.
GG: Well I know that Europeans do sit there occasionally with scores. We don't
here - we turn out the light - we make it even more dramatic and perfumery, but
I simply cannot feel that any good can come of this cultivation of the herd in
music listening. I think what we're getting through to now because of recording is a
super-subjective state. You know we talked a lot about this question of
individuality and what it means in the listening process, whether in fact there
is such a thing as a listener who can form judgements that are uniquely his own.
I don't think this was possible while concerts existed and while people sat
there with some degree of the perspiration of 2999 others penetrating
their nostrils. I think it is indeed possible, now that we have home
listening developed to a remarkable degree, and on the verge of many greater breakthroughs.
GG: There are many people who will assure you that recording is essentially a
dishonest activity. They've decided that since recordings are composites, and the
artist can repeat a work, or section of a work, indefinitely until he gets
satisfactory results, that they represent no true measure of his ability. This
argument is raised so often nowadays that I think it'll be worthwhile to
examine it in some detail. I could only give you statistics based on my own
recording experience - I won't pretend to speak for any other musicians in this
matter, because one finds such divergent attitudes toward this whole question..[gap in tape] ... in
two or three or more diametrically opposed interpretations, and if such is
the case, it seems to me important not to opt for one of the interpretations only,
but if time permits to record all of them, then to live with them on a test
tape for some weeks or months, and to defer the decision as to which, if any,
are satisfactory until such time as one of them becomes incontestably more
convincing than its companions. It's much as though one were to record the role of
Hamlet in many takes and each time with a different emphasis perhaps first with
an existential emphasis: "to be or not to be", then again with a Freudian emphasis:
the bedchamber scene with Hamlet's mother would be the centerpiece of that
one. Then again as a swashbuckling action drama with the swordplay of the last act
the inevitable outcome, and only after all of these Hamlets were recorded
would one begin the process of assimilation. Now what I'm suggesting is
a philosophy of recording which runs counter to all the prevailing concepts
of that elusive thing called artistic integrity. Because of course people who
go to the theatre expect to see Olivier's Hamlet or Scofield's Hamlet or
Peter O'Toole's Hamlet, and going on to a concert they anticipate Klemperer's
Beethoven, or Schmidt-Isserstedt's Beethoven, or Sawallisch's Beethoven, and
they become very upset if you challenge the notion that for each man there lies
but one true road to Hamlet or to Beethoven. Now it may be perhaps that in
live concerts or in live theatre, the one way tradition is a necessary limitation.
The economics of theatre and concert management virtually rule out any
possibility that Peter O'Toole could make Hamlet behave like Albert Camus one
night and like Errol Flynn the next. The cost just to reorient the cast would be
astronomical. Similarly, if Otto Klemperer were to give
up his stolid, rather humourless Beethoven beat, and launched into a free skating
exhibition a la Leonard Bernstein, the members of the New Philharmonia Orchestra
would find the whole thing a considerable inconvenience, and might
even have to look up from their music stands on occasion. I think the point is
that in recording Beethoven, or in filming Hamlet, one is not held captive
by the same restrictions, and sensibly one should not act as though one were.
To harbour nostalgia for a medium is one thing, but to carry its limitations into
a new medium is quite another. I firmly believe that recording is an autonomous
medium, and can profit one only if treated as such.
When, eleven years ago, I recorded Bach's Goldberg Variations, I bypassed the theme,
the very simple aria upon which the variations are constructed, left it
for recording until all the other variations had been satisfactorily put
down on tape. I then turned to that ingenuous little Sarabande, and found
that it took me 20 takes in order to locate a character for it which would be
sufficiently neutral so as not to prejudge the depth of involvement that
comes later in the work. It was a question of utilising the first 20 takes
to erase all superfluous expression from my reading of it and there's nothing
more difficult to do. The natural instinct of the performer is to add, not
to subtract. In any case, the theme as represented in my recording of the
Goldberg Variations is take 21.
Now, it's quite possible that had I played the thirty variations differently,
take one of the theme, or indeed any earlier take of it, would have done as
well. Because what we're dealing with here is the attempt to make a part fit
the whole - to create a first page that will match the other fifty pages, and to
anyone indoctrinated with concert procedures, not only will twenty-one
takes of a simple air seem an outrageous indulgence, but more shocking still will
be the cavalier dissection of the work, treating it bit by bit and out of
sequence, because of course if you give a concert and play a long work like the
Goldberg Variations, not only must you resign yourself to the notion that no
take two can come to the rescue, but you must also be prepared to accept the
consequences of what you do from first note to last. If, for instance, through
lack of concentration or attention or through being distracted by the lady
with the catarrh and the jangling bracelet in the gallery, the theme
emerges as an unwieldy over-decorated sentimentalised rubato-filled air,
one is stuck with it, and with its ramifications, and logically must impose
its consequences upon the remainder of the work. In many ways, modern recording
techniques are akin to those of the film medium. As in film, multiple takes are the
rule, not the exception. The quest for a certain kind of technical perfection may
at times override other considerations. As in film, the work can be viewed out of
sequence. The finale, for instance, can be done first, and through its vitality, or
lack of it, counsel modifications in the interpretation of the preceding
movements. Again, as in film, one can usually put some distance between the
actual making of the recording and the time when one must sit down, reflect upon
the results, and edit them into a unified whole.
Just as a film director will gain a measure of objectivity by sorting out
the previous day's rushes, the recording artist and his producer are not bound to
make final decisions during the taping session. And in my view it's impossible
to exaggerate the psychological importance of this afterthought control.
For in recording, as in working with film, the producer's activity is of vital
importance. Sometimes he has the difficult task of diplomatically
persuading a performer to eliminate from contention a
take which in respect of performance is a credit to him, but which strictly on
its merits as a recording leaves something to be desired.
One cannot, for instance, simply match and splice together two takes of adjacent
segments of a movement, even though both may be admirably executed. An infinite
number of technical considerations must be weighed into the bargain.
Are the tapes recorded at a uniform dynamic level? Are they played at a
uniform dynamic level, and at a consistent tempo? Is there a
preponderance of pedal sonority in one take, but not the other, at the point
where the splice must be made? Nothing will expose splices more cruelly
than the sudden erasure of pedal overhang. In all such decisions, the
producer's word is law. He must be allowed a veto, but there are other subtler ways
in which he can influence the end result as well. In 1962, when I began to record
the 48 preludes and fugues from Bach's Well-Tempered Clavichord, the producer
assigned to the series was a young Englishman named Paul Meyers, an
indefatigable enthusiast of Baroque music. In an early session, we had worked
through to the Prelude No. 8 - the rather celebrated one in E-flat minor.
It's a piece that, in my day at least, most every student tried out at graduate
recitals, but which, as a token of nonconformity, I had never learned to
play. Consequently, I arrived at the studio with no very set notion about how
it should go, which is quite a good way to arrive, as long as you're prepared to
learn on company time. Nevertheless, I wanted to find a character for it which
would affirm its sarabande-like simplicity, while disassociating it from
those doleful legato performances in which I had so often heard it
represented as one of the lesser Chopin Nocturnes. Take one was made, and it went
along fairly well. "Not bad", said Mr. Myers over the intercom. "I have the feeling
you're trying to give it a guitar like plucking." I confessed that I was. "In that
case", said Mr. Myers, "it's still much too legato. Why don't you try to sustain the
guitar effect throughout?" For a moment I thought of all those zealous pedagogues
and earnest students for whom the piano means legato playing, Bach means sobriety
and the Prelude in E-flat minor means no fun at all. Well, the result was Prelude
in E-flat minor take two, which is the performance you hear on this recording
and my own favorite among all the bits of Bach that we've recorded these last
10 years. Needless to say, it was greeted with almost unanimous critical condemnation,
and the following Christmas I presented Mr. Myers, since, after all, the whole
thing was his idea, with a scrapbook stuffed with the most disparaging
reviews on record.
One gains ideas from actually trying things that one can't quite try at home,
one can't quite try under concert circumstances. You don't dare experiment
to that degree in a concert, and at home you don't quite have the tension of the
moment to make it necessary and feasible to experiment that widely. JM: There
are lots of critics and concert-goers I think would attach a kind of moral
disapproval to that kind of behaviour. It's not quite honest perhaps. GG: Yeah, they
feel that there's a certain amount of cheating involved - of course there is, because as
you know, a recording very often consists of a collection of taped fragments that
are quite carefully spliced together: a) to eliminate inaccuracies - finger faults of
one kind or another; b) and much more important: to create a homogeneous entity
of that particular composition. We've put out a lot of music that consists of take
one from start to finish. A lot of the Bach preludes and fugues,
which are rather short pieces, and hence no great achievement is involved - there are
take ones with no splices of any kind. JM: Or a complete take three? GG: Or a complete take three, yes.
JM: with no splicing. GG: Yes On the other hand, some of the very best things we've done,
and I'm thinking particularly of one fugue, the A-minor from the first volume of the
Wohltemperierte Klavier consisted of two extraordinary takes which were
absolutely different in character, and which miraculously matched each other,
paced each other in tempi. It's very unusual
JM: Why don't you illustrate what you're speaking of? GG: Right, well we played the
A-minor fugue about a year and a half ago at a session in two completely different ways,
and in the first fashion, this was the way in which we phrased the subject:
That became what we called take six. Then we had a take eight - take seven was
rather a let-down as I recall, and take eight sounded something like this:
And in take eight, as you can see, there was a very Teutonic emphasis. It was very pompous,
it was very grand, it was a little bit turgid, a little bit boring, and we felt that we
couldn't go on indefinitely being that pompous about a phrase, a motivic idea,
that on the whole was rather light-hearted even though its texture was quite
thick. At the same time we couldn't be quite as skittish as take six was either, so
about a month later, sitting in the playback booth, we discovered that both
these takes - take six and take eight were accomplished in exactly the same
amount of time. I don't remember what the minute and second hand read at the moment - but perhaps
3:20 for one, 3:22 for the other - very close in any event, and
we then found that it was possible in effect to make a constant shift of gear
between take six and take eight: to use take eight, to use this pompous, rather turgid,
rather Teutonic version of the theme and its corresponding answers for all of the
basic expository passages, and for all the episodic and fragmentary ones to
use take six, to lighten the texture as if one was shifting to the upper
register of a harpsichord or whatever, and it made one very best fugues that we
put out, I think JM: So you build your interpretation with the razor blade and
the engineer? GG: Indeed, and we built it after the fact. We had no idea on the day of the
session that it would turn out that way. We couldn't possibly have guessed it, and
I don't think that under any pressured circumstance, under concert conditions, for
instance, one could ever have arrived at something quite that - if I may use the word
in quite the wrong place - inspired version. I think that it's very much easier to do
that when you're dealing with Baroque music let's say, which has no written-in
tempol indications and where composers like Bach provided few and far between
dynamic indications for that matter. One can obviously improvise a great deal
within me the framework that you're given
It's rather less easy to do it, and one is inclined to bring down critical wrath
upon one's head if one does do it in romantic music, where things are written
out to a fair nicety.
I had a fascinating experience a couple of weeks ago. I sat in a studio in New York
and took a couple of Bach fugues, the E-major fugue from the second volume of the 48 and
the F-sharp minor fugue from the same book, and also the B-flat minor from that book. And these
are fugues that I played all my life. I'm very familiar with them. I can't quite
say I could do them in my sleep, but I think almost that, because they were
favourite pieces when I was a teenager, and I had almost the performing
experience of a lifetime, I would say. I put on a set of earphones and had fed to
me my own click track, which in this case consisted of simply saying "four, three,
two, one, oomh", and the "oomh" constituted the beat. Whereupon I went back to the bass voice and started
playing the bass voice along with my control performance, hearing only what I
had just done and hearing really a muffled version, as one must necessarily
do with earphones, of what I was in fact doing. And having put down the bass voice
in this fashion, we did the tenor and so on, and the extraordinary was that having
known these pieces 20 years, perhaps 20 years conservatively indeed, I saw them and
heard them afresh in the most extraordinary way. I had never realised
things about the inner voice aspects of those fugues which are manifestly clear.
They're simply there to be apprehended by anyone who takes a closer look at
that score, and I'm sure that if you took a student or indeed anyone who was at all
interested in music and suspicious of the contrapuntal experience, because a
lot of people are - if you took him into a studio and had him do precisely that - let
him listen to one voice at a time, which I really think is the ideal way to
understand music in any case, it leads to other questions: as to whether one can be
content with that on the larger scale experience, I'm sure that it would change
his whole notion of what Bach was, what the Baroque represented, what that whole
incredibly involved experiment of baroque counterpoint really meant. CD: Do you foresee at
some point presenting that experience to the public in the form of a
recording? GG: I would like to try. It isn't quite feasible yet. It isn't feasible in
my own case until I learn to play duets and trios and quartets with myself
successfully, which I certainly did not do on this occasion. It was a
disaster as an ensemble performance, but I would love to see performances of that kind
presented in four corner stereo - a speaker in each corner of the room. It would be a totally unreal performance.
One would not in any sense be confronted with spectacle in the sense of awareness of
somebody up there on that podium, on that platform playing at you. You would be in
the centre of the problem, so to speak, and I think that's really what the listener should try to do, and the way
in which performance experiment of Bach must continue and must try to bring the listener into the centre
of the problem. CD: When you successfully solve that problem for yourself I can
see a hotel cocktail lounge advertising "featuring the Glenn Gould Quartet".
GG: Presumably there could be a generation growing up that has learned to correlate
the contrapuntal experience with a certain kind of visual image. What would it be?
Something very inner and post- expressionist, sort of Rorschach blot? JM: I
think there are probably as many pictorial - possible pictorial
associations with, let's say, a Bach fugue, which does not contain anything that
could possibly be remotely associated with the visual other than by a kind of
literal Mickey Mouse effect. When the notes go up you think of clouds and when
the notes go down you think of grottoes. But leaving aside that kind of
literalness, it would probably take someone who had a very strong visual
sense already, let's say a filmmaker like Norman McLaren might make direct visual
associations with a Bach fugue that wouldn't occur to either of us.
Well, there is, I suppose, an animation-like aspect to Bach as regards the performance of the work because one can certainly think
of it as existing at an infinite number of tempi as being taken frame by frame and separated -fragmented and valued for that individual frame. JM: Well,
it feels that way looking at it from the point of view of its composition. It
feels rather like having to put the piece together note by note by note,
one at a time to get each one exactly right and exactly in its right place,
just the way you would put together animation cells to be able to ultimately
simulate a motion, which by the time it arrives in the form of a motion
projected as a film, has to seem completely natural and flowing and
appropriate to the character that you're trying to portray, and yet in its
technical execution that has only been put together very very slowly, piece by
piece, painstakingly, and none of that must ever be apparent.
GG: Do you think that film observation, I mean the whole cult of film, which is the new great super-art - the art that Wagner thought he was inventing - do you think that
filmmaking is going to influence the way in which we listen to music? JM: Yeah, it may very well be that
what film will ultimately do is to change both our ears and our eyes. I
think the ability of the eye to lead the ear, and the ear to lead the eye:
there's something that film is exploring more and more by offsetting the track,
by leading your ear into the next scene before you have visually left the
preceding scene, or doing the reverse: introducing visually something that is
about to happen, while the track continues to hold on something that you
had just been leaving. And in that sense it's a construction which is
not all that unrelated to the principles of counterpoint. GG: Right.
I have a feeling that it's changed our our sense of distance that sound
represents, and I know that since film became more and more important to me in
the last decade or so I began to think of music dimensionally in a way that
just hadn't occurred before. You see, I have a feeling that what we're going to do
eventually is to forget about this funny notion that we've carried over into the
recording of music strictly as a legacy, and a very poor one, of the concert hall and
that is that we should sit the listener down in front of his stereo speakers and
confront him box-like with an experience. I don't think that we're supposed to
confront him with anything at all, and I think that one way in which that can be
broken through is to think in terms of multiple perspectives: multiple
perspectives which represent and which choreograph, and which set forth the work as
clearly, as analytically as we can. I mean precisely in the way in which a
film track would have multiple perspectives applied to it, you know, to
represent the kind of situation it was - the horse leaning over and
kissing the girl from the farm next door - that kind of scene, as against the
intimate chat by Bonanza fireplace - that kind of scene, you know.
No one's ever thought of doing this, except in relation to one
symphony as against the next symphony, maybe. In that way you could convey
precisely what the emotion of that piece, just as an animator could convey it too,
was all about, you know. You wouldn't violate the music - there will be no
sense of violating the music. What you would violate is the ridiculous, too long-held
perspective of the concert hall which has kept us going and in business for a long
time...JM:  But what on the concert platform do you recall is among the most frantic
instant processes of Bach decision-making? GG: The ones that I couldn't remember.
KW: Glenn Gould the Well-Tempered Polymath featured the late Glenn Gould in
conversation with composer-critic Curtis Davis; former CBC radio music producer
James Kent; Professor Hans Eichner, head of the German Department, University of
Toronto; BBC music commentator and critic Humphrey Burton; and John McClure, head of
the classical music division of CBS Records. The excerpts were taken from 10
minutes with Glenn Gould;  The Well-Tempered Listener; final takes from
The Art of Glenn Gould; the Hans Eichner interview from Musicscope; a Psychology
of Improvisation from the Ideas series; Bach and his keys from Thursday Music; and To
Every Man His Own Bach and The Gould- Burton Debate from CBC and BBC
television specials. We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation of both the
radio and television archives of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation; the
Glenn Gould Estate; and producer Vincent Tovell of TV Arts and Sciences in the
preparation of this program. Glenn Gould The Well-Tempered Polymath was edited
written and produced by Warren Wilson. Technical operations were by
David Quinney. Production assistant Laura Singleton. Executive producer Ann Gibson.
I'm Ken Winters. [captions edited by Bruce Cross]