All right. How's everyone doing?
So, um we're going to talk a little bit
about how you might get pardoned from
your Bitcoin. Uh and it has to do with a
particular form of attack uh that is a
civil attack and a social engineering
attack and it is called fiat medicine.
Uh you will be departed from your
bitcoin if you enter this healthcare
system that is currently centrally
controlled. uh it is heavily
politicized. It's one sizefits-all
mandate of medicine and these markets
are controlling mandates, kickbacks, and
all type of capture. However, this
community is in a unique position to
actually be able to address this because
the core of this problem is actually
from something known as what we call
fiat science and peer review. The
peer-review system is incredibly
centralized and uh it is under it is
gets induced into these mob attacks that
they get all types of researchers to
come and take down papers that are
counternarrative and accelerate papers
that are in fact that are for the
narrative. There's lots of conflicts in
decentralized medicine. We have the NIH
that has billions of dollars being
handed out yet they're on a royalty
screen with vaccines. So you can imagine
how medicine can end up in disrupting
your actual health and your time time
chain. If you don't believe me, there's
many different examples of this during
the pandemic. James, our great pointer,
actually weeded this one out called
Serge Sphere. Serge Sphere was a fraud
that ended up taking HCQ off the market.
It stopped the clinical trial. People
died and nobody went to jail. The Watson
paper came out and completely utter
fraud. This paper suggested that these
vaccines saved millions of people. It's
now known that this is actually a
monoling error. There's the proximal
origins paper that tried to claim that
this virus came from a pang lamb that
made it with bat. Uh this is the another
egregious fraud that has accepted
narrative that this gain function
research actually does something
productive for us in fact creates leaks.
And of course there are all the other
SSRIs the statins vi these are all drugs
that have proven to do the opposite of
what they've been claimed to do. Fosamax
being perhaps the most potent one which
was meant to help osteoporosis engaging
the bones and so there's this live story
but what I want to focus on today is the
one that hit the most people which are
the mRNA vaccines these things were
distributed to 5 million people with 13
billion doses and this is very much big
connect in the biotech space right we
basically had the FDA running
cheerleaders for these vaccines and
they're supposed to be the regulator so
to understand where went wrong. You have
to know a little bit about the proof of
work that goes on with DNA. In order to
write DNA, you have to consume cellular
energy. You got to consume ATP. It gets
literally written into the message. So
this proof of work system is what's
required for this DNA chain, if you
will, to get distributed around the
world and for high fidelity. Jack Mer
gave some great talk a couple
conferences ago. We talked about DNA
being a time chain or at least the
Bitcoin system being a time chain that's
required to synchronize global
transactions. Your DNA is a very simple
time chain and that it is globally
replicating and it replicates at a
faster rate than the the 10 to 21st hash
rate that you have in Bitcoin every day.
Subscribe.