About himself he said recently, "As for a message, well, I have no message."
That's right.
There's no message whatever.
"Some things simply occur to me and I write them down with no aim to hurt anyone or to
convert anyone.
This is all I can say.
I make this public confession of my poverty before everybody.
Besides, had I not done so, you would have known it was true."
Yes, that's what I said.
I'm just going to finish this introduction and then we'll exchange.
About him others have written that he is the greatest living writer.
Still others, that he has influenced the literature of the world more than anyone alive.
Jorge Luis Borges lives here in Buenos Aires, although he has traveled extensively, especially
in the United States, and taught most recently at Harvard for a year.
He is blind, since the late fifties.
He does not mind it, he says, "because now he can live his dreams with less distraction."
He took early to his craft, translating into Spanish from the English Oscar Wilde's
The Happy Prince when he was six years old.
The translation, thought to have been the work of his father, was used as a school text.
He began to publish in the twenties--poems, essays, short works of fiction.
In the late Thirties he got his first job as a menial assistant in a library,
but even this he lost for the offense of having signed a declaration in opposition to General Peron in 1946.
When Peron was ousted, Mr. Borges was made director of the National Library,
and his literary work continuing at an extraordinary rate and including now translations into Spanish of
major American writers.
He took to lecturing widely, acquainting many Americans with his writings and with himself.
Concerning his work, his critics disagree except on the proposition that it will survive the century.
Mr. Borges is substantially but not entirely apolitical.
Since Argentina is having its problems, I thought to begin by asking:
Is there anything, Mr. Borges, distinctively Argentinian about those problems?
Well, I wonder.
I know very little about politics, but I think we have the right government now, a government
of gentlemen, not of hoodlums.
I don't think we're ripe for democracy as yet--maybe in a hundred years or so.
But now I think we have the right government.
I think that the government means well, and the government is acting, and as I said, we
are governed by gentlemen and not by the scum of the earth, as happened, well, but a short time ago.
When you say that it might be a hundred years before--
Well, or let's say 500, no?
If the world lasts.
After our time?
Yes.
Why is that?
Is it something distinctive to Argentinians?
Distinctive to the hemisphere?
Distinctive to what?
I can't tell you, since I know my own country and am very puzzled by my country.
I wish I understood my country.
I can only love it.
I can do what I can for it.
But I don't pretend to understand it.
I'm no historian.
Well, when you say that you don't understand it, do you mean that you are continually surprised
by what happens?
Yes, I am continually surprised, but I try to live in my own private, secluded -
in my own private, literary world.
Well, do you recognize an obligation of the man of letters to involve himself in politics
to the extent of saying no to the barbarians?
Yes.
To that extent I do.
Not more than that.
I think that if I do my literary work honestly, then in a sense I am doing something for my country.
I can do nothing else, being old, blind, and lonely.
I can try to do my work as best, as well as I can.
That's all I can do.
I could never involve myself in politics.
I could never allow myself to be bribed.
I haven't even tried to be famous, though I have become quite famous.
But I have done nothing whatever to, in that sense.
I've merely kept on writing, never thinking of that, of the public, or of the readers.
I write to please myself.
I mean, if I were Robinson Crusoe on a desert island I would go on writing, and I suppose
I would write more or less the same kind of stuff I'm turning out now.
Well, you were criticized to be sure in a left journal in America for, for instance,
advocating the execution of Regis Debray in Bolivia, is that correct?
Yes, this was correct.
But after all, I think execution, I think that capital punishment is kinder than prison.
I'm not against capital punishment.
I wouldn't mind being executed, but I wouldn't like spending five years in jail.
Actually, I wouldn't mind being executed.
In fact, I think I would welcome it, since I'm rather tired of life, since life has few
pleasures left to me.
Well, if you insist on being executed, let me know, and I'll suggest a provocation.
You are thinking of the general?
But why not?
Maybe you are right.
He wasn't being sentimental about himself or feeling sorry for himself, or abounding,
as Kipling had it, in loud self-pity.
I don't think a man should abound in loud self-pity.
At least I have tried my best not to do so.
Well, do you find this challenge, this inclination to self-pity, a characteristic of the age?
I wonder what is characteristic of the age.
I know very little about the age.
But maybe it is rather common here, in this country.
People go in for being sorry for themselves, which is a pity, I think.
Of course, if you go in for being sorry for yourself, then you keep on being sadder and sadder, no?
You mean because there's so much to be sorry for?
Oh yes.
Sometimes walking down the street I sometimes feel unaccountably happy, and then I welcome
that happiness because I don't know where that happiness comes from, but still it should be welcomed.
I think happiness should always be welcomed.
Is it a happiness that comes as a result of the satisfaction you take in your work?
No, personally I dislike my work.
I prefer the work of any other writer.
I think that every time I have
not been given the Nobel Prize, I think that the Swedish Academy has acted justly.
I don't deserve that prize.
When I think-- . Well, you certainly don't deserve to be put
in the same class with Quasimodo.
But I don't deserve to be put in the same class as Kipling or Faulkner or Bernard Shaw.
Well, they can't miss all the time.
No.
Do you mean you have officially abandoned any intention of receiving the Nobel Prize?
No.
I think it is a kind of game that is played every year.
You know, every year I am to be given the Nobel Prize and then it turns out to be next year.
It's a kind of habit I have, or a kind of habit the Scandinavians have.
In fact, it might be called an old Norse tradition, you know, not to give me the Nobel Prize.
That's a part of Norse mythology.
I'm very fond of Norse, all things Scandinavian.
I love all things Scandinavian.
Is it your point that you would lose respect in the Nobel Committee if they awarded you the prize?
I would think it was a very generous mistake, but I will accept it greedily.
What are you at work on now, Mr. Borges?
Well, precisely, I am working on a book with a friend of mine, Mario Corama, on Snorri
Sturluson, the Icelandic historian, and then I'm also writing a book of poems to be published
by Emece in Buenos Aires, and then a book of short stories to get published by Emece in Buenos Aires.
And I'm writing off and on all the time since I have nothing else to do.
I live by myself.
You say that you dislike your work.
Do you also dislike working?
No, I enjoy working but I don't like the work.
As Carlyle said, "All work is contemptible, but that doing that work is not contemptible."
It may be the only justification for a man.
And I think he was right.
Because after all, when I am working I am fulfilling my destiny.
What else can I do but work?
What else can a blind man do but work?
As to the result of the work, I leave that to others, and I never reread what I have written,
except when I have to correct the proof sheets.
But I enjoy working, and not only working,
but I enjoy planning my work, perhaps more than the actual writing of it or the raw dictating
of it, since writing, of course, has been forbidden to me.
You have been compared to both Milton and Homer.
Well, yes, in the sense of being blind, yes.
Yes, but in other senses too.
You've been compared to them.
I know that you make it a practice not to read anything about yourself.
No, I've only read one book, a book published by a Bolivian -
his name was Tamayo, and an Argentine writer, Ruiz-Diaz.
That's the only book I've read about me, and they tell me there are some 300 books that
have been written about me.
But I think the writers should choose a better subject.
Well, in that case I'm in a position to instruct you about yourself.
I suppose you are.
You have been compared to both Milton and Homer in terms of a highly illuminated internal vision.
Is this a correct judgment as far as you're concerned?
Well, I do my best to think it a correct judgment.
At least I try to put up with blindness.
Of course, when you are blind, time flows in a different way.
It flows, let's say, on an easy slope.
I have sometimes spent sleepless nights--night before last, for example--but I didn't really
feel especially unhappy about it, because time was sliding down that--was flowing down
that easy slope.
You mean you'd have felt more unhappy if you had been able to see?
Oh yes, of course I would.
Why?
Well,
I can't very well explain it.
These are the thoughts of years.
When I first went blind, I mean for reading purposes, I felt very unhappy.
But now I feel that being blind is, let's say, part of my world.
I suppose that happens.
One's heard about it.
When one is in jail, one thinks of being in jail as being a part of one's world;
when one is sick, also.
How do you refresh yourself as someone who is blind, sufficiently?
I'm reading all the time.
I'm having books reread to me.
I do very little contemporary reading.
But I'm only going back to certain writers.
And among those writers I would like to mention an American writer.
I would like to mention Emerson.
I think of Emerson not only as a great prose writer-- everybody knows that--but a very
fine intellectual poet, as the only intellectual poet who had any ideas.
Emerson was brimming over with ideas.
Well, you did a great deal to sort of reintroduce Americans to many American writers, including
Emerson, isn't that correct?
Yes, yes.
I've done my best.
Emerson and also another writer I greatly love.
Hawthorne?
Well, but in Hawthorne-- What I dislike about Hawthorne--he was always writing fables.
But in the case of Poe, well, you get tales, but there was no moral tagged on to them.
But in the case of Hawthorne things are always becoming lessons or parables.
But I would think of Melville, one of the great writers of the world, no?
How do you account for the failure of Melville to achieve any recognition during his lifetime -
any significant recognition?
Because people thought of him as writing travel books.
I have the 1911 edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica.
There's an article about Melville, and they speak of him much in the same way as they
might speak about Captain Marryat, for example, or other writers.
He wrote many travel books; people thought of him as writing in that way, so they couldn't
see all that Moby Dick or the white whale meant.
What part did you play in the rediscovery of Melville?
Well, in this country I've done what I could, I suppose.
Had it already been translated when you were a student?
No, when I was a student it hadn't been translated.
It was translated afterwards, and I translated a very fine story of Melville's;
you know it of course, "Bartleby."
Yes.
You translated that for the first time?
Yes, for the first time.
Then I also think we did the first translation of Hawthorne's Wakefield, a very fine story
after the manner of Kafka, - or rather Kafka came after him, no?
But Kafka enables us to read Hawthorne better, which is what a great writer does.
In a sense he graces the forerunners.
He makes people read them in a different way.
But maybe I shouldn't have read Hawthorne's Wakefield as well as I did, or as I should
have done, had I not read Kafka before.
I think that's one of the functions, one of the gifts of a great writer, is to make people
read in a different way, go over the old texts in a different fashion, so the past has been
continually modified.
Yes.
Well now, you say that you spend most of your time reading the older writers now.
Is it because you reject the new writers,
or because you choose to continue to be unfamiliar with them?
I am afraid that I'd find the new writers more or less like myself.
You won't.
I suppose I will.
I suppose all contemporaries are more or less alike, no?
Since I dislike what I write, I prefer going back to the 19th, to the 18th century, and
then, of course, also going back to the Romans since I have no Greek, but I had Latin.
Of course, my Latin is very rusty, but still, as I once wrote, to have forgotten Latin is
already, is in itself a gift.
To have known Latin and to have forgotten it is something that sticks to you somehow.
I have done most of my reading in English.
I read very little in Spanish.
I was educated practically in my father's library, and that was compounded of English books.
So that when I think of the Bible, I think of the King James Bible.
When I think of the Arabian Nights I think of Lane's translation or of Captain Burton's translation.
When I think of course of Persian literature I think in terms of Browne's Literary History
of Persia, and of course of Fitzgerald's.
And frankly, I remember the first book I read on the history of South America was Prescott's
The Conquest of Peru.
Is that right?
Yes, and then I fell back on Spanish writers, but I have done most of my reading in English.
I find English a far finer language than Spanish.
Why?
There are many reasons.
Firstly, English is both a Germanic and a Latin language, those two registers.
For example, for any idea you take you have two words:
Those words do not mean exactly the same.
For example, lf I say regal, it’s not exactly the same thing as saying "kingly."
Or if I say "fraternal," it's not saying the same as "brotherly," or "dark" and "obscure."
Those words are different.
It would make all the difference, speaking, for example, of the Holy Spirit--it would
make all the difference in the world in a poem if I wrote about the Holy Spirit or I
wrote "the Holy Ghost," since "ghost" is a fine, dark Saxon word, when "spirit" is a
light Latin word.
And then there is another reason.
The reason is that I think that of all languages, English is the most physical of all languages.
The most what?
Physical.
You can, for example, say, "He loomed over."
You can't very well say that in Spanish.
Asomo?
No, they're not exactly the same.
And then, in English you can do almost anything with verbs and prepositions.
For example, to "laugh off," to "dream away."
Those things can't be said in Spanish.
To "live down" something, to "live up to" something.
You can't say those things in Spanish.
They can't be said; it's a Romance language.
I suppose they can be said in German, although my German really isn't too good.
I taught myself German for the sake of reading Schopenhauer in the text.
That was way back in 1916.
I had read Schopenhauer in English; I was greatly attracted to Schopenhauer, and then
I thought I would try and read him in the text and then I taught myself German.
And at long last I read Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung in the text,
and Parerga und Paralipomena also.
Well, do you write your poetry in English or in Spanish?
No, I respect English too much.
I write it in Spanish.
Well, do you pass on the translations?
Do you personally pass on the translations or do you simply entrust them to people like
Kerrigan or di Giovanni?
No, I have people like Alistair Reid, di Giovanni, and Kerrigan, who are greatly better at my texts.
They are greatly better than that in the translation.
And then of course in Spanish words are far too cumbersome.
They're far too long.
Well, I go to one of my hobbies.
For example, if you take an English adverb, or two English adverbs, you say for instance
"quickly," "slowly," and then the stress falls on the significant part of the word.
Quickly.
Slowly.
But if you say it in Spanish, you say lentamente, rapidamente.
And then the stress falls on the nonsignificant part, on the gadget.
Right, right.
And all that makes a very cumbersome language.
Yes.
But still, Spanish is my destiny, it's my fate, and I have to do what I can with Spanish.
Well, does the fact that the Spanish language is less resourceful than the English language
necessarily make it less complete as poetry?
No, I think that when poetry is achieved it can be achieved in any language.
It's more than a fine Spanish verse; that could hardly be translated to another language.
It would turn to something else.
But when beauty happens, well, there it is, no?
What Whistler said--people were discussing art in Paris.
People spoke about, well, the influence of heredity, tradition, environment, and so on,
and then Whistler said in his lazy way, "Art happens."
Art happens.
"Art happens," he said.  And I think that's true.
I should say that beauty happens.
Sometimes I think that beauty is not something rare.
I think beauty is happening all the time.
Art is happening all the time.
At some conversation a man may say a very fine thing, not being aware of it.
I am hearing fine sentences all the time from the man in the street, for example.
From anybody.
So you consider yourself a transcriber, to a certain extent.
Yes, in a sense I do, and I think that I have written some fine lines, of course.
Everybody has written some fine lines.
That's not my privilege.
If you're a writer you're bound to write something fine, at least now and then, off and on.
Even Longfellow?
Longfellow has some very beautiful lines.
I'm very old-fashioned, but I like "This is the forest primeval, the murmuring pines and the hemlock"
That's a very fine line.
Yes, yes.
I don't know why people look down on Longfellow.
Maybe he was too much of a literary man, no?
He was much the same kind of poet as Ezra Pound.
I mean he took mostly from books and not from his own experience.
But his translation of the Divine Comedy is a very fine translation.
In fact, I read it in English before I read it in Italian.
You did?  Whose translation?
Longfellow's translation.
Oh, I see.
And I began--because I've always been a bit of a prig--by reading firstly the notes and then the text.
The first thing I read was the notes, as a boy.
Then I went on to the text.
Then I took up the text.
That must have been more than 30 years ago.
Then I found out that I had no necessity of knowing Italian, that if I had Spanish I had
Italian, and that the Divine Comedy could be read by anybody who had Spanish.
After all, the languages are much the same.
The Italian editions of the Commedia are very fine, the Momigliano, for example, or the Grabher.
There's a note to almost every line.
If you don't understand the verse itself you can always fall back on the notes.
They're very interesting.
I think I've read the Divine Comedy some 11 or 12 times over, and I have no Italian.
I couldn't talk to an Italian, or see an Italian film, or hear an Italian film.
I couldn't understand it.
I have no Italian blood.
But somehow Italian and Spanish, well, they're so alike.
Well, would you understand it if it were read to you?
I don't think so.
If it were read to me it would be read too quickly.
Yes.
When I am trying to understand a line in Italian, then of course I can reread it.
These thoughts that go through your mind that you transcribe, as you put it, into prose and poetry.
I wonder if there's an essential difference.
I don't think so.
I think the gist is the same.
If an idea comes to me I don't know whether it will become a tale, become a short story,
or a sonnet, or maybe an example of free verse.
That comes afterwards.
First I see the whole thing from afar.
Then somehow it has to be licked into shape.
Now, this was as much true when you could see, as since?
Oh yes, always, yes.
The technique was always the same?
Technique was always the same.
The technique is the technique of being, let's say, an onlooker, of seeing things, but seeing
them at first in a very misty way, and then afterwards, well, getting nearer them, seeing them closer.
But in the case of a story--in the case of a story or in the case of a poem, I always
know the beginning and the end.
Generally I know the first line and the last line, or at least what will happen.
But then I have to find out what happens in between, no?
Then of course I have to grope and maybe lose my way and maybe go back.
Oh, you do have to struggle in between, do you?
Oh, of course I do.
But the struggle is part of the game.
That's not merely an act of transcription.
No, it isn't, but the struggle makes for enjoyment.
Do you know at the outset that you are going to succeed, if you know the first and last lines?
Yes, I know.
But I wonder if I have succeeded.
People say have now and then.
I think there is a lot of agreement on that point.
Well, if I don't believe in democracy, why should I believe in a lot of agreement?
After all, those are mere statistics.
Is there a critical democracy in which you do believe, or do you find that the opinion
of the critics is often mistaken so that very little expertise lies in the field?
Having been a critic I know that their opinions are generally mistaken.
In fact, I have been mistaken many times.
Can you give an example of someone whose reputation was for years mistaken?
Is Melville a good example?
Melville might be.
Melville, now, I think holds his own, no?
And he should.
But not in all his books.
Is there a living writer who is vastly under-appreciated?
I know very little about living writers.
In my case I would say that I am overrated, greatly overrated.
My stuff is greatly overrated.
Well, what about Neruda?
Neruda, when he was a sentimental poet, was quite bad.
When he was a Communist he wrote very fine poetry.
That means that communism was the kind of food he needed,
even as Walt Whitman needed democracy, no?
But I think Neruda is a fine poet.
In fact, I was in Stockholm once upon a time for a fair -
and I said that if - this was more or less on the eve of the judgment, no?
And I said, well, if they choose me they make a mistake.
Of course; I would grab the prize if I can.
But I think the true candidates—those two candidates would be Pablo Neruda and Jorge
Guillen, at least in the Spanish language.
What about Gabriel Marquez?
I think he wrote but one book.
The book - I think the book falls off, no?
I think it begins well, but then at the end the writer is the style of the reader, perhaps.
What about Cortazar?
I know very little about him.
I was editing a literary magazine, and a young man came to see me.
He brought a manuscript and he came back within 10 days and I told him the story was going
to be published, and I said, "Would you illustrate it?"
That story was "La Casa Tomada" by Julio Cortazar.
And then I met him in Paris and I reminded him of the incident.
But I haven't read his other books.
That story is a very fine story, after the manner of - perhaps Arthur Machen, yes, I should say so.
Are there any of these writers, Mr. Borges, whose work simply resists translations into
Spanish, Nabokov, for instance?
I wonder if he has been translated.
I don't know.
I don't think so.
Well, then, he does resist, I guess.
Well, in the case of Joyce, of course, well, he can't be translated.
I don't think James Joyce could be translated, unless you invent it.
Of course, in the case of James Joyce, his craft is part of the language.
I mean that kind of thing can't be translated.
For example, "the rivering waters of--the hithering, thithering waters of night."
How can you translate that?
How do you translate "rivering waters of"?
It's like translating Lewis Carroll.
Well, it can't be done.
No.
It can be done in German, because German is more or less akin to English, but not in Spanish.
Spanish, the whole thing is rather lame, you know?
Is Shakespeare successfully translated into Spanish?
No.
Shakespeare also, I mean he was involved in music, in wordcraft.
That kind of thing can't be translated.
I attempted a translation of Macbeth, and then after a scene or two I felt I couldn't do it and I left it.
But Macbeth would be my favorite Shakespearian tragedy.
It's so intense.
It begins at full speed and then goes on till the end, no?
Yeah.  Yeah right, right.
Are you one of the last admirers of Kipling?
I hope I am not one of the last.
I think Kipling was a very great man.
I know you do.
But he's not very widely appreciated, or even read, is he?
No, because he's judged by his political opinions.
I suppose opinions are on the surface.
I don't think a writer should be judged by his opinions.
I think when you write you should be judged by what you write, and you don't write your opinions.
Opinions, after all, are on the surface.
They come and go.
People hold many different opinions during their lifetime.
In the case of Kipling, he was a very wise man also, and his word-craft is wonderful.
I remember, for example, "Harp Song of the Dane Women."
You see how stark the title of the poem is.
It doesn't even sound like English.
It might be Old English, or Old Norse.
"Harp Song of the Dane Women," and then "Sicken again for the shouts and the slaughters."
There you get the Old English rhyme and alliteration.
"Sicken again for the shouts and the slaughters."
Yes, yes.
He was a very fine writer.
Was he appreciated in your childhood in Spanish, or not?
Yes, he was.
But people think of him - I think if a writer writes for children he makes a mistake.
I mean, as concerns his own fame, because people think of him as writing only for children.
The case of Stevenson, for example.
Why do people look down on Stevenson?
Because they think only of Treasure Island, a very fine book, but a book meant for boys.
But had they read his other books they would see he was a very fine writer also.
So perhaps he made a mistake.
For a writer to attempt, let's say, boys' fiction, or to attempt detective fiction--because
people tend to think of him in terms of that particular kind of craft.
And I suppose in the case of Chesterton, people know that he was a very fine writer, but if
people think of the Father Brown stories then they are apt to class him with--what?--with
Ellery Queen, or with even Phillpotts -
Agatha Christie or something like that.
Or Agatha Christie, yes.
But of course he's far above them.
Is it a mistake-- It would be a mistake for the fame of a writer,
not for the writer himself, because, after all, if the Father Brown stories didn't exist
I would feel it was a great loss, at least to me.
I agree.
But at the same time it has done no good to his reputation.
Would you go so far as to say that a writer who seeks fame ought not to write books that
children can enjoyably read?
No.
What about Tolkien, for instance?
Well, Tolkien--I have only found him utter boredom.
I have never got inside his books.
Who got inside his books?
I have never got inside his books. I have always been an outsider.
Yes.
I attempted that "Brotherhood--" Is it the "Brotherhood of the Rings"?
Yes.
The "Lordship of the Rings," isn't it?
The "Lordship of the Ring."
I don't know.
But in any case no rings were awarded me.
I tried to enjoy him; I did my best.
I was in Scotland at the time, was doing American theater, read him, laughed very loudly, but
at the same time I felt I got nothing out of reading.
To compare him to Lewis Carroll is blasphemy.
I'm so fond of Lewis Carroll.
No, but I think a writer should not write just for children, because that may harm his reputation,
and after all, reputations are worthwhile.
It's more than just the work itself, it's the enjoyment of what you are doing.
I only think of reading and of writing in terms of happiness.
If you don't feel happy when you're reading or when you're writing, or if you don't feel
greatly moved, then you are not really reading or writing.
The whole thing is merely reading, I mean for examination marks, and that, of course--I
won't say that way madness lies, but that's the way dullness lies.
Are you really saying that all writers should enjoy writing?
Of course they should.
At least I do.
I mean it.
I have to toil, I have to work, but at the same time I am enjoying it.
After all, I have chosen that literary fate for myself.
Well, do you think that gymnasts should enjoy -
I know nothing whatever of gymnasts, so whatever I say -
Well, ought they to enjoy their exercises, would you say?
Are you making a universal statement that all people should enjoy their work?
No, I suppose sweeping statements should be avoided, and that's a sweeping statement also.
Maybe when one talks one falls into sweeping statements, no?
In fact, if you're talking you are making a sweeping statement.
To say A is B is a sweeping statement.
It may not be always B; it may be something else.
But I enjoy writing.
It's one of the few enjoyments left.
So as you put it, you would write even if you were Robinson Crusoe and there was no
possibility— Well, that's the only thing I could do would
be to write.
You could build canoes.
No, my canoes would be hardly worth the building.
I don't think I'd be any good at that kind of craft or any other.
You'd rather write a book about how to build a canoe than build a canoe, right?
Oh, yes, of course I would.
But maybe I would choose another subject.
What in your judgment is the new philistinism about which there is a lot of talk these days?
I don't know.
There are so many philistinisms involved.
Which is the one to which you have a special allergy?
I hate nationalism.
As distinguished from patriotism?
Yes.
I think nationalism is a mistake.
I think that we are all more or less nationalistic.
Maybe I am.
When you say "Argentinian" I am very angry.
There is no such word.
The word should be "Argentine."
"Argentinian" is an invention, a word that rhymes with Bolivian or Peruvian.
There's no such word, since "Argentine" is an adjective.
"Argentine" is an adjective?
Of course.
The Argentine Republic.
Yes, Argentine is silver, because of the Rio de la Plata.
Silver River.
Silver River, yes.
Argentinian—no such word.
In English, you mean?
No, I don't think there is such a word.
In Spanish there's no such word.
You would say Republica Argentiniana, instead of Republica Argentina.
If you said Argentiniana, people would stare at you.
How common is that error?
Yes, I was asked all the time when I was in the States--people asked me "Are you Argentinian?"
And I said, "No, there's no such thing."
"Are you Spaniard?"
Well, I left off being a Spaniard 150 years ago.
"Are you Latin American?"
Well, no.
Who knows what a Latin American is?
There's no such thing.
I mean a man is a Colombian, a Peruvian, a Bolivian or a Uruguayan, but hardly a Latin
American.
There's no such thing.
Or an Argentine.
Or an Argentine, why not?
I do my best to be a good Argentine.
And you say you detect this nationalism even in yourself?
Do you detect a lot of it in current literature?
I detect it in myself.
You do?
I don't know why, for example, I write so much about such an invisible, such a dull
city as Buenos Aires, and yet I love it.
Why write so much about myself?
I'm not an interesting character.
And yet I keep on being interested in Jorge Luis Borges.
I don't know why.
Still it's a lifelong habit.
One of the books about you says that your most intense experiences are autobiographical. I suppose they are.
But that doesn't mean - I suppose they are. - either that you are narcissistic or that you are nationalistic, does it?
I don't think so.
I suppose it means more essential things.
It means, well, it might be in thinking or loving or falling in love or being crossed
in love, or being now and then happy in love.
Those things are essential to man.
But they're universals, too.
They are universals, of course.  Happily.
So therefore you're not committing the sin of nationalism or narcissism?
No, I'm not.
No, I don't think I'm a narcissist or a nationalist, for that matter.
Nationalism I think is wrong in all countries, especially in a new country like mine.
I mean, for example, let's say you're a Chinaman, or a Japanese or even a European, or even
if you're American you might be a nationalist.
But here our history is, let's say, some hundred and odd years old, a country with no local
color like this, well, we have had quite a fine history in the last century, and now
I think that we are better, more or less improving.
I mean we went through a very sad period, and now things are better, at least we should
hope they are better, because our hope is part of the betterment, no?
Yes.
Well, it didn't undermine your appreciation of Kipling--his nationalism.
No, I think the .British Empire made for good.
I think they were right, there.
Maybe it did no good to England— So it's bad nationalism you object to, not just nationalism.
But in the case of Kipling, I think-- I not only think the British Empire made for good,
but I think that Kipling needed that faith in order to write his books, even as Walt
Whitman needed democracy or Neruda needed communism, or Dante needed the Roman Catholic Church.
It was a catalyst of his talent.
Yes, it was.
But why not?
That's allowable.
Not only allowable, but it is to be wished for.
Well, why don't we have any good literature coming out of the Soviet Union celebrating communism?
Why isn't it a catalyst of anything beautiful?
Because people are bullied into it.
As distinct from Neruda, who was not?
No, he was not.
As to the sincerity of Neruda, I know nothing whatever.
But still, it made him-- I mean he wrote some bad sentimental poetry.
His love poetry was quite bad.
He thought so too.
And then that political faith came to him and saved him.
I only met Neruda once in my life.
He thought that nothing would be done with the Spanish language.
And then I said to him, "Something might be done with English."
And he said, "Well, something has been done."
And then I said, "In Spanish nothing has been done as yet."
And he said, "No, I suppose not."
And I said, "Well, we'll have to do something for that God-forsaken language."
Well, we did, or at least he did.
Now, how many books ago was that conversation?
That must have been way back in 1920-odd, eh?
He was already a Communist, was he?
I don't know, because we never spoke about politics.
But he loved the English language.
I suppose he always did.
You say if you are bullied that you stifle the muse?
I think you do.
You stifle everything.
Well, but Dante was bullied.
I don't think he was bullied.
No, I don't think he was bullied. I think he believed in it.
But he lived in an age in which it was dangerous not to believe, didn't he?
Well, I suppose he was intensely religious.
For example, I can't think of myself being a Roman Catholic, or even a Christian.
And yet I thoroughly enjoyed the Divine Comedy, without enjoying the framework, of course.
I don't like the framework of the three institutions of hell, purgatory, and heaven, or paradise.
I can't believe that kind of thing.
But still, if I accept that framework, then I have a wonderful poem, perhaps the greatest poem ever written, given to me.
Why is it that there is no intense love of communism that has brought out an equivalent masterwork.
Of course, I suppose you can 't have an equivalent masterwork, but a masterwork.
How do you account for the aridity of the entire Soviet experience in the last 50 years, 60 years?
I think aridity has been explained away.
I think it's quite common.
For example, let's say--maybe I'm insulting people by saying this—you take the United States.
You have at least half a dozen men of genius, from the literary point of view.
You mean in 200 years?
You have, for example, you have Poe, you have Melville, you have Whitman, you have Hawthorne, you have Henry James.
You have Frost.
Pound.
Well, Pound.
Well, I don't want to rope him in, but if you do it's not my funeral as well.
But at the same time, if you think of Canada and Australia, they have produced nothing,
produced practically nothing.
So maybe the American Revolution made for good from a literary point of view.
In other words, you consider six people in 200 years a profusion of genius,
and aridity the rule of thumb?
Yes, I should say so.
What I mean to say is that, well, you may like or dislike Poe; I don't think much of
him as a poet.
But I think of him as being a man of genius.
You may like or dislike Whitman; you can find good and bad lines in him.
But he can't be thought away.
You can't think of contemporary literature and -
Dismiss Whitman.
Yes, and dismiss them.
They can't be thought away.
While other writers may be thought away.
For example, South America has produced nobody worthwhile, I mean to the whole world.
I suppose we have some fine writers.
They are fine writers, let's say, for Argentines, or for Chileans, or for Peruvians and so on,
but they mean nothing whatever to the world.
Well, you do.
Neruda did.
Well, in my case I think that what you're saying is a form of pessimism, to say that I've - or of optimism.
I gather you are telling me that there is no reason to expect that in Russia there should be a huge figure.
Of course there is, and that's Solzhenitsyn, and he's a dissenter.
Do you expect anything from Australia, for example?
I don't suppose you do.
Patrick White.
Well, I don't know him, I'm sorry to say.
I must plead my ignorance.
He won a Nobel Prize, I believe, didn't he?
Well, if that means anything.
No.
Doesn't necessarily mean anything, does it?
I suppose I shouldn't say that, not having won it.
But maybe they needed an Australian, or they needed a kangaroo, and so they--
You have then no thesis that would explain why over a period of 50 years in Russia there
was the biggest spiritual conflagration in literary history, and then nothing.
I must say that in that case the czars were better,
because they gave us Tolstoy and Dostoevsky and Gogol.
They made for good.
Correct, but what was it that all of a sudden brought that whole movement - destroyed the inertia?
Or is genius too rare to make it possible to formulate any rules about the incidence of it?
I suppose it is rare.
Then we have to fall back on Whistler.
Art happens or it doesn't.
Nothing can be expected.
But there are propitious and nonpropitious circumstances, aren't there?
Propitious countries, also.
For example, England.
I greatly love England.
I worship England.
But England, for example, if you think of it in terms of music or of painting it's not
a very important country.
But in terms of literature, it is, in terms of poetry, especially.
In terms of prose, also.
I don't suppose England produced any musician important or of matter to the whole world.
I don't suppose they have.
Though I love Turner, but still that may be a private bias or a hobby of mine only.
You love who?
Turner.
Blake, also, but of course in Blake what I admire is rather the poet and the mystic.
Well, are you making really a genetic observation or a cultural observation that people with
English blood will gravitate to letters but not so much to art or music?
I suppose it might be translated into that, but I wouldn't care to make such a sweeping statement.
In fact, I wonder if I'm capable of abstract thinking.
I don't think I am.
I only think in terms of particulars, of individuals.
That may be my English side, also, putting things in terms of nominalism, of individuals.
In France would you make any generalities of the English nature?
France has produced many men of genius.
I think we should all feel very grateful to France.
I think I've been ungrateful to France because I'm always looking at England, and also at
the Scandinavian countries.
But no, France can't be thought away.
It can't be done.
Spain has produced perhaps the one man of genius, Cervantes, and the others, I suppose, may be safely forgotten.
At least, I safely or unsafely forget them.
I have Spanish, Portugese, and English blood, and maybe everybody has a little Jewish blood, also, no?
Have the Portugese produced a writer of the first rank, by your rather severe standards?
Yes, I think they have produced two.
Eca de Queiros, a 19th century novelist, and Camoes, who wrote one, the great epic poem,
the Lusiadas, where you have feeling for the sea.
You never get that in Spanish poetry.
They have no feeling whatever for the sea.
Why?
The Castilians were an inland people.
That may explain the failure of the Armada, also.  They're not much good.
Is it in your experience possible to stimulate a love of literature, or is it something that
also just happens or doesn't happen?
Is it possible to take 20 people and make them love literature more?
Of course, I have been a professor of English and American literature during some 20 years,
at the University of Buenos Aires.
That's why I asked you.
And I have tried to teach my students not literature - that can't be taught - but the love of literature.
And I have sometimes succeeded, and failed many times over, of course.
If the course has to be done in four months, I can do very little.
But still I know there are many young men in Buenos Aires--maybe they're not so young
now--young men and young women, who have their memories full of English verse.
And I have been studying Old English and Old Norse for the last 20 years.
And I have also taught many people the love of Old English.
And so there is a pedagogical art.
It isn't simply a matter of -
But I think literature is being taught in the wrong way all the time.
It's being taught in terms of history and of sociology.
And I wouldn't do that.
I have seen many teachers who are always falling back on dates, on place names.
You don't do that?
I do my best to avoid it.
On the grounds that it is distracting?
Yes, of course.
Yes, I feel that it's irrelevant.
If I give you a beautiful line of verse, that verse should be beautiful today as it was centuries ago.
Or had it been written today, it beautiful also.
Well, doesn't the context in which you read it attach a certain meaning to it?
Yes, but I suppose if a line is beautiful the context can be safely forgotten, no?
If I say, for example, that "the moon is the mirror of time," that's a fine metaphor, don't you think?
Yes.
A mirror as being something round; it can be easily broken, and yet somehow
the moon is as old as time, or half as old as time.
Now, were I to add that that comes from a Persian poet, it wouldn't really add to the beauty.
Perhaps it might add in a certain way.
But still, had that metaphor been invented this morning it would be a fine metaphor, no?
The moon, the mirror of time.
It happens to be a Persian metaphor.
Well, but certainly certain things are accepted as beautiful in part depending on the prevailing style.
The kind of enthusiasm, for instance, that was shown for Restoration comedy.
Some of that stuff isn't very funny now.
Some of the romantic excesses of the 19th century aren't--
But I suppose all that's rather artificial, no?
That's one of the reasons why I'm so fond of Old English poetry, that nobody knows anything
whatever about the poets besides the century they wrote in, and yet I find something very stirring about Old English poetry.
It has to stand on its own two feet, you mean?
It has to.
Or maybe because I like the sounds of it.
"Mæg ic be me sylfum soðgied wrecan, siþas secgan"—now, those sounds have a ring to them.
What does that say? What is that in dollars?
That would say--wait a bit.
In dollars that would be: "I can utter a true song about myself.
I can tell of my travels."
That sounds like Walt Whitman, no?
That was written in the 9th century in Northumberland.
"Mæg ic be me sylfum soðgied wrecan, siþas secgan" - and Ezra Pound translated it as this -
I think it's rather crap translation - "May I for my own sake song's truth reckon, journey's jargon."
Well, that's too much of a jargon to me, no?
Of course, he's translating the sounds.
"Mæg ic be me sylfum soðgied wrecan, siþas secgan" - "May I for my sake song's truth reckon," - "soðgied wrecan" he's translating the sounds more than the sense.
And then "Siþas secgan"--"tell of my travels," he translates "journey's jargon," which is rather uncouth, at least to me.
Whose translation did you say?
It's Ezra Pound's translation.
Oh, I see.
It's Ezra Pound's translation from the Anglo-Saxon, yes.
How would you have translated that word?
I would translate it literally.
"I can utter, I can say a true song about myself.
I can tell my travels."
I think that should be enough, no?
It was a plain statement, a straightforward statement.
But in any case this would be an example of something that can't be influenced by a change in fashion?
I don't think so.
It's beautiful then and now.
I think if things are beautiful, well, Keats said it.
He said it in too flowery a way, perhaps, but I think it was true.
"A thing of beauty is a joy forever."
I suppose he meant that, no?
If he meant anything.
Now, when you say "too flowery a way," you were intending what kind of criticism?
Well, "A thing of beauty is a joy forever."
There is something flowery about it, don't you think so?
Well, I do, but I'm not sure that the perspective by which we are permitted that observation
was available to him.
But if you have to take perspectives into account, things aren't too good, no?
For example, I was reading Burton's translation of the Arabian Nights.
I think the Arabian Nights is a very fine work.
It would be fine if it were written this morning.
It's a very fine work.
And would read well anytime?
I think it would.
I think that's the test, that a book should read well at anytime.
Of course, when writers go in for word-craft, wordmusic, then of course it's very difficult
to translate them.
In the case of Shakespeare, for example, I suppose that half the beauty lies in the language,
and therefore it can't be translated.
Well, is there a correlation between the self-esteem of a writer and his permanence, or is there
no rule on the subject?
Do some modest writers live and some vain writers die?
I don't think I could say anything valuable on that subject.
Did Dante know he had written a masterpiece?
He was fully aware of it.
You can see that he knew very well what he was doing, unlike Shakespeare, who was unconscious
of what he was doing.
Or let's take a lesser example.
Did Mark Twain know how good a book he was writing when he wrote Huck Finn?
I don't think so.
You see that the end of the book falls to pieces.
Tom Sawyer is allowed to spoil the book.
And yet he wrote the book, the one book, I should say -
Well, the other books he wrote were quite good, I mean Roughing It, Life on the Mississippi, First Days in California.
Those were fine books, but those aren't as good.
Of course, he had to be making jokes all the time, and that, I suppose, hampered him.
Well, Cervantes thought of himself as a poet didn't he, primarily?
As a poet he was nowhere.
So that was simply a mistake in judgment?
But what I mean to say is he was a poet when he was writing prose, not when he was attempting verse.
Yes, yes.
It is said that the one good verse he's written in Spanish was
"La gracia que no quiso darme el cielo"--I mean being a poet, no?
That's the one line of good verse he ever wrote.
Do you want to translate that?
"The gift that heaven did not give me."
Could not give me.
Yes, could not - que no quiso - no, would not, did not care to.
Thank you very much, Mr. Borges.
No, I have to thank you for your extraordinary patience.
You can have my patience anytime you want.
Thank you, sir.
And thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you, sir.