Hello and welcome everybody to another
episode of History After Dark. Today
we're joined by geoysicist Robert
Schneider who will tell us about his
recent research into the Great Sphinx.
So Bob, it's been a minute, but how have
you been?
&gt;&gt; I've been good, thank you. It's it was a
great summer and uh yeah, been an
interesting year. just got back from a
conference down in San Antonio where I
did a presentation on the Sphinx and
that's what we're going to talk about.
How are you doing?
&gt;&gt; I'm doing okay. I can't well I could
probably complain some but uh I'll
refrain.
&gt;&gt; I want to say thank you for having me
on. It's it's it's fun to talk about
this with somebody who's who's
interested in the subject. So, thanks
thanks for having me on.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, for sure. Sure. And it's always
good to have people on who have um you
know different methodological
perspective on this because I mean I
come from a history background so I
don't know geology all that well and you
know issues like erosion or things where
I kind of have to lean on someone else's
work to get anywhere. So it's nice to
hear from somebody who has a stronger
background in that.
&gt;&gt; You know I I totally agree. I don't see
myself as much of a archaeologist or
Egyptologist and I mean by Robert Shock
saying the uh age of the Sphinx is
dependent upon erosion that's kind of
the way I get involved in this because
it is now then a geological question
more than it is an archaeological
question and that's kind of what I've
been looking at. So I dabble a little
bit in the I have to into the
archaeology but you know that's not my
strong suit. I'm I'm a geologist. I was
looking into some of the popular
literature on the on the Giza complex,
especially on the Sphinx, and I didn't
realize exactly how much of the
literature Robert Shock has gotten into.
But almost every modern publication that
mentions the Sphinx will have him come
up, at least briefly.
&gt;&gt; So, that has had a huge influence on how
this subject is treated
&gt;&gt; without question. So, you know, I was
just going to start how I got involved
in all of this. I don't I know we talked
before but um I don't remember and
nonetheless I think we should go through
that. I I was watching NOVA on public
television
13 years ago now. It's hard to believe
and there was an episode on the Sphinx
&gt;&gt; and I was like I don't really care about
this episode but I left it run in the
background while I was doing something
else. And at one point I saw uh Mark
Laner explaining how shallow groundwater
is wicking up at at the sphinx and that
salt that's in the water crystallizes as
the as the water evaporates and those
salt crystals build up pore space. It
filled the pore spaces with crystals and
that builds pressure and it causes the
limestone mostly of the sidewalls to
exfoliate
and creating creating this rounded sort
of weathering pattern or I'm sorry
erosional pattern and um my day job is
contaminant transport and fate modeling.
I've got software that does that and I
do training in that and it's a very
difficult concept for people to
understand that the water could actually
wick up off the water table and
evaporate at the surface and then the
contamination would go that same way. It
would actually move from groundwater
upward through the soil and to the
surface where it might either
concentrate or volatilize depending upon
the contaminant.
And that is just such a difficult
process that um to comprehend. Everyone
thinks of a coffee maker where the rain
falls on the ground, picks up some
contamination, and then carries that
down to to groundwater. And here's the
opposite thing happening. And um so I
was just going to use it as that. And
that's when I found Robert Shock and I
was like, "Oh my god, he's he's creating
an entire civilization out of um
erosion." And I was like, that doesn't
sound logical to me.
And um so I started looking into it and
and I felt like I needed to um because
nobody else was answering this question.
And I got to say at some point I was
also intrigued that I'm going to figure
that out,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; And
so what what I did then is I I presented
a paper on that. I did modeling in my
software that shows that yes at at with
the depth to groundwater at the Sphinx
and given the the dry hot climate in
Egypt the the groundwater would wake up
and that's why the the salt would would
form and I I gave a presentation on that
at the Geological Society of America
meeting in 20 I'm trying to remember the
year on that. I think it was 2014 and um
was interesting and and I chose that
venue because according to John Anthony
West the uh Geological Society of
America meeting the annual meeting is
the Super Bowl of geology and that's
where Shock presented his paper and
they're hanging there everything on this
presentation at the GSA conference. So
that's why I chose that and it was up in
Vancouver that year. And it's kind of
interesting as I was putting up the
poster presentation, I was poster number
one right under, you know, because
they're numbered into the hundreds. And
it was right when you came in the door
and it said geoarchchaeology and another
presenter from a few posters down came
over and said, you know, and was helping
me and I said, I don't belong here. I'm
a geoysicist.
and he said, "I also don't belong here.
I'm a geoysicist."
And so we talked a little bit about my
presentation about the waking
groundwater. Then we went down to his
and it was interesting because his was
he had been traveling in Tibet
and there were these Buddhist prayer
walls. And when the the monks found out
that he was a geologist, they said, "We
have a mystery that we that we cannot
understand that the moss never grows on
our prayer walls." And so he was
intrigued by that. And he looked at the
prayer walls and did some preliminary
research and couldn't find any reason as
to why there would be no moss growing on
it. came back. He was at the University
of Utah. I don't remember his name. And
uh wrote up a grant and got it and went
back to Tibet to study why the moss
isn't growing on the on the prayer wall.
And he's looking at minology, he's
looking at sun, he's looking at angles,
and he's looking at water flow. And he
couldn't find anything. And finally one
day he was there and he was just staring
at the outcrop trying to or the wall.
I'm not sure exactly what it is. And
trying to figure out what's happening.
As he's doing that, this woman walks up
and starts scrubbing the wall with
water.
So, [laughter]
you know, so here it is. You know, he
answered the question and unknown to the
monks, the local women were taking turns
scrubbing the prayer wall. So, that that
solved the question. That actually turns
out, you know, I didn't put two and two
together, but that actually speaks to
what's happening at the Sphinx because
I've come to the conclusion that most of
what people have been describing as
erosion isn't erosion. It's it's part of
the construction process.
Uh yeah, I remember you mentioning that
some last time where um
yeah so it's I I guess too another
factor that even for someone
uh operating on historical time uh you
know obviously geological time is much
more vast. So I guess it is sometimes
difficult to remember that all of the
monuments we see are built of materials
that pre-existed
those monuments and of course go back
millions of years potentially. And of
course that also can be misleading
because the millions of years doesn't
correspond with the actual date of the
monument. So, how do you determine when
you're looking at something that's
constructed out of these old quaried
materials, the difference between the
age of the material itself and then the
age of when it was completed?
Um, well, you really can't tell when it
was um created and and Chuck is
basically saying that. Any geologist
would say that. He's simply saying that
the evidence of erosion by precipitation
and I would argue um any erosion
whatsoever would prove that the Sphinx
is older
um because there is no process
by which over the last 4,500 years that
the Sphinx could have been eroded. It
didn't take me very long to come to that
conclusion, but as a as a geologist
looking at it with geology eyes, I I
couldn't figure out what that meant. Um,
it was it was very frustrating. So I I
get the fact that people would like
shock would look at it and and he very
quickly came to his conclusion that it's
some type of erosion, but when you look
at the details,
it really it doesn't fit any of the
proposed hypo hypothetical types of
erosion. Be it wind, be it water, be it,
you know, the the Nile floods, be it the
wicking groundwater, nothing nothing
fits. Nothing makes any sense when
you're looking at at the Sphinx there.
But nonetheless, as you first glance at
it or even study it like I did for some
time, you kind of come to the it looks
like it's erosion. And it took me a long
time and I eventually
So anyways, getting back to your your
question, you can't really date the the
when the Sphinx was carved. It's just
the fact that if it was exposed to
erosion, well then and and there is no
evidence of any erosion over the last
4,500 years, then just the presence of
erosion itself indicates that the Sphinx
must in fact be older. And that's that's
the premise that they're using. And and
Shock is specifically looking at the
water erosion, but there's other
methods. But um so looking at it,
[clears throat]
I I finally realized that
I was trying to figure out exactly what
was going on. And I I I went through
everything over the last 4,500 years in
terms of climate, in terms of history.
And it actually turns out that any
erosion that happened to the Sphinx is
actually confined to uh a thousand 1100
year period from its construction to
Tutmos IV because it was Tutmos IV that
according to everyone uh put it the
blocks on the the the phase one what
they call repair blocks onto the Sphinx
body and so the erosion is confined to
that 1100 year period.
And um Mark Laner when he was doing his
dissertation, he looked at those phase
one blocks and everything about them,
the the the the quarry from which they
came, the way that they were cut, the
way that they were put onto the Sphinx,
everything about them says that they
were the original blocks that were put
there when the Sphinx was carved 4,500
years ago. And the only factor that
stopped Mark Laner from attributing
those blocks to the original
construction was the degree of erosion
beneath those blocks that were on that's
on the surface of the of the Sphinx. And
so
um and and so what I was looking at was
trying to figure out well what then
actually happened here and I I I could
not find any geological process that
made any sense. And I finally I also
well one of the other things I did
getting back to this is I started at the
very beginning. I started looking at
well when were these rocks deposited
and it turns out that the rocks from
which the Sphinx was carved were
deposited about 40 million years ago.
And um that was during the eosene and I
I'm sure we talked about this last time.
Uh when I saw that it was the eosene. At
first I was like, "Oh man, there's
nothing any cool cool stuff has happened
since the eosene, I mean the dinosaurs
were wiped out, you know, 66 million
years ago and you get this low rise of
the mammals. Not much else happening."
Well, that is so wrong. Um the eosene
begins with a massive release of
greenhouse gases to Earth's atmosphere.
The known as the paleocine eosene
thermal maximum. The amount of carbon
that was released is somewhere between
all the known fossil fuel reserves on
Earth and three times the known fossil
fuels on Earth. Not just what we put
into the atmosphere, but everything we
know of. And this is just massive. And I
started learning all about
hyperothermals.
And then I was like, okay, let me get
back to the Sphinx. And I looked at the
Sphinx and I said at the head, the
contact at the head and the body. and
that had the characteristics of a
hyperothermal.
And I sat on that for a number of years.
And um so a little bit of a story here.
I I was tracking um Randall Carlson was
on Ben's Uncharted X and he's pointing
out he's got his 20,000 papers and he's
willing to go toe-to-toe with anyone on
the facts. And so I wrote to him and I
wrote to Ben and I didn't get a
response. Eventually,
I tracked Randall Carlson down at his
hotel in Mexican Hat, Utah, and we shook
hands and agreed to a debate um that he
called for. I didn't call for the
debate. He was the one saying he's
willing to go toe-to-toe. I accepted his
challenge, but he since has has hidden.
He's he's, you know, with good reason.
I'm sure he doesn't want to uh try to
defend what he's saying. And anyway, so
the thing that I didn't know anything
about that we we t discussed subject
matter of the debate and we we settled
in on the the Sphinx Gabbecley
and the Channel Scablands and I said I
didn't know much of the channels
scabland. So I contacted Bruce
Bourneststead who's got a guide book and
I asked if I could if he would take me
on a private tour and he said sure but
why don't you go to the GSA conference.
We've got a 4-day trip with Vic Baker,
Richard Wade, Brian Atwater. Um, I mean,
these are the big name people in mega
floods. And so I I did that instead. And
while I'm at the conference,
uh, one of the somebody walks up to me
and says, "I think you're right." I
didn't even recognize this person. I'm
like, "Of course I am." But I was like,
"What am I right about?" and he said I
was right that there is an exposure of
the middle eocine climatic optimum at
the head of the sphinx and that turns
out that was Dr. Clay Kelly at the
University of Wisconsin Madison. I had
stopped in his office a few years
earlier and suggested this to him
because I was looking for some way to
confirm my my suspicion that it was
there. And so when he did that, I I
presented um a paper on that the
following year at the GSA conference
that there and it turns out that this
hyperothermal.
So what happens everything that they're
saying h when you have a uh release of
carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, all
everything they said happens happens.
The oceans become acidic, they become so
acidic that organisms that are trying
that are making their shells out of
calcium carbonate go extinct.
And we see that at the Sphinx that
there's a ser that the the limestone of
the body is a very fossiliferous
limestone,
but the the head has no fossils in it
whatsoever.
And it's a very distinct change. And the
and the limestone of the the sphinx body
is very soft and and weathered, but the
limestone of the sphinx head is is much
stronger, more resistant to erosion and
to weathering. And so it turns out that
that is the middle eosene climatic
optimum. So had this
uh event 40 million years ago not have
occurred then the capstone that formed
the the the Giza it's a coesta it's not
a plateau would not have would not be
there. So the sphinx and the pyramids
wouldn't be there if not for this
worldwide event. And the next year when
I gave a presentation on that,
one of the people there was giving
another presentation and that was Walter
Alvarez. Do you know who Walter Alvarez
is?
&gt;&gt; I don't actually.
&gt;&gt; You know, this this really surprises me
that nobody knows who he is. Do you ever
hear of uh an asteroid that killed off
the dinosaurs?
&gt;&gt; Oh, so he's the guy who discovered the
Yucatan asteroid?
&gt;&gt; No. Close. He was the guy who found the
aridium layer.
&gt;&gt; Ah
&gt;&gt; so he was he was working on
paleomagnetism in Italy and there was a
half inch roughly a half inch thick
layer of of rock and he knew but that
below that layer there were dinosaurs
and other other things that weren't
wiped out at the at at the KT boundary
and above it they're gone. And so the
question he was wondering is how long
does it take a half an inch of this rock
to be deposited? And so he went to his
father, a Nobel Prize-winning physicist,
Lewis Alvarez,
and they said, well, he said, you know,
the earth is constantly being bombarded
by micrometeorites, and that contains
iridium, and it's the only basically
this the source of aridium. And so the
more iridium in this layer, the longer
it would have taken to be deposited.
And so they they measured it and the
aridium came back offscale that it would
have been like you know millions of
years. I don't know the exact number but
it was so long that there was no way
that that could be the the time period
over which it took this half inch layer
to form. And that's when they realized
well the source is still the same. It's
extraterrestrial.
And so that's when they identified the
fact that it looked like some kind of
impact had wiped out the dinosaurs. And
then it was later that the um that the
um uh Yucatan impact crater was
discovered.
&gt;&gt; Ah
&gt;&gt; so
so the thing so I was at the conference.
Are you still there?
&gt;&gt; I'm here. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So I was at the conference and I'm
talking to Walter Alvarez. He's talking
about um a a mega flood and and actually
a mega lake, mega lake sud in uh central
Africa
and um because of my research on the
Sphinx, I knew a lot about that and I
actually gave him some papers on that
that and he wrote a really great article
about looking at that and and at one
point he's suggesting the possibility of
a mega flood that would be like 18 times
the largest of the mega floods that were
in the chneled scablands.
And um so we talked about that and then
he said, "What's your presentation?" And
I I came back and I I said, "Well, I
found, you know, the the the middle
eosene climatic optimum." I said, "It's
sort of like finding the aridium layer
that killed off the dinosaurs." I can't
believe I'm telling you this,
but you know, so it's been the reason I
tell that story in part is because I
have met some of the most interesting
people and I've done things and I I
think this is one of the things that we
can agree upon the the people no matter
what side you're on in terms of the age
of the Sphinx or lost civilizations or
whatever, if it gets people out there
looking, if it gets people talking, you
know, that's a good thing. and and I've
met other very interesting people and
I've been to places and done things I
never would have done had it not been
for this. Anyways, you have any
questions on what I'm talking about?
&gt;&gt; Um, not so far. No, it's very
interesting though how you've made this
discovery and this correlation uh with
you know the middle eioene climatic
optimum and how that has impacted how
that layer formed as opposed to the
lower body levels which you know are not
as hard.
Yeah. When I first came up with that I
thought okay there's people who look at
the Sphinx and they see lost
civilizations and I'm like yeah where's
that? And I look at the Sphinx and I see
hyperothermals. I'm like, okay, this is
just does it bring this kind of weird
things out at people? Have I am have
have I just done the same thing? You
know, because here I I mean the odds of
the middle eosene climatic optimum, any
hyperothermal, in fact, I think there's
a possibility that there's a second one
um at at the base of the Sphinx, a
smaller one. But hyperothermals weren't
discovered until 1991. So about the same
time that Shock was and West were
presenting their paper and it was
discovered by Ellen Thomas and they she
was on board a ship and they were cing
they were drilling off the Antarctic
coast into deep ocean and the thought
was at the time reasonable thought is
that you're not going to see any abrupt
change because this is so deep down into
the ocean that even if Earth's climate
had a dramatic change it would take some
time and it' be buffered by the time it
would reach down to the bottom of the
ocean. And what she saw instead was a an
abrupt change that the organisms that
had been there suddenly go extinct in a
whole new environment. She's one of
those people that can look at a fossil
and determine what it is. And from that,
because they've already been dated
elsewhere, you you can date the rock.
And so she very quickly knew that she
was looking at something right there at
the at the Paleocene Eioene boundary and
geologists had picked that out. It said
something big happened here, but they
had no idea what it was. So I gave a
presentation on this and she was in the
audience and she called me on the fact
that it can't be the mo that's exposed
on the on the sphinx because it wasn't
deep enough because there's this
carbonate depth below which the the
carbon carbonate the limestone will
dissolve. And what happens is during a
time when there's a release of
greenhouse gases to Earth's atmosphere,
that depth shallows. But it should
never, it would seem impossible for it
to have shallowed to the point that you
would see it in the rock that was being
deposited to make the Sphinx. And I
didn't get a chance to talk to her about
it, but it was actually that contact
looks exactly like the core that she saw
when she was drilling off the Antarctic
where you have this limestone that's
very fossiliferous, just like in the
Sphinx body. And then you suddenly have
limestone without any fossils and it's a
much harder, more erosion and and
weathering resistant limestone. So, it
was that contact that made me think of
it. I don't know why it's there. So, I'm
puzzled, but stratographically
it fits. It it it it's there. And maybe
this tells us something. And I don't
know because I'm not I'm not I don't
study hyperothermals, but it maybe it
says something about where the hyper how
that hyperothermal occurred. And maybe
it was something maybe local that was I
don't know. I'm this is just wild
speculation on my part.
&gt;&gt; So, how much uh of the rest of that
layer exists? Because I know due to
tectonic forces, a lot of layers don't
last. But I mean, I'm sure that there
have to be plenty of other places in the
world where this layer is still intact,
right, with the underlying limestone you
mentioned in Antarctica, but are there
other places that are a little bit more
accessible where you can still see the
same stratographic layer? Well, there's
a couple of question or a couple of
answers. The first one is I mean at Giza
itself
was your initial question kind of led me
to think about well it as I take it the
limestone of the Sphinx head once
covered almost all of Giza and it was
the reason that they chose to build the
pyramids there because they quarried
this high qual or higher quality um
limestone to construct the pyramids. And
so there's so many people who are
suggesting that the Sphinx was actually
a yard. Are you familiar with a yardang?
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; So it's a it's a feature that's carved
by a windb blown sand and you get weird
shapes. Other names might be like a a
hoodoo and things like that, but it's
it's just that it would undermine it
would undercut because the erosion when
you have windb blown sand, it it really
hugs the surface. And when you get
higher up into the to the air, the the
size of the particles diminishes. And
even if it hits something, it's not
going to do anything. It's more like
just a dust. And so the the sand grains
that are going to do any erosion are are
close to the surface. And so it'll
undermine and create things that kind of
look like the Sphinx. And one of the big
advocates for that is Farooq Galbaz.
He is uh an Egyptian geologist with an
interesting background. He was uh
responsible for training the Apollo
astronaut who stayed in orbit around the
moon while the other two were on the
surface. And that person was responsible
for taking photographs and describing
the geology that they were seeing in the
craters and elsewhere on on the moon.
And um he was also responsible for radar
being taken on board the space shuttle
and imaging the Sahara which is when
they first discovered that there were
all these river channels under the sand.
And that was as people were beginning to
understand that the Sahara had become
was green in the past and that there's
no question that these channels are
there. But he he he he was responsible
for finding that. Um, but yeah, so he's
saying that the Sphinx was actually
carved from a existing
shape that kind of looked like the
Sphinx at that location. I totally
disagree with that. Um, to me, if it
were for, as I said, I think that that
layer covered all of Giza. And um there
was an archaeologist George Rynisner
back in 1942
said exactly that that the top of the
head of the Sphinx marks the original
surface at at Giza. And and I'm totally
with him on that because what the the
limestone beneath the the head is much
softer and that's pretty much what's
exposed there today. And that is clearly
not a natural surface. Anybody who looks
at Giza today and thinks that uniform
flat surface is natural is not a
geologist because you're just going to
go no somebody modified this. So, and it
was the harder layer that was then
quarried. And exactly what that looked
like, I don't know, but it it covered
that. And if you look at the at the
Great Pyramid, you'll see some of the
limestone of the Sphinx head is actually
incorporated into the into the Great
Pyramid. And that's what was quarried
there. And the layer above, if you look
above, there's just Have you been there?
&gt;&gt; I've not gotten to go there. No.
&gt;&gt; So when you get if you ever get a
chance, when you look to the south, so
it's it's it's it's a layer cake
geology. Let me describe this first.
It's so it's a layer cake classic layer
cake geology. If you've been to Utah,
you know, you you've seen that there. Uh
but now instead of it being just
basically horizontal, it was it was
tilted upward and that formed a natural
ramp and it was up that natural ramp
that the blocks to construct the the
pyramids were dragged. Nobody lifted
them. If anybody's suggesting that the
blocks were lifted, well, you couldn't
lift them today, nobody would even in
their right mind ever even suggest
lifting blocks like that because the
moment you try to do that, you're going
to break them because they're not that
strong. But if you drag them along on
the ground, they're not going to break.
And they actually lubricated the ground
um with a slurry that was it most likely
made from the the mud that was left
behind the annual by the annual Nile
floods. And so that was a and that's how
that's pretty slick and that's how they
move these blocks around. Um,
but if you look to the south, you're
going to see that there's what's
considered by some to be a watti. And
that's an indication that whatever rock
was above the limestone of the sphinx
head was very soft and it eroded away.
And so, um, you can determine how thick
that was. And I I bet that's what George
Rynisner did to come up with the the how
that that the Sphinx head was the
original surface at Giza. Now, if that
is the case, and I'm going to argue that
the geological evidence for that is
extremely strong, then you could never
have a larger head to to you could not
have a lion's head. You could not have
an annubus head. You can't have any
other head than the Sphinx head that we
see because that was the original
surface. If you're carving a lion head,
as as Shock has suggested, well, a good
portion of that, more than half or about
half, is carved out of this soft
limestone that eroded away
to form the valley to the south. And so
that's impossible. And um it's it's one
of those ways in which I I look at Shock
and I'm like, he's just not a very good
geologist. I mean, he's he's so biased
in what he's looking for. He's like
again so many of these people they they
find one piece of evidence and they're
going to go with it and they just, you
know, and ignore the evidence to the
contrary. Um I look at the evidence to
the contrary. That's why it took me so
long to present evidence that there was
an exposure of the Miko or um to get on
to what I what I just presented at. So
I've given three presentations at the
GSA
and one was on the the wicking
groundwater but that cannot and I people
keep misquing me. I've never said that
the Sphinx was eroded that this erosion
that you're seeing today was all carved
by wicking groundwater. That's not what
I've said. I've said that that accounts
for the erosion at the bottom. That's
it. It cannot I want to make this very
clear cannot account for the erosion of
the body and cannot account for the
erosion up at the neck. The the erosion
at the neck was caused by windb blown
sand and and it has all the
characteristics of that but that cannot
account for the erosion of the body and
is not associated with the with the at
the lower sections of the wicking
groundwater.
So, um, I was working on on that and I
had convinced myself probably about five
years ago
that the Sphinx actually isn't eroded,
that it was actually part of the
construction process. And how I got
there was is I watched the Anova episode
kind of out of frustration because I'm
looking at the Sphinx and I'm going
looks like erosion, but I can't figure
out what type of erosion and I can't
figure out when that erosion could have
happened.
And so I watched the program again and
Mark Laner was uh trying with a a
sculptor to carve a new nose
and they um took the primitive tools. I
mean this is one of the other things
that everyone thinks that they're using
all these advanced tools. No, they carve
this with primitive tools, a two-ended
pounder. It's about the size of a large
bowling ball and and basically that sort
of shape. and they took that and out of
a hard uh rock like granite or diorite
and they bang that onto the surface of
the softer limestone and flake the
limestone off. The other thing they used
was two-handed pounders. So, it's a
slightly smaller rock, maybe about a
third that size. They cut grooves in it
and tie sticks to it and they use it as
a hammer.
And they use copper chisels just for
detailed work. And when I saw that, I
like, well, that's it.
that that's why it looks the way it
does. I mean, the limestone of the
Sphinx body before they even carved it,
the limestone was so soft, you could
crumble parts of it in your fingers.
If there's anybody out there who thinks
you can take limestone that soft and
carve it into a statue, I'd like to see
them prove that. I'd like to see a way
of having actually done that. I think
they had no choice but to pound those
layers back and cover it with those
blocks from the very beginning. So
that's where Mark Laner was wrong. He
should have assigned those blocks to the
very beginning because it's not erosion.
It was part of the construction process.
So I I I had convinced myself of that
like five years ago. And I was like,
yeah, it was only through the process of
elimination and only by watching that
program. But I'm like, this isn't going
to convince anybody. I don't think I
don't I don't have the the nail in the
coffin to convince anybody that that's
true. I've convinced myself and I still
looking for alternatives all the time
like any good scientist, but I had
convinced myself that was the most
likely cause
and I gave Are you familiar with Dr.
David Mo?
&gt;&gt; I'm not familiar with him. He's got a
YouTube channel and he does a really
good job and he's very thorough. So I
gave him a copy of my paper and this is
about four years ago now and um he
looked at it. He sat on it for like 6
months and he finally suggested that
what we need to do is find some
limestone of similar quality of the
Sphinx body and do some experimental
archaeology and carve it using these
primitive tools. And if I'm right, well
then we will reproduce the pattern that
looks like erosion on the Sphinx body.
And I thought, well, no. I was like, no
one's going to buy that. I mean, first
off, I'd have to find some limestone
where we could do that. And then people
are just going to say, well, you just
looked around,
excuse me, until you found something and
created the pattern that you want. And
on top of that, when Mark Laner on Nova,
the original program I watched, when
they tried to carve a new nose, they got
a really high quality piece of limestone
and they had to resort to modern tools
to carve the nose. And I'm like, they
failed at that. I I I'm like, no. I
mean, I got his point. And and and it
made me think that's where I'm like,
okay, I I I get it. I was I just
remember thinking, I get it. I get it.
We need to we need to have some way of
doing this. And I do my thinking when I
go out on bike rides. So, I was out on a
30 mile ride.
And all of a sudden, I remember, you
know, I was like, what we need is
something that was carved by the ancient
Egyptians
at about the same time as the Sphinx
through the exact same layers of rock
from which the Sphinx was carved. That's
what we need. And I'm like, yeah, like
that exists. And then I went, it does
exist.
It's the Osiris shaft.
And I had just watched a video on it and
I was like from NEXT. I don't Do you
know who that is?
&gt;&gt; I don't but actually now that I pulled
up David Biano's picture I have seen
some of his videos before but I'm not
familiar with the other user you just
named.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, NEXT is uh John Anthony West
was his mentor
and um he
you know he he believed that the Sphinx
was older and um he was into all of that
and I don't remember how I started some
email exchanges with him but you know at
one point I said you're too smart you
know you know too I watch him I mean he
is so accurate on what he's saying
nobody gets 100% things Right. I mean,
I'm sure I'm saying some things that are
wrong. I try. And again, he he
definitely tries. And I think a lot of
people are trying, but I said, "You're
just too smart. You should have known
this or something. I can't remember."
Anyways, at some point, he wrote me and
said, "He no longer believes that. He no
longer believes his mentor. He no longer
believes that the Sphinx is older."
And um but he this isn't the point. I
mean, but he had also put together a
video. And maybe because I I knew of
him, I watched his channel and it was on
the Osiris shaft. Well, everybody at the
Osiris shaft goes straight to the bottom
and and it's like 100 feet down and down
there you'll intersect the water table
that's basically horizontal that that is
beneath the the Sphinx
and but at the upper layers it goes
through the exact same limestone as the
Sphinx. And I was like, I just watched
that video.
And I was like, I can't remember what it
looks like. And it was a bright sunny
day. So I stopped biking and I and I
looked on my phone and it was just it
was too bright. I I couldn't see it. And
I thought, I need to go home. So I had
to ride 15 miles back home.
And um I look it up and I go, there it
is. Without question, the Osiris shaft
looks as eroded, if not more eroded,
than the Sphinx, but yet the chisel
marks are still there on the protruding
layers, and it's underground. It's
protected,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; And it was carved about the same time.
I'm like, this this is it. This is the
piece of evidence that kills the idea
that there is any erosion on the Sphinx
because and then you can take the the
layers of the limestone from the Osiris
shaft and superimpose them on the
Sphinx. It's the same layers. They
match.
It's done. That's not erosion.
They did the same thing, exact same
thing at exactly the same time, using
exactly the almost exactly the same time
using the the same tools and they
created a pattern that looks like
erosion.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; But it's not erosion. It's over. The
idea that the Sphinx is older, the
Osiris shaft has killed that. And that's
what I just gave a presentation on. And
it was interesting because NEXT
he was responsible because it's it's
like an extra $3,000
so to to enter the shaft. And I should
point out that the shaft is located on
the causeway that goes from the valley
temple right next to the Sphinx up to
the mortuary temple up to Kafra's
pyramid. And it's about halfway up on
that that the shaft descends directly
below the causeway. I mean, so I walked
over it and didn't look down. I'm not
sure what you can see from the top, but
I was like, you know, damn it, but you
have to pay like an extra $3,000 to
access this. And there was another
photographer because NEXT finally sent
me those photos because he took them
back in September and he was doing a
tour in Egypt and then he went off to
doing a tour at Quebec and he barely had
time to send those to me. So, I actually
printed them up as a side um when I was
down in San Antonio for the conference
because I got them so late. But they
prove it. And and there's another
photos. There's another photographer,
Frank Schmidt, who is a German
photographer, and he's really interested
in how these things were constructed.
So, when he was in the Osiris shaft, he
took a series of photos of the of the
upper layer. Not as much as I would
like, but he definitely until NEXT's
photos, he had the best photos. So I
he's allowed me to use his photos.
Again, if you go to my web page, go to
robert schniker.com, you'll see a lot of
this stuff is I just updated my web
page. Come to think of it, we could have
done that earlier.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I've got your uh website up.
Actually, what uh where would the
pictures be? Under which tab?
&gt;&gt; So, it'd be right on the main page.
right on the on the on the main page if
you slide down you'll see pictures of
the Osber shaft.
&gt;&gt; Ah
&gt;&gt; and I'm like we're done.
That's not erosion. I'm not you know I I
convinced myself and now I was like okay
now I have the ability to con quickly
convince other people. And again, I knew
of that more than a year ago and I
didn't really present a paper on it
because I'm like, you know, playing
devil's advocate in my mind. If I'm
going to make a claim like shock has
that there's a lost civilization based
on erosion, if I'm going to make the
claim now that every archaeologist and
every geologist who's ever studied the
Sphinx is wrong because they were
identifying erosion where there's no
erosion. I'm coming in here and saying,
"No, you everybody everybody, not just
the alternative archaeologists are
wrong. Everyone is wrong. I better make
sure I get that right." And that's why I
sat on that for a while. And I'm going
to I'm going to I'm I'm I've convinced
myself and I'm out there putting it out
there that yes, everyone is wrong. Mark
Laner is wrong. Robert Shock is wrong.
John Anthony West is wrong. You know,
Graham Hancock is wrong. Everybody is
wrong. And here's my evidence. That's
not erosion.
But, you know, again, I I want to make
sure I have that right. So, are you are
you seeing that on the web page?
&gt;&gt; Yes. And you're right. I mean, these
layers do look very similar to each
other. I saw another picture of the
Osiris shaft earlier. We could still see
the chisel marks on the wall. Um,
&gt;&gt; yeah, there there is one there. It
should be on the on the on my homepage.
Uh Frank Schmidt took that and yeah, I
mean it's it's pretty distinct.
[snorts]
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; So that's it. [laughter] Next question.
&gt;&gt; Huh.
&gt;&gt; I mean, you know, and you know, the the
Joe Rogan crowd, I watch, you know, what
they're doing. They surround themselves
that he lives in an echo chamber. He
wants to he'll put anybody on who's
going to tell him the stuff he wants to
hear. He won't put anybody on like me
that's going to tell him things he
doesn't want to hear. Yet he calls these
other people not open-minded enough. But
he's, you know, these people live in
this echo chamber. You know, I've met
Mark Laner twice. I met him once in
Boston and I explained some of this and
that was some time ago and I met him in
Cairo and now unfortunately he just
arrived on the and and his flight was
late so we didn't get a chance to talk
very much and that was my last day
there. I mean, I don't know where he
stands on this, but you know, I'm I'm
putting it out here. You know, I th
those people talk to me. Does Hancock,
does does Carlson does Rogan do any of
these people? I've tried contacting all
of them. Never hear from them.
&gt;&gt; I've heard they they're not open to uh
discussions that prove them wrong.
They're not scientists. NXT is who who
was like convinced himself that it was.
And I don't know, maybe I had something
to do with that. I don't know. but he
convinced himself otherwise. What were
you gonna say?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, from what I've heard, I don't
think you'll have any luck getting
Randall to debate because um I read
somewhere else because I know you told
me that he dodged you. I've heard he's
ducked a lot of people over the years.
&gt;&gt; Well, this seems to be the norm. Uh Milo
and Casey, I forgot the name of their
web page. Um they've got a YouTube
channel and I appeared on that and they
used to be believers in the the channel
Scablands that's associated with the
younger Dus and the older Sphinx and all
that stuff. And the moment that they
realized that that you know they came to
the conclusion that was not the case
they they have been ghosted. Nobody will
talk to them. The the people that they
knew the people they made friends with.
I mean, I don't know if you've ever gone
on a on a field trip like that. It's
it's a real bonding experience to go out
and and hang out with these people and
and and see these amazing places. They
they they just won't talk to them
anymore because they're not telling them
what they want to hear,
right? And I mean this is something that
they do need to answer for if they're
going to try to
give their explanation of, you know,
this million this erosion that dates
back to, you know, this pre-ivilization
that they posit. Um because otherwise
it'd be very hard to explain why this
looks exactly like this interior layer.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Um, and elevationally, if we're
comparing where the Sphinx is on the
plane,
how does that compare with the level
that the pyramids are at? Because I know
it is a little lower, but is it exactly
parallel?
&gt;&gt; Well, so no, well, it's parallel in the
bedding. So, the area was originally
horizontal.
It's one of the basic principles in in
geology. Nicholas Steno 1669 the
principle of original horizontality.
So th those rocks were the limestone was
deposited horizontally and it it since
has been tilted up. So it's it's dipping
to about six degrees. I see different
numbers. I've I've seen like six and
elsewhere 10 degrees. Um it's dipping
from the northwest to the southeast.
And the low point is the Sphinx. And
that's why right in front of the Sphinx
there was a harbor which is where they
unloaded the the granite blocks that
they had quaried like it's crazy 500
miles to the south at Aswan
and uh floated down the river you know
so it's downstream you don't need any
any motors and you can load it onto
these uh barges made out of reeds when
they're on dry land and then when the
annual floods come they get lifted and
then you just float them down river and
you bring them in towards the by the
Sphinx and when the water goes down now
they're sitting on dry land and you can
just pull them off. This is there's no
magic here. This is um anyway so there's
a there's actually a harbor and without
question that there there's a harbor
right in front of the Sphinx. And so
that's the access point where they would
unload these these things and and haul
them up. So, um I forgot why I went off
on that tangent, but
&gt;&gt; Oh, we're just talking about the uh the
linking up of the layers you see on the
same So, it's the same layer. So, if you
were So, imagine you take a cake and you
just lift one edge and and now it's
tilted. If it were a plateau, like have
you been to Utah?
Um I no I don't I have not
&gt;&gt; because I mean what you see out there
all over the place is plateaus and the
difference between a coesta which is
what Giza is and a plateau a plateau is
flatline rocks with cliffs all the way
around where a coesta is dipping to uh
to some direction and it has cliffs on
one side uh but the other side it's it
slopes down in a gentle hill and and
that's what you have at at Giza and the
and the Sphinx is not
up on some plateau. I mean, the Sphinx
is only 66 feet 20 meters above sea
level. The Sphinx is only as far above
sea level as it is tall.
&gt;&gt; So, it's not there. And one of the
things that I want to point out that I
didn't I was mentioning comes to my
mind. I was mentioning how the erosion
doesn't make any sense in terms of when
you look at it, it's like this this
can't be any geological process that's
caused this erosion. So Shock is saying
that it's water erosion and his evidence
of water erosion are the sidewalls of
the enclosure. Well, those sidewalls,
that roundedness
that was created by the wicking
groundwater. There's no question of
that. and the sidewalls have this
rounded sort of erosion where the Sphinx
body has more of an angular type of
erosion. And nobody points out that
those two are different, but they're
very distinctly different. And those on
the sidewalls were were clearly carved.
And you could see it with Mark Laner if
you go watch that episode of NOVA from
2012.
Um you can see where he goes, I hate to
do this. and and a section of the he
pulls a section off. Kind of looks like
a giant Pringles chip off the off the
sidewall. Um, but what's missing is the
plunge pools. So, these guys are all big
into the channel scablands and and how
there's that's associated with the
younger dryest, which I can prove it's
not. And um, but when water goes over an
edge, it it cuts most where it hits at
the bottom. Yet the floor of the Sphinx
enclosure this is is intact. There is no
erosion on the floor. This kills the
fact that there's no erosion on the
Sphinx floor kills the water erosion
hypothesis that it came from
precipitation or water chneled and
coming in or even sheet flow or whatever
coming into the Sphinx. This kills it
because that's they would cut hardest at
where it comes down. It does not do
that. And then Shock went out and he did
a geoysical survey. He did seismic
tomography. Are you familiar with this?
&gt;&gt; No, I'm not familiar with what seismic
tomography is.
&gt;&gt; So, it's it's basically like a CAT scan
where what you can do is with a CAT
scan, you're using X-rays and you're
looking at the difference in the
intensity of the X-ray as you're
measuring it. And you take an object, it
could be your brain, and you image it
from multiple locations,
and then you can piece together
what what it looks like inside by having
just pass this beam through at specific
points. It's really a cool technique.
And that's called tomography.
And you could do the same thing with
seismics, but what you're going to
instead of measuring the intensity,
you're going to measure the the arrival
times. is you're going to see how fast
did the seismic energy get moved from
point A to point B. And again, it's it's
principally a straight line. It's not
going to be exactly a straight line when
you're doing seismics, but it's
principally a straight line. And Shock
did this at the Sphinx [clears throat]
and he's saying that it proves that
there is a um a hall of records,
this low velocity zone beneath the
Sphinx. But he did surface tomography.
He was measuring the seismic velocity
from points on one side of the sphinx
enclosure through the sphinx to the
other side of the sphinx enclosure. He
has no ability to measure anything at
depth. That'd be like going in and
having a cat scan of your head and then
telling you what's going on with your
liver. It cannot work. And that is
precisely what shock is basically
selling. When you read his article very
carefully, you realize he he backs down
on that. And it says that the
information for the for this the the the
hall of records there is from some
Japanese survey that was done with
radar. I don't even remember or
something like that. I don't know. But
he does he backs down on it. But when he
presents it, he talks about it and he's
saying that hisography data proves that
the there's a hall of records. That is
impossible. That could not have
happened. And in fact, if you look at
his paper,
um I don't know if I put it on my web
page. Do you see that where there's Did
I put it on my web page where you see
that there's a black and white image of
the Sphinx looking down?
&gt;&gt; Uh let's see. So, there is it 1896 image
or
&gt;&gt; No, it's um I don't know if I put it
there. Let me let me go to my web page.
Um almost there.
I don't remember if I put it there or
not.
&gt;&gt; Would it be under the lost civilization
tab?
&gt;&gt; No, I didn't put it there. I don't know.
Is it formatted right? Some sometimes
this doesn't format right. I'm wondering
if if it's something wrong with the
program. Anyways, um so what what what
what he points out is is that there is a
seismic anomaly that the the velocity
he's correct. He he identified without
question he identified that the seismic
velocity
under the sphinx is lower than the
seismic velocity in the exposed part of
the sphinx enclosure the floor. This
kills again his water erosion hypothesis
because part of what he's saying is is
that since the sphinx floor he he
forgets the you know he dismisses this
whole thing. He never brings it up in
terms of the the plunge pools, but he's
saying that the rock of the enclosure
would then have been exposed to the
environment for at least 12,000 years,
maybe 30,000 years, maybe 800,000 years.
He throws out all kinds of numbers like
this and then backs down from them. But
let's go with his most conservative
number, 12,000 years. So, he's saying
that that limestone would have then
weathered. So, it's not eroding. It's
just it's it's it's it's weakened by the
by the precipitation falling on it,
making it more easily eroded. Well, what
he found using his seismic tomography
shows that the lowest seismic velocities
are not in the exposed floor of the of
the sphinx enclosure, but actually
beneath the sphinx. And the highest
seismic velocities are actually exposed
on the floor of the sphinx. This
counters his point. And to to to make it
so that it looks like it's doing that,
he talks about the seismic velocity
anomaly, the high anomaly to the north
of the Sphinx and makes no mention of
the equally high seismic velocities to
the south of the Sphinx.
And I'm like, what the hell?
He he he
I'm not impressed with his ability to do
seismics. And then he he he you know I I
can see why he made a mistake regarding
the the Sphinx in terms of the erosion
that that that is very confusing and
very difficult to do. But he looks at
the tomb of Debon which is also there at
Giza and he's calling that erosion by
windb blown sand. When I went to that I
nearly burst out laughing because that's
impossible.
At first off it has all the
characteristics of having been carved.
They look like they took the softer
layers and kind of made them look like
beams and such. There's hieroglyphs that
you can read. So that hasn't destroyed
those hieroglyphs which are much
shallower than the supposed erosion by
wind that he's pointing to. And and then
on top of that, it's it's it was buried
in sand. And so if if sand were to
actually hit that wall, it would hit the
wall and drop. And then in no time at
all, it would bury it. So it and if the
wind came from the other direction, well
then it just fill it without doing any
erosion whatsoever. It wouldn't even hit
it. I mean, it's laughable what he's
what he's proposing doesn't even make
any sense. And yet he uses that all the
time as a classic example of windb blown
erosion. And I'm like, no, it's not.
It's not even close. It can't be.
Anyways, enough of my complaint. So out
of uh curiosity because we talked a lot
about erosion and that's the whole
premise of their contention. So in
theory to get the level of erosion that
they claim is there how long would it
actually take for that to happen with
the material of the sphinx?
&gt;&gt; Well that's an interesting question.
I've never given that any thought. I
would say that given that at the neck
especially you could crumble it in your
fingers.
um the layers below it it varies in the
hardness
for the harder layers
I mean
again that's like trying to put a number
on the erosion and and I don't think you
can look at a surface and say how long
it I mean Randall Carlson does that all
the time. I mean so he does it let me go
down that tangent real quick while I'm
thinking of your answer. He um he looks
at the sidewalls as does Robert Shock.
Looks at the sidewalls of the Sphinx
enclosure and says that that's evidence
of erosion by precipitation.
Yet this is very soft rock. And they all
will tell you that the Egyptians were
very methodical in what they did. They
didn't do things halfway. That's why
they're saying the disproportionate body
to the head is is proof that it once had
a larger head. Things of that sort
because the Egyptians were so good at
what they're doing. They never make any
mention as to why they would leave the
eroded sidewalls as evidence that there
was erosion. I mean, it would have been
the simplest thing in the world, the
easiest thing to carve those
vertical.
It would have been the easiest thing in
the world. It is because they didn't do
it that that they have evidence of their
erosion. And I'm like, well, why would
the Egyptians, and I agree, they were
very methodical in what they were doing.
Why did they leave that? Why do they go
Why didn't they just simply carve that
and make it look nice? Why would they
leave these ragged walls and clean up,
you know, recarve the Sphinx head
supposedly, do all these other carve it
with, you know, cover it with blocks, do
all these things,
not do anything, not even touch the
sidewalls. It makes no sense. If I were
going to do it, I'd be like, "Okay,
let's carve these and let's make it look
nice." They didn't. They left it. Bragg
it. that conceptually as as you know it
just doesn't make any sense that anybody
would ever do that how whoever did it
whenever they did it. And so they the
point being that those again those those
were probably covered with blocks and
the idea that the walls according to um
to Randall Carlson were vertical and he
and he shows you examples of how it's
then eroded to the shape that they have
now that they're more at an angle. Well,
the angle at which they're at is roughly
the same angle as that of the pyramids.
Personally, I don't think that they were
vertical and there's no evidence to
support that. one way or the other. But
it's crucial that they were vertical.
Rand Carlson will show you those
depictions over and over. You can find
them doing that online.
But I don't think they were. And I think
that again, they were covered with
blocks from the start, but they were
sloped down towards the py towards the
Sphinx in the same way that they were
sloped by the by the pyramids. That's
what it looks like to me. The idea that
those were vertical walls. So the thing
is is if you're looking at the erosion,
you've got to make some assumption of
what it looked like in the beginning.
And the assumption that Randall Carlson
is making, and I don't know what Shock
thinks of this, but the one that Randall
Carlson is making is clearly is is a
vertical wall. So then you're looking at
quite a bit of erosion, and I don't
know. So you got to make some assumption
of what it originally looked like. Um,
the idea that you could ever have taken
the the the body from the head down
towards the lower paws
um on the rear um and carve that into a
pristine sculpture with that soft
weathered limestone that's there is
absurd to me that that that could never
have that nobody could have done that.
It's just too soft. Like I say, you
could crumble it in your fingers. It
doesn't make sense. And there's even a
section that was missing known as the
major fissure. So there was a large gap
that was discovered as they were working
on the sphinx and that's why the head is
smaller because they decided to elongate
the body to uh then carve the rear paws
directly out of the limestone. And so
even though those rear paws today are
covered with blocks, it's crazy, but
they actually chiseled back, they gave
them the Sphinx a manicure to um put
these modern repair blocks over the
original construction. And it looks
pretty crude. It is not this pristine
sculpture. It isn't as high this high
quality limestone that you have of the
head. It's better than the body, but
they carved it directly in, but it sure
doesn't look like anything all that
advanced. It's pretty crude, but
nonetheless, they they they carved they
they covered that. And so, you got to
make some assumptions, but I so I don't
know. It's not my area. I I don't think
I I'd even try to venture a guess how
long it would take to erode that, but
I'm just saying it's it was never that
in the first place,
&gt;&gt; right?
Okay, that's pretty interesting.
&gt;&gt; So, um, so what what what are your
thoughts on this? I mean, you know,
everyone seems the media is full of all
sorts of alternative explanations. What
what are your thoughts? I mean, I'm
curious what what what have you learned?
What that you think, you know, that
you've heard that the Sphinx is, how it
was made, how old it is. I mean, do do
you have any thoughts on this or is it
something you haven't given a lot of
thought? I
&gt;&gt; It's always been my assumption that this
was contemporaneous with the building of
the three pyramids at Giza. And I guess
the typical explanation is that it was
built with the second pyramid, which I
believe was uh Kufrey
and
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And that would make sense.
Clearly, they have they're working in
the area. They have the technology at
the time.
And then I guess a lot of the mystery
and I think really the reason why this
has been discussed for so long is
precisely because they chose not to
write anything on the Sphinx.
Um
&gt;&gt; it is it is interesting that there are
no known inscriptions on the Sphinx.
Um, yeah,
&gt;&gt; it'd be some real [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] though if it
turned out that there were there was
writing on the Sphinx, but it was
covered up by some of those blocks
you're talking about that were added to
help preserve part of it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know what the likelihood
of that is. I mean, an Egyptologist I
mean, do they do they mark everything?
Did they I'm you know, I mean, the idea
that the Sphinx is first mentioned on
the Dream Steeler 1100 years later, I
take that as with a grain of salt. I I I
I think you know I'm saying that by the
way then if I'm right then Tutmos IV
repairs are far more less significant
than what everyone is thinking because
I'm ascribing most of what is attributed
to him to the original construction. And
so it means the whole timeline
of the of the Sphinx repairs over the
last 4,500 years needs to be
re-evaluated.
And that I mean maybe some of what
was attributed to Tutmos the fourth
maybe maybe it's still there. I mean
maybe it's just that they're going to
attribute these other things to him. But
it would seem to me the whole thing
would like shift over and that was what
was never done by the person after Top
Mosorth might be the things that he
actually did because he didn't actually
put those blocks there in the first
place. I don't I don't know. The whole
history of that could change. Yeah. And
I guess there's not a lot of ancient
evidence about um you know how this
structure was regarded. I mean I I'm
thinking back to book two of Herodus,
you know, the first Greek historian. I
actually don't know for sure if he
mentions the Sphinx. I know he mentions
the pyramids, but
I'm I'm almost now I think back I don't
think he mentions the Sphinx. I'll look
that up real fast and see. But I would I
mean it's just crazy that you wouldn't
mention it because I can't imagine any
time where the if nothing else the head
would have been exposed and I think
people would have been like oh my god
what is this thing
um yeah so I yeah I don't know
&gt;&gt; okay so
&gt;&gt; you would
&gt;&gt; so the Google AI says he does not
mention it and the belief I suppose
therefore is that it must have been
buried in sand at the time which is the
fifth century BCE.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't know if the sand ever got
over the head. Um, from what I know, I I
don't think that's the case. And I would
be sort of surprised because when you're
there
&gt;&gt; and you walk down from the pyramid and
you and you walk towards the Sphinx, you
can clearly see the head sticking out
quite substantially above the surface.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And also given its importance and
you how um it is this obvious
man-made thing. I mean, you would think
that they would clear out the sand if it
compiled in that way. Um,
&gt;&gt; it sounds like that was a major issue to
clean out the sand that that it it took
forever and and and there were multiple
times and it sounds like from what I can
gather that the sand wasn't just there
that it covered a large part of what's
Giza now and and and in front of um the
the Sphinx. What that what that looked
like when it was fully covered in sand,
I have no idea. But some of those
pictures, I mean, they they spent a long
time wheeling it out of there because
they didn't have any modern equipment
when they were doing this like a hundred
years ago. They did it with like a small
railroad car where they'd load it up and
then roll it down these tracks. I've
seen some photos. I I don't know to what
extent that's exclusively what they did,
but I mean it was a lot of work. It took
a long time to clear out all of the
sand.
&gt;&gt; Right. Um, I was going to say something
else.
Um, one of the things I want to talk
about.
Well, I was looking at my conclusions
here. Um, I want to make sure that we've
covered everything.
No, I mean, we just we covered the last
of it. Um
the one one of the points that I want to
make is John Anthony West
made a big deal out of um out of the
Sphinx being older and being eroded by
um precipitation
and from that I mean I I have a quote
here. I just want to read this. So let
me pull that up and and I because this
is what I have in my slide. This is part
of my my poster presentation at GSA. I
say so solving the Sphinx erosion enigma
goes beyond its archaeological
significance as the erosion forms the
foundation upon which alternative
archaeology is built. In 1979, West
wrote, "If the single fact of the water
erosion of the Sphinx could be
confirmed, it would in itself overthrow
all accepted chronologies of the history
of civilization.
And I and then I respond by saying if
he's right, then disproving the water
erosion hypothesis would have similar
ramifications on the fundamental
assumptions of alternative archaeology.
They've got nothing left. You know, if
if if this isn't erosion, they they're
going to have to come back and say that
is water erosion. Because if it's not
erosion,
I mean,
this is it. and and so they've got to
address, of course, they won't they'll
just they'll just ghost me. They'll just
ignore this, you know, the comments that
I'm making. They'll ignore my
conclusion, even though this is at the
Super Bowl of geology.
And even though all the geologists are
agreeing with me, I' I've yet to meet a
single one that's agreed with shock. And
I've talked to hundreds of geologists
now on what on my research here. Not a
one of them has ever agreed with shock.
and he keeps saying that all the
geologists agree with him. Who are they?
But the fact is that the geologists
agree with me and they're just going to
dismiss this and they can't because this
is the evidence. This they need to
address it when when they're asking the
scientists to address their points and I
have and the other mainstream people
have. Zawas and Mark Laner, they talk
about their stuff. They are not doing
that in return. They want special
treatment. And the moment somebody
starts calling them on them doing things
wrong, well then they just say, "Oh, I'm
close-minded." It's they who are
close-minded. It's they who are not
willing to look at the evidence. That's
they who are ghosting the people who are
presenting evidence and and and so much
of what they say when they're on Rogan
and such is just plain wrong. Robert
Shock talks about the younger driests as
being a humid wet period. It's a cold
dry period. He can't even get that
right. But that's integral to his whole
hypothesis on it being solar flares. He
can't even get the facts of the younger
dryest right. And this is again, it's
important for what he's saying. But he's
wrong about that. But rather than than
address it, they're just going to hide
the fact that I'm doing this.
&gt;&gt; They don't want to talk about it. When
it comes to the pseudoarchchaeology
crowd, is it safe to say that with the
exception of Randall Carlson that very
few of them even pretend to understand
geology?
&gt;&gt; Well, I don't think I mean, so that's a
good question. I mean, it's very
different for everybody. I mean, Randall
I mean, Graham Hancock um clearly
doesn't claim to be a geologist and
that's why he uses as he self as he
described him an amateur geologist and
that's Randall Carlson. He he described
him as an amateur archae a g geologist
on ancient apocalypse. I'm not using a
term that he didn't use. So yeah, he
relies on people like that. He relies on
on people that um are going to present
that particular view. He also relies and
and you know he gets people who are
actually doing research and they they're
using you know they're they're seeing
this as an opportunity to talk about
their research. But he takes that and
then distorts it or some of these people
actually believe what they're saying. So
yeah, Graham Hancock,
he defines himself as being a
journalist. He's not, you know, he's a
researcher. Um there's a lot of people
who call him an a pseudo archaeologist
and I'm like, no, he's a
pseudojournalist because the reason I
use that term is because he does not, as
I was just discussing, he does not
present all the sides. He makes it sound
like he's presenting the alternative
information, but these are straw man
arguments and and they're not based on
anything. He's not going to mention what
I'm talking about because, you know,
it's like there was um there was a a
crater impact that was discovered in um
Iceland and when they first or Greenland
when they first discovered it, they were
saying, you know, we don't know how old
it is. The geologists were saying could
be millions of years old, could be like
50 million years old and it could be
because it's under the ice and they had
yet to examine it could be just 12,000
years old. So when it was thought to be
perhaps just 12,000 years old, well then
Graham Hancock mentions it. When it came
back and they proved that it's not
12,000 years old, that's something like
50 million years old. He's not going to
bring that up because he's only going to
present evidence that supports what he's
doing. And if there was something or or
years ago he he a couple years back he
he had a a po a a tweet where he posted
and he showed the statues at Quebec with
the hands coming together just above the
belt buckle. Then he had a a picture of
one of the statues on Easter Island. It
turns out there is only one. I did some
searching. There's only one statue at
Easter Island where the the hands come
together just above the belt buckle in a
similar pattern to that at Quebec. And
he goes, "Coincidence, you decide." So I
added a Santa Claus with his hands on
his belly coming together just above his
belt buckle. And I said, "Coincidence?
You decide." Because, you know, they
they're going to find evidence that
supports that. But you know, the last
thing he wants is you to be thinking
that maybe Santa Claus is part of Gabbec
on Easter Island. You know, the the the
evidence is that's not really evidence
and and you know, he's just presenting
these things. So he presents an
extremely
biased view and he uses people that
allow him to do that. But then at some
point, I mean, I I don't know, he may
have distanced himself from Randall
Carlson. I mean, there's that program
that Randall Carlson was on. Joe Rogan
apparently dealing with energy or
something. I don't know the details. And
so there's a there's a there's a program
that hasn't aired. And I think I think
even that I mean I don't know but
there's a part of me that wonders if it
wasn't that he was saying things that
Joe Rogan was just like no this is just
nonsense and he's not going to put it
on. But I don't know.
&gt;&gt; I don't know what that is. It looks like
Graham Hancock because I know he was
doing this with America before but he's
very much getting into the spiritual
aspect because I remember even in
America before there was actually a part
in the book where he cites an Iawaska
dream for evidence and so since then
that seems to be more or less what he's
doing. So his latest book is called
Visionary, the mysterious origins of
human consciousness and it's all about
uh things that are supernatural. So he's
kind of given up on the material
evidence altogether and he's focusing
much more just on
consciousness and things that are a
little bit harder to disprove.
&gt;&gt; Is this um I think you said Carlson. You
mean Hancock?
&gt;&gt; Oh, Hancock. Sorry, not Carlson. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And actually I don't know what Carlson's
been up to the last few years.
I don't know either. Um, yeah, it's
interesting that they go down that path.
I mean, that's not my area. I I I I
can't I mean, to to come to knowledge
like John Anthony West, I mean, not um
um like Edgar Casey through, you know,
dreamlike states. It to me that sort of
dismisses the whole thing as being kind
of ridiculous to start out with. I don't
know if you know, but Mark Laner
actually went to Egypt to prove that
there was a hall of records beneath the
Sphinx. Did you know that?
&gt;&gt; No, I didn't know that. That's uh that's
kind of embarrassing for him.
&gt;&gt; Well, he calls it his cognitive
dissidence. And so, but he acted like a
scientist. So, he went out there and he
he worked with a couple of other people
and um they figured out where to drill.
And nobody again Hancock and these
people they don't mention this because
they don't want you to know that the
Hall of Records was drilled by people
funded by the Edgar Casey Foundation
because that Mark Laner was
and when they drilled it he said and I
asked him he said within
a few hours a day at the most he
abandoned the idea
and like that's acting like a scientist
that's like I have my hypothesis I think
this is what we're going going to find.
He was thrilled. He was going to release
to the world the knowledge of Atlantis.
He was going to reveal to all of us this
knowledge. And yeah, he he's not
hesitant to discuss that. And yeah,
there was another person with him,
Matthew McCully. And I also asked
Matthew McCully the same question, and
he gave exactly the same answer, which
was, you know, a few hours a day at the
most.
They abandoned the idea and moved on.
and and um Mark is a I mean uh uh Mark
is now the you know PhD went on to study
it and Matthew McCully is this
entrepreneur.
So yeah they they looked at the evidence
and they had their opinions and they
thought well I'm right and if if I'm
right well then this should be here and
it's not and so yeah they they change
your mind. I mean that's that's what you
you do. You follow the evidence.
&gt;&gt; You don't create new evidence to prove
that you're right. you follow the
evidence wherever it goes and that's
science and and you take it and then if
you you know if you want to hold on to
some other idea well then find some way
of of responding to that but that's not
what that's not what they do they they
they just they just say you know I'm
close-minded I I saw Dan Richard saying
because I I'm debunking because I I
started out saying I thought this was
just crazy that the Sphinx is older so
I'm biased I can't follow the truth I
can't. I can't. I don't have the
ability. This is all implied or
basically straight out said. But no, the
answer is I'm a geologist. I'm a
scientist. And if the Sphinx were older
and if the Sphinx was created by a lost
civilization,
excuse me. Then that would be fantastic.
I' I'd be a millionaire. I would love
for that to be true. It's not. If I
could choose a reality, that's the
reality I would choose because then I'd
be very famous for having proven that.
Instead, nobody cares, especially them,
that I prove that it's not. I mean, they
they they're they're all, you know,
they're actually indicating their own
biases and justifying their own biases
and and scolding me and others for not
being biased,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Excuse me. I've never understood the
meaning of ddunking. I feel like that
has to be the dumbest channel name in
the history of this platform.
I didn't even notice that he had um
commented on my appearance on um Flint
Dibble.
Um I just saw that as I was putting
together my web page. I was doing a
search and I was like, "Oh, okay."
Um, but yeah, I mean, his arguments are
pretty weak and and when I make my main
argument, he doesn't even respond. He
just stares at the camera and then goes
off on a tangent even though I've just
made my point. He I don't know. I don't
know what I don't know what that's
supposed to mean, but that's what he
did,
&gt;&gt; right? No, I Yeah, I've had a little bit
of experience with ddunking and he tried
to make a video actually in response to
something I did and it took me about
five minutes to realized that it was a
waste of time. So, I never actually
finished watching it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I did watch that one. Um, so
Flint actually used some of my slides on
the Joe Rogan podcast when he was in his
debate.
&gt;&gt; Oh, cool. And um I don't know and it was
just interesting because they were just
getting on to the subject of the Sphinx
and as they're doing that Graham Hancock
changes the topic and then they never
they never really investigated the
Sphinx which was which was I think
intentional on his part. I don't know. I
mean, you know, conversations
go all over the place and I'm not sure
that Flint is actually, you know, the
best person because he's not a geologist
and like I said, this is a geological
question according to shock and I
totally agree with him that this is not
just a pure archaeological argument. It
is more of a geological question on the
erosion of the Sphinx. So, you know,
Flint wouldn't have been actually the
ideal person. And, you know, somebody
like me needs to get on and explain
this. And then I'm I'm open to
challenges. I'm I'm you know, let's
let's talk about it. This is what I'm
seeing. If you think it's wrong, well,
then correct me. Let's let's go through
it. Let's go through the details. If
you're really interested in this
subject, then let's have that
discussion. At least let me on to
explain what what you know what I'm
saying. And again, I'm disagreeing with
everyone. So, you can't argue that I'm
mainstream science. You can't argue I'm
mainstream archaeology. I disagree with
them. You can't argue, you can't tell me
I'm alternative because I disagree with
them. I'm just I'm taking the evidence
where it goes as I'm seeing it. And
that's what a scientist should do. And
they're going to complain about that
instead of answering my points.
Anyways, enough of my complaint. I'm not
typically like that.
&gt;&gt; No, I understand. I mean, uh, some of
the people who get involved in, well,
pretty much any academic field, I mean,
there are definitely a group of people
who are hyper pedantic and who get
extremely defensive of their pet
theories to the point where um, you
know, if you're trying to introduce new
evidence, they
will take offense.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, is there something you want to
talk about? Well, I mean, we could we
could move on to um Gabbecape or the
channel Scablands. Um
&gt;&gt; let's talk about the channel Scablands
because I know you've brought that up a
few times and I remember that also got a
lot of exposure
&gt;&gt; thanks to the Graham Hancock Netflix
series. There's a whole episode about
the Scablands and
&gt;&gt; the idea of this grand flood that
happened, I suppose, right at the end of
the last ice age.
&gt;&gt; Well, see that. So that's that's the way
that they want you to present it and you
just gave their views but in fact there
were multiple floods there. There could
have been as many as a hundred floods
and there's some people who go and say
as far as perhaps looking back over the
last like 2.6 million years that there
could be a thousand floods. I don't know
where all this is standing but without
question there were multiple floods and
not a one of them was tied in to the
younger dry. So the let's let's go down
that path before I go down because this
is this is what they're hanging their
hat on and this is where they went
wrong. As as I pointed out earlier,
Shock describes the younger dryest as a
warm wet period when it's a cold dry
period.
And now with the with uh Reynold Carlson
and and Graham Hancock in the ancient
apocalypse, they're talking about that
there is a single flood that's
associated with a comet impact that's
associated in some fashion with the
younger dus. Well, we can we can kill
that pretty quick because
exactly what caused the younger dus is
still up for debate. It was originally
proposed that it was caused by a glacial
meltwater
uh from the melting ice that it it it
flowed on top at the northern Atlantic
and being lighter than the um salt water
beneath um turned off the the basically
the Gulf Stream which caused the
northern hemisphere to abruptly cool.
And um so it's it's been attributed to
that. More recently there I just watched
a video where a geologist is saying that
the younger dus was actually caused by a
volcanic eruption and that put you know
these aerosols into the atmosphere and
and sulfur and such and it reduced the
uh sunlight reaching the earth and it
caused a a cooling period. And uh what
they're suggesting is Randall Carlson
and Graham Hancock, they're suggesting
it was a comet impact. There's there's a
couple of issues with that. Um first,
there are there there's the younger dus,
there's also the older dus. And in fact,
there's other multiple events, abrupt
cooling events like this if you start
looking over the last 2.6 million years.
And if you're attributing one, the last
one to a comet impact, well then what
caused the others? Are you are they
suggesting that every single one like
the older dus is also caused by a comet
impact? They seem to be there's some
correlation not you know it's still the
evidence is still being built but there
is some correlation that these cooling
events are in fact associated with
volcanic eruptions. And that makes more
sense because you're going to get
periodically you're going to get
volcanic eruptions of varying sizes over
the last 2.6 million years. To attribute
one to a to an impact, well then you
haven't explained all these others. But
it gets worse because
as I mentioned that originally it was
thought that the younger that the that
the flooding in the channels scablands
what they're proposing is caused by this
comet impact which abruptly melted the
ice and sent the water down the Colombia
River and then it it carved the chneled
scablands. Are you familiar with the
scablands at all?
&gt;&gt; Um not very. I've never been to
Washington State, much less that part of
the state.
&gt;&gt; Well, so I I only went because Randall
Carlson agreed to debate me and I
thought I got I got to get up to speed
on this and I have. Um, so what it is is
there was a glacial lake Missou
Missoula. So there was a a lobe of the
glacier that came down out of Canada and
into Idaho at the panhandle way at the
north end of the panhandle of Idaho and
it blocked the Clark Fork River. And
when it did the um a lake formed from
the meltwater coming off the glaciers
and from precipitation,
excuse me. And and that created a lake
with roughly the volume of half that of
Lake Michigan.
And but it's this ice dam and it's it's
pretty wide. It's like 20 miles across.
And at some point the water level in the
lake rose high enough that it either
floated the dam or in some way broke
through this dam
and then flowed down the Colombia River.
And when it did, it reached a glacial
lake. I believe it's called Colombia.
And that was there because the Colombia
River was blocked by another lobe of ice
further to the west. And that created
this lake. So all this water from this
lake the lake Missoula went into this
other lake and it overtopped that lake
and it sent the water across the land on
higher ground where it stripped away
this uh loss this this very fine grain
material that comes off of glaciers and
then below that there's these uh the
columnar jointed
lava flows and it just picked that off
and created these kind of square shaped
valleys
and Um and so and then what happened is
is the lobe where of the glacier coming
out of Canada advances again blocks
blocks the Clark Fork River and 30 to 50
years later the lake re the lake is
refilled and it bursts through the dam
and it does it again. And so it did this
multiple times.
um each time going across being diverted
to higher ground because of the other
lobe of glacia really wide one to the
further to the west that was blocking
the Colombia River. Um, so Grenle, I
mean, so Graham Hancock is all about the
uh Clovis point and and and he's just
like all about that and how the
scientists are wrong and they admit they
were wrong. But h the reason they were
proposing that is that there was an
ice-free corridor that had opened up by
about 13,000 years ago and it would it
allowed humans to migrate from northern
Canada Alaska area down into the
continental United States going through
this corridor
and without question that the ice had
retreated to the point that it had done
that by the time of the younger dus and
that's the problem because If they're
saying that it was a comet impact by
this point, even if the comet had hit
and even if it had melted the water, it
wouldn't have sent it down the Colombia
River. And even if it did send it down
the Colombia River, the other lobe that
was further to the west isn't there. And
so the water would have just gone down
the Colombia River and it would not have
been diverted to the higher ground. And
so it would not have cut the channel
scablands.
So you can kill that idea. And I I was
mentioning that I was on a a channel
with Milo and and Casey and they said
that's a mic drop moment. And I was like
yeah I mean that that kills that idea.
It it cannot have happened that way. Not
at that time. And on top of that if you
want direct evidence of that there are
lake barbs. So this this was just
massive. So the the release of water was
something like 10 miles wide and 400 ft
deep. And there's a point at dry falls
where it cut these falls that dwarf um
Niagara Falls. And but they're dry.
There's there's no water there anymore.
And and and and that's only just a small
section of what was actually happening.
And just downstream from that there are
lake bars. So lake vavves form every
winter as the ice, you know, covers a
lake and then there there's seasonal
fluctuations. So they leaves come in in
the fall and then you got the bloom of
things in the summer and then a winter.
And you can kind of count these lake
barves in these soft sediments like you
like you count tree rings. And those
lake bars at at a point down gradient of
the uh very close to dry falls just a
few miles downstream without question in
the area where the flood would have
occurred are still there. And on top of
that there's a volcanic eruption. So now
we can date it and that nobody's as far
as I know nobody's actually dated it but
the last eruption occurred 13,600 years
ago. So that means and all the
geological evidence elsewhere points to
the fact that all of the floods and
there were multiple floods and the
channel scablands predate the younger
dus by at least a thousand years or
about a thousand years that that
hypothesis has been killed. There is no
way. So even if you have so even if
there was a comet impact and even if it
melted this ice it would not have
created the channel scablands. That's
impossible. Their hypothesis, again,
they're trying to make it fit the
evidence. They just ignore anything that
doesn't fit their evidence. That's
impossible. That is just that that
deal's dead,
&gt;&gt; right?
[laughter]
It's that quick. I mean, they spend a
whole episode talking about it and
talking about how close-minded
scientists are. And they're right. So,
so it was Jay Harland Brett. So, there's
a story here. So, geology, and this is
where I I agree with some of the people
when they're picking on Hancock and
they're calling him a racist. I'm like
that he is the furthest thing from a
racist. And they're doing that because
they're saying that the views of
alternative archaeology and alternative
history is based on racist views. And
there's no question that that's the
case. But that that doesn't describe
Hancock. And I don't think anybody
should go down that path and try to do
that to him. That that's just that's
just craziness. That's that's that's
grasping at things in the same way that
they're grasping at things and trying to
make a point without making a really
valid point. Um geology has has its
roots in the Bible. So like Charles
Darwin went out to prove the biblical
interpretation of Earth history and
geology did try to do all of that. And
so they were using a worldwide flood.
And there were people who were proposed
all sorts of really outrageous ideas on
how the geology that we see on Earth is
based on is partially based on these
this worldwide flood. There's an area
just to the to the west of where I am.
It's called the drifless area where the
glacial is unaffected by glaciers. But
the word drifless comes from like
driftwood. It comes from an idea that
was at the time that's why they called
it that is that it was not affected by
the flood. And so, you know, so geology
has its roots in that. And so when Jay
Harland Brett and and then they were
then they were like, "Oops, our bad."
And they realized what how ridiculous
all of that was and that the Bible is
not a very reliable geological source.
And and so when Jay Harland Brett was
coming in and saying that there was this
massive flood
without looking at the evidence,
basically these geologists were saying,
"No, perhaps you don't realize we've
moved on from that. We we no longer are
talking about worldwide floods. That
doesn't exist in geology." And and
you're going back and you and they're
like, "This idea has to stop." And so
they were trying to kill his idea
because they they were seeing him as
trying to take geology back to the idea
of a biblical interpretation just
because he's talking about these
worldwide floods. And Hancock, you know,
presents himself as speaking for Bretts.
And um but if there's anybody who's
going to do that, that would be Vic
Baker. And Vic Baker and Richard Wait,
they they met Bretts and they talked to
him. And I asked uh Vic Baker if he had
any thoughts on what Brett would make of
people like Hancock and he instantly
responded. He would be insensed. And so,
you know, Hancock is not speaking for
scientists. He's right in saying that
that they were dismissing his idea
without looking at the evidence. When
they finally did, they were like, "How
could I have been so wrong?" And they
eventually gave uh Brett's the the
highest award that you can get in
geology at the GSA conference. And Brett
was saying he was like in his late 90s
and he's like, you know, this is nice,
but I can't gloat over this fact because
everybody who's was against me is dead.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But yeah, so they so they they were
pushing that idea that you know because
and without looking at the evidence. So
it was a point. I mean there are times I
mean scientists are people too. Um but
you know uh and and they were definitely
wrong and
I could go into that story a little bit
further. Nick Zentner did a whole who's
a geologist did a wonderful series on on
all of that and really goes into depth
and finds out some nuances in this story
that other people hadn't known. And you
know, and again,
I've never heard uh Graham Hancock or
Randall Carlson or anybody um update
their presentations to include the new
information that was uh that was
discovered by Nick Zentner with his
research, you know, and talking to the
experts and you know, but that's the way
they work. They they they have their
answer and and and once you have your
answer, they stop looking. And
scientists don't do that. I mean, I'm
still looking at why what what what
reasons could have eroded the Sphinx
other than what I'm saying. I'm I'm
looking for that. I'm I'm you know, tell
me. I'm very interested and I'm looking
all the time.
&gt;&gt; So, that's pretty much so the the
scablands. I It's just amazing when with
the flood when it reached downstream
when it got to Portland, it flooded all
the way down from Portland down to
Eugene. I mean, this flood is just
massive. But as as I said earlier, um,
uh, Walter Alvarez is proposing that
there was this massive lake, and if if
he's right, then the flood that went
down the Nile somewhere in the last
three million years, probably closer to
three million years, he doesn't give a
date, um, would have been 18 times
bigger than the largest of the Channel
Scablands floods. And so, you know, it's
not unique. and and the English Channel
was carved by uh I I believe two mega
floods. So, prior to that in this mega
flood during the ice age at some point,
I don't remember the dates, I think it
was like 190,000 years ago and another
one like 300,000, but don't quote me.
Um, but yeah, when they looked at it,
when they did radar sonar images of the
surface of the the bottom of the ocean,
they saw all the characteristics of a
mega flood. And you also see mega floods
on Mars. And Vic Baker, I mean, if
there's ever any program on on mega
floods, he's the guy. I mean, be it on
Mars, be it on Earth, um he's on NOVA
all the time on those kinds of programs.
Yeah. So, anyways,
so and
it's it's just a fascinating area to go
there um and and to see it and to just
boggle your mind when you're at Dry
Falls in particular. I think there's
there's no better spot to just try to
comprehend that it was something like 10
miles wide and you're not looking at
like a Niagara Falls. You're looking at
400 ft above you. And so this waterfall
would have been like a little ripple
well below the surface
of uh you know that of this of this
massive flood or floods.
It's a neat place.
&gt;&gt; Oh wow. So,
okay. So, this guy's been looking at
images of Mars to look for evidence of
mega floods there. That's fascinating.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, when they first went there,
when they started getting these higher
resolution pictures of Mars,
um the the the characteristics, the the
geological characteristics of a mega
flood are there, but where do the water
come from? I don't know where all this
stands, but it was it was a real puzzle
because it kind of looks like the water
just sort of came out of the ground and
then flowed off and but you know at the
same time it was massive. I mean
unbelievably massive floods. I I I I
don't know the I don't I'm not familiar
with Mars but I I you know I believe
it's even bigger than anything on Earth
and yet but like where did the water
come from? It just seems to have melted
out of the ground somehow. It's weird.
&gt;&gt; Right. for sure. I mean, I guess there's
been a lot of speculation that some of
the water might have been reabsorbed and
there are massive underground aquifers
there, but um I don't think it would
account for all of the evidence that
we've seen of the surface being shaped
by water. Um so, some of it might have
just simply evaporated and been lost,
but I don't know. It's
&gt;&gt; fascinating subject though.
&gt;&gt; It is. I mean to to look at another
planet and you know in some ways it's
very similar to Earth especially back
you know about 4 billion years ago
um definitely had an atmosphere and you
know seems like it had water and the
evidence of life is you know building
but we have yet to have absolute proof
and again so this is kind of the way
that you know that Hancock and those
people work. Um is there life elsewhere?
almost certainly. I mean, the idea that
life just happened on Earth, it's just
really absurd. Um, basically, as soon as
this planet was cool enough to support
life, it supported life.
And um, prior to that, it would have
been too hot. It was molten rock. And
so,
we we can we can determine that. and and
so just learning that piece of
information and um is is a is a clue and
then finding out that you know the
evidence that there's I mean how many
billions of planets now there's like
there's a minimum of like two planets
per star or I don't that was some time
ago and now it's probably a lot more
than that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, I mean I think right now the
uh you know the sort of prevailing model
is that with the exception of the hyper
giant stars which tend to clear out the
area around them. I mean most
&gt;&gt; stars the size of the sun and smaller
which is the vast majority have multiple
planets. Um so there's no telling how
many planets. Plus I've heard an recent
estimate too that there might be more
rogue planets than planets orbiting
stars. So, I mean, it's a ridiculous
number of potential environments.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, I don't know how many of
those would be habitable, but um but
yeah, I mean, the odds are that there
are without question
billions upon billions of planets that
are are going to be habitable. Not maybe
in terms of complex life, but single
cell organisms. That's, you know, what
we're talking about.
&gt;&gt; Um yeah. So when we find that someplace
else, they're going to come back and
say, "See." And I was like, "Well, no. I
mean,
any any scientist, I think, is going to
argue that, yeah, it's probably there,
but we've yet to actually see that
evidence." And and we we can't draw an
absolute conclusion. But that's the kind
of thing that these alternative people
are doing all the time is they're
drawing these grand conclusions out of
partial information.
And I mean personally I you hear
everyone talking about you know the
cultural shock and disorientation of to
quote 2001 which is a lot of things what
they seem to be doing um with finding
life elsewhere. I I think the response
is going to be very different. I think
they're going to say well we knew that
all along. You're finally telling us
what we already knew but we don't know
it. And that's that's the point. We do
not know it until we absolutely have
proven that it that it's there. We're
not going to say that. And that's the
way science works.
&gt;&gt; And they want science to go with these
weird hypotheses. And you know, and and
and the likelihood that life is out
there, I would argue, is yes, it's
extremely high.
&gt;&gt; But we've yet to find absolute proof
that it is,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; And and and that's the difference.
And that's what they're hanging their
hats on
&gt;&gt; because at this point I mean we uh you
know people talk about you can look at
the atmospheres of exoplanets for
biomarkers
but then uh you know other scientists
have pointed out that those same
chemicals can be produced by natural
processes that don't involve life. So I
mean the whole system is still very
we're in a very very early stages of
doing that. I mean, I guess I would
compare it to the early stages of
exploration. You know, the age of
exploration begins with what the
Portuguese and with the 1450s.
And I don't think the whole Pacific was
mapped until nearly 1800.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Hey, I want to get back to
something that I I I just watched an
episode where Joe Rogan was talking and
he was talking about farming and I found
myself agreeing with him, you know. Um
and again I'm not an archaeologist but
it's it's something I've independently
have come to that I think farming
to some extent
humans were familiar with farming
you know thousands of years earlier than
they actually used it. You know there's
there's there's seeds that only
germinate after having gone through a
digestive si system. And it could be
their own it could be others. And I
think they'd see that and I think that
that you know and they may have done
things like you know planted a tree
knowing at some point in the future when
they're going to come there that tree
may have grown in you know and I think
but that would not bear the the marks of
domestication
and it wasn't until they settled down at
some place like Quebec and they did that
without farming that's clear there's no
farming there's no domesticated plants
animals. This is clearly the pre-
pottery Neolithic.
And it was only when they sort of
trapped themselves by settling down
because the the resources locally were
so abundant
that they then had to find a way and
their population had grown. So they had
to find a way to make it work and that's
when they kind of resorted to farming.
But I think the roots of farming would
would predate that and probably predate
the um the uh arrival of Americas into
the into the people into the Americas. I
think that and that would help to
explain why
it occurred in many places. Now again,
this is me speculating as a geologist in
an area, you know, and and it may be
that there's archaeologists that say,
"Oh, no, what you're forgetting is
this." or you know we already know and
there's this other evidence that
counters that that sort of thing. Um but
it you know I I found myself tenatively
agreeing with that. One of the things
that um I want to get into I don't know
if you want to keep going.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, for sure.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, one of the things that you
know really bugs me about what they're
saying and and this is one of their main
points and and it's so obvious that it's
wrong and that is is that they'll
mention that the human species is homo
sapiens. The there's a skull in Morocco
that's like 300,000 years old. In fact,
it's dated a little bit older than that.
And so their their argument is is that
well, if modern humans have been here
for 300,000 years, why did it take until
the last interglacial for them to create
civilization? Why didn't they do that
300,000 years ago? The thing is is that
if you saw that skull that they
collected in in Morocco, the one that
they're using that they they ident and
then they're classifying as modern
humans. If you saw it, you'd be like,
"Who's the idiot who decided that's a
modern human?" Because it's got these
heavy brow ridges. It doesn't look
anything. I think if you ran into that
person on the street, you'd be like, "Oh
my god, who is this?"
&gt;&gt; Right?
&gt;&gt; You know, you've got to draw the line
somewhere. But to to imagine that this
line is an abrupt change from an earlier
version to us as we are exactly now is
ridiculous. Yet that is one of their
core arguments that they're making over
and over and over again. I mean it still
doesn't completely answer the question
as to why was it only in the last
interglacial
and that you know that now that that
civilization began. It still doesn't
address that directly but it does
narrow it down. So it couldn't have
happened 300,000 years ago because they
weren't like us. And to to to the
there's Brian Hume. Are you familiar
with him and Richard Rangom?
&gt;&gt; No, I haven't heard of them.
So, Richard Rangham uh worked with uh
Jane Goodall and um he's written some
interesting books and he's he's just
this guy with these big ideas. Uh
Cooking Made Us Human is one of his
books. Demonic Males is another. And and
he's really big into this whole thing of
self-domemestication.
And so, if you look at an organism
that's been domesticated, their brains
get smaller, their face is less
protruding, they have more like juvenile
features.
And humans, if you look at our species
through time, we have all the hallmarks
of a domesticated species, but we
domesticated ourselves.
And um he's and Brian Hume is is is
worked with him and he's got a I think
it's called the the evolution of the
friendliest. I mean, in some ways that
describes human, in others we're not
friendly at all. But um Brian Hume is of
the opinion that the scara, the whites
of our eyes, didn't evolve until 70,000
years ago. Because if you look at other
primates, they don't have whites in
their eyes. and um and and it's only
humans and occasionally here and there a
chimpanzee
will have whites in their eyes but and
it it and it's thought to have developed
as part of the ability for us to hunt
together. So yeah, I could if I were if
I could see you, I'd be seeing where
you're looking right now and then I'd be
looking in that direction to see what it
is you're looking at. And dogs will work
with humans on this. But if you take a
chimpanzee and you know you hide
something and you point to it, they
won't get it. They
they won't you're you're pointing to you
know the location where it is that that
they want to find this reward doesn't
help them at all.
&gt;&gt; They just can't do it,
&gt;&gt; right? They need more complex
communication is hugely important for
developing civilization.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So the whole idea that just
because they're anatomically
modern human 300,000 years ago, which
again is like well maybe I mean I guess
we'll draw that line there, but just
there's other aspects of us and our
behavior
that haven't evolved until much more
recently. And and so they're dismissing
all of that. They're dismissing all of
this research into when we started doing
art, when we started, you know, maybe
doing other things. They'll grasp onto
things like when there was evidence of
uh like what is it like 300,000 years
ago something where it looks like
somebody stacked up some logs kind of
like Lincoln logs if you played with
those when you were a kid
&gt;&gt; right cut notches in one to to to to put
on top the other and they're seeing that
as a potential structure I mean yeah
&gt;&gt; so but but did it did it take root
&gt;&gt; just because you found that doesn't mean
it was a structure it could have been
just a walkway you know a
bridge, a stepping stone, and they and
they put the logs down and they rolled
and they're like, "How do you stop the
raw log from rolling?" You cut these
notches in it.
&gt;&gt; And so, you know, it it there there
could be alternative explanations and to
jump instantly and say, "Well, see this
log? Well, then this proves that there
was an advanced civilization."
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean, that's that's kind of a
joke with early archaeology that one of
my friends had a shirt where, you know,
it says one rock, two rocks. If you have
three rocks, then you have a
sophisticated fortification zone.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, yeah. I mean, so there I mean
there's there's really interesting and
this is this is the you know, it was I I
do want to say as I said earlier that I
have been places and have met people and
done things I never would have done. And
I think we could I can agree with
Hancock and Carlson and Shock that
they're saying that, you know, that's
part of what they hope happens. Um,
where was I going to go with that? But,
you know, but you got to be open-minded
to to what you're seeing and and and and
No, I wasn't I wasn't going to go there.
I was going to, but I mean, it does take
me back. I mean, that's why I went off
on a tangent here. I mean, I've been to
Egypt. I never would have gone to Egypt.
I I met with uh I met Walter Alvarez. I
met Vic Baker and you know Brian Atwater
and and and Richard Wait and you know
these are names that I would read in
textbooks
but the odds of I my meeting them
would be like nothing. And and I learned
so much about the history of our planet
over the last like 56 million years. And
there's just amazing things that have
happened and if they hadn't happened, we
may not be here. And um
I mean I could go off on all sorts of
tangents right now. And I did all of
that because I was questioning whether
or not the Sphinx was eroded. So there
is some good that can come out of this.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; I think that Go ahead. One time my uncle
who was in the sciences told me that um
no matter how stupid a question might be
it could always yield an interesting
answer.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. I mean there's there are
questions you go well I don't know but
yeah and especially when you try to
understand
why that person raised it. So, you know,
I I can see why Graham Hancock would and
and and Randall Carlson, given who they
are and what they know, why they would
think the way that they're thinking. Um
I I wish they could act more like Mark
Laner, you know, and an ext,
you know, rehashing the same things that
they're that they're they're talking
about. I mean, I'm presenting
something entirely new that that it's
not erosion.
They're just sort of rehashing,
you know, Eric Vondonigan kind of stuff,
you know, and and Atlantis and things. I
mean like shock says all the geologists
agree with him but at the same time he
has what he calls the a word Atlantis
and he can't use that around geologists
because we're not ready and to me that
means no it's not that we're not ready
it means he cannot defend it. He's
convinced himself on this but he can't
defend it. And that's why the problem
isn't that he's got an idea he can't
defend. problem is the geologists like
myself who aren't open-minded
to an idea that he can't defend. And so,
you know, so the thing is is that when I
when I'm making my point here, I I was
looking for evidence,
like I said, to to find that that
there's no erosion. And I found that in
the Osiris shaft, and I waited until
then. These people are just like jumping
on things and then giving quick answers
and then moving on to the next thing.
and they're confusing a lot of people on
this stuff.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Speaking of Atlantis and sort of
these theories that get spread in this
way, I was wondering, you know, as a
geologist who's studied the Sahara some,
uh, what could you tell me about the Eye
of the Sahara? Because I've seen that
put forward as a potential
um, location for Atlantis.
&gt;&gt; I don't know much about it. It, you
know, it sure looks like it's an impact
site to me. And um I don't see and again
I've never really read anything on it.
Um it it doesn't seem to fit the story
of Atlantis that it's underwater, you
know, but they recreate this and they're
talking, you know, just because it's
circular is basically the evidence. I
think there, you know, I know um there's
a YouTube channel, I don't know if
you're familiar with Itchy Boots.
It's this woman who happens to be a
geologist, but she doesn't do much with
geology. And she rides all over the
world. And she went there and she's like
there and there's this guy who's trying
to sell these, you know, sophisticated
tools and artifacts associated with the
site and everything's extremely
primitive. There's nothing there that
looks out of place. But I mean, and that
there were people living across the
Sahara. I mean, that was one of the
coolest things I've learned was that the
Sahara switches back and forth between a
savannah, a green savannah, and a
desert.
&gt;&gt; And it does so because of orbital
dynamics.
And basically, it's tied into the same
things that are causing the ice ages and
then the interglacials.
And I mean that to to take a place like
um like the Sahara and turn it green
that's larger than the continental
United States.
It's just amazing. Um one of the things
I didn't bring up thinking about the
Green Sahara, there is artwork along the
Nile. This is one of the places I really
want to go back and visit and it's not
on anybody's list and if it's Quatar or
something like that. There are um these
depictions in the rock that were carved
and a portion of one of them was buried
in sand and that allowed them to do
luminescence dating on the sand. And it
proves that these uh that this artwork
and there's a lot of it and that one in
particular it it demonstrates that it is
at least 15,000 years old. Now, it's
fully exposed to the environment and
it's carved, I believe, in limestone and
it hasn't eroded. In fact, over 15,000
years during the Green Sahara period,
the the sand grains didn't even get
washed away in the precipitation
because if that had happened, then we
couldn't have dated it. And and it's
almost completely uneroded, like I was
saying. So, and this is further to the
south. So when the Sahara switches, you
know, it it transitions from from the
south, it it advances green and when it
turns back to desert, it starts at the
north as a desert and migrates south. So
this is I don't know how many hundreds
of miles south of Giza. So this would
have received more precipitation and
over a longer period of time than the
Sphinx. And yet it's not eroded. And yet
it's dated without question to 15,000
years ago.
It again kills this hypothesis that the
Sphinx was eroded by precipitation
because why would this why would the
this rock that's the Sphinx have eroded
if you believe Shock's vision of the
original head? There's 14 meters of
erosion at the at the nape of the neck
from his original depiction of the of
the um lion and and the neck. But let's
let's go with the more conservative
number which everyone throws out which
is about a meter, you know, roughly 3
feet of erosion on the Sphinx body.
Well, then how come this rock art is
still here? It's fully exposed to the
environment. Why is it there? Again,
this completely kills the idea that the
Sphinx is older. And of course, you
never hear of it because all that they
do is present evidence that supports
them. They never look at any evidence
that doesn't support them. They're not
going to do that. And if somebody like
me does it, well, the answer is you just
ignore them. Their evidence is not
relevant even though it kills their
idea,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Anyway, so yeah, so the green Sahara, I
mean to me that was just fascinating um
that I personally,
again, this is where I find myself sort
of agreeing with Hancock and I think a
lot of archaeologists too would say
this. I'm thinking that that switching
back and forth of the climate
was part of what drove our evolution to
create a creature that can live in all
in this everchanging environment that
you know at one point they're living in
a desert and then the next point they're
living in a green savannah and then back
to a desert and it also um when when
they the last time they did that and
they congregated in the Nile Valley
because it's that little rivet of green
um it they brought together people with
ideas from all over. And I mean, and
that's one of the questions that the
alternative archaeologists ask is
because, you know, it's kind of like
it's already there. There's a
civilization. I mean, they have writing
and and things from the very start. So,
where were they? Well, prior to learning
about a green Sahara, that question was
unanswerable.
Now, we know of the Green Sahara. Now,
we know where they were.
&gt;&gt; Well, actually, they didn't have writing
from the beginning. uh writing was
something that was actually discovered
first in Mesopotamia
and we actually have evidence the
Egyptians thought about copying Kunea
form writing but then decided to go with
their own pictographic system.
&gt;&gt; But when did that evolve?
&gt;&gt; So the earliest writing in Mesopotamia
is around 3,500 B.CE.
So you know approximately 5,500 years
and Egypt caught up within I think 300
years something like that. So they had
writing within you know pretty short
period of time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. See again I don't know the details
on the um the foundation of the Egyptian
civilization but I date it somewhere
around there is when they got started.
But that's again I'm not an
archaeologist.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, what's interesting about
Egypt is uh you know with the
compression in that Nile Valley um they
had a unified culture from a very early
date because I mean if you're building
an empire and you want to resist the
Egyptian authorities where the hell do
you go? What terrain can you defend to
hold out and maintain independence?
Well, I've also heard it said that it's
one of the reasons the Egyptian
civilization was lasted so long is
because you couldn't have wars with
people because they couldn't get across
the desert to come in. I mean, they did
to the north and south, but yeah, but I
mean, it's one of the reasons that it's
thought that it's more stable. Um, I
mean, also the the pyramids themselves
were pretty much a make work project
which kept people busy,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Um, so they also didn't have time. But
again, I'm kind of like on the fringes
of that. I'm not an archaeologist. I'm
I'm not really all that interested in
archaeology. I'm not dismissing
archaeology. Sure. I'm just saying I'm a
geologist. This is that's what I do. And
I'm And if we're talking about like the
erosion on that artwork, well, now I can
talk about that. But if you're going to
get into the, you know, the the the
ancient Egyptian history, I'm I'm I'm
not that good on that. Not really going
to study it. I'm I I'm going to I'm
going to go elsewhere. Look at other
things on
&gt;&gt; What was the um You said the earliest
art form was found at uh Can you name
that area again?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. What was it? Um I should know
this. Um
it's um G. No, I'm thinking of the wrong
person. The guy who studied it was a
Dutch guy and um he passed away.
Where am I? I'm trying to figure out
where I would have that. I can see it in
my head. Um,
it's it's
Give me a second here. I'm trying to
think as I'm I'm I'm gonna Okay, where
was that?
Yeah, it's one of those amazing things
when you learn it. You're like, how come
I never hear about this?
Um,
I know it's
all right. I think I know where to find
it pretty quick. Um,
let me just
It's in I have a word document where
I've like kind of written a book
about the Sphinx and I one of these
years and I was working on it. Um,
okay.
So, I'm doing a search in that document
for that rock art.
61 hits. It's a really long document.
&gt;&gt; Oh, wow.
&gt;&gt; And um I'm almost there. Um because
we're gonna Saharan rock art.
What's interesting about the rock art is
they compare it to the caves in France
and it's not Damn it. What happened?
And um
what just
I was doing a search and it's okay.
It is okay. It's at Q. I thought so.
It's Q Urta
is the location.
And it's 500 miles south of Cairo, 800
kilometers, and is by far the oldest
rock art in all of Northern Africa. And
as I write here, it shows very little
erosion, if any. And um there were the
archaeologists they definitely dated it
based on luminescence dating to 15,000
years ago, but based on the the
depictions of the art and that it looks
like it's been eroded a little bit, you
know, or whatever in the sun, whatever
reason, they're they're dating it to
could be as old as 21,000 years old.
&gt;&gt; Oh, well, because that
&gt;&gt; and I used it.
Okay, that's super fascinating because
um do you know when cattle were
domesticated? Because I think it's
pretty clear this is depicting cattle,
but you know what the date is right now
for people thinking when cattle were
domesticated.
&gt;&gt; I don't think they were domesticated
back then,
&gt;&gt; right? I So cattle were first
domesticated around 10,500 years ago
based on most studies. And um I think
genetically they've also shown that a
lot of the earliest herds to be
domesticated uh you know the ancestors
of almost every modern herd.
&gt;&gt; I think it's in orox isn't it? Isn't
that how you pronounce that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah orox. So that is fascinating
because
maybe they were I wonder how that could
Huh.
&gt;&gt; I know. I'm like, this is this huge
piece of information that nobody talks
about.
&gt;&gt; Well, this is potentially massive. U
&gt;&gt; Yeah, this is this is so like I say, you
know, I I there there's places that when
I go to Egypt, like when I went there,
okay, the Sphinx was cool, but I was
more impressed to be at the Nyometer.
Are you familiar with that?
&gt;&gt; The nyometer?
I know I've heard of it before, but I'm
trying to remember what it is.
&gt;&gt; The beginning of science.
So the the ancient Egyptians I you know
this this one that's there now was built
I don't know like 1500 years ago but the
the palemo stone and elsewhere I believe
it's a pmo stone they there's no
question that the ancient Egyptians
would measure the level of the Nile
every day year after year and then they
would use and they'd graph it think of a
you know an Excel graph and they would
plot the the level of the Nile on any
given day and use that to project how
high it's going to get in any given
year. So they were projecting based on
past performance of the Nile what it's
going to be.
And I'm like that's science.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; That is the beginning of science. I'm
like this is this is saying the world is
knowable
to me. That was when I went there I was
like this is the coolest place I have
ever been. This is the start. And again,
why doesn't anybody talk about it? Why
is why is the nylometer not on every
when I
&gt;&gt; This was in the Islamic period. So, I
mean, a lot of people, especially in the
West, want to
&gt;&gt; It goes all the way back. It goes back
4,500 years. The ancient Egyptians were
doing it.
They were using it. the I'm I'm thinking
that this is just my take on it that the
that the pharaohs were getting this
information and then they'd come out and
tell people, you know, um based on the
projection that, you know, say it's
going to be an ideal because it was too
high it was destruction and if it was
too low it was famine and they had the
you know that's what they called it and
they and they would make these
projections. So, I can just imagine the
Pharaoh coming out and saying, "You
people have been very good this year, so
I'm going to give you a wonderful Nile
flood." Or he's going to come out and
say, "You people have been trouble all
year and doing the wrong things and you
haven't worshiped enough. So, I'm going
to give you a famine." And you know, and
and who but a king, who but a god could
control the Nile.
&gt;&gt; Now, it's not going to be 100%
&gt;&gt; Yeah. that because%
&gt;&gt; normally though if the water level was
too high or too low that was a sign that
the gods were displeased with the
pharaoh.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But they would but he could also I
mean this is just again this is my take
on it. But I think they could use that
they they because they'd know they'd
have a very good idea before the peak
ever occurred that the Nile was going to
flood too high or too low in any given
year. I mean, it wasn't 100%, but it was
it was pretty accurate. And
&gt;&gt; um what else I was going to say? They um
&gt;&gt; was going to go someplace else with
that. I mean, it's just it's just
fascinating that that they were doing
this and and that to to when I went,
you know, everywhere you go in Egypt,
you need a driver. I mean, there's no
way you could drive there. I mean, it's
just crazy. Um, so we had a driver and
he's like taking us and we went to the
that same day we went to the mu the the
the Egyptian museum which was very very
cool. I really recommend it. Now there's
a new one that's finally opened. Um,
again I'm sure it's wonderful. But so on
our way back we stopped on Roa on the
island and we went to see the Nylometer
and there is nobody else there. There
isn't a parking lot. There's kind of
well there is kind of a a brick parking
lot but it's very small. Nobody else was
there. There was one guy you got to tip
him to go in and and you and you're in
there and I'm like, "Oh my god, I'm
here."
&gt;&gt; To me, that was that was more special
than to see the Sphinx. That was more
special than to see the pyramids. That's
my take on it, you know, and that I that
I have a picture of myself there.
[laughter] It's just like so cool.
&gt;&gt; No, that is a pretty neat instrument for
sure. Sure. I mean, that's uh I guess
did they find a point in the Nile that
would be determinative for the rest of
the river, like somewhere that's fairly
uh down south where you can get a good
sense of what you're going to have up
river or I mean,
&gt;&gt; was I understand it there were multiple
nyometers that there weren't just this
one and there wasn't just this one.
There were they were they were all over
the place and that some of them uh the
one you know were just steps on on on
the shore. And this one, the way it was
constructed is connected at depth to the
Nile. So that doesn't have waves in it.
So if it was a windy day, if there were
waves, you could get a very accurate
measurement. And um Oh, I know what I
was going to tell you. The other thing
about the Nyometer,
there's a couple of really cool facts
that come from it. One is is that we
know for certain that prior to the Aswan
Dam at times the Sphinx would have been
inundated by the Nile because it's
basically side gradient to the Nile the
the dynamometer that that's there now
and the the elevation the highest
elevation and I did my own research on
this and I wrote my own code to convert
the measurements and then compared those
with other people's measurements and I
basically agreed but I found some errors
in what others had done in the past. But
we know for a fact that at one point the
the highest level like 1879 something
like that at the nylometer was 21.4
meters above sea level. That means
without question that the Sphinx is an
island in the Nile surrounded by 1.4
meters of water.
&gt;&gt; There's no question of that. and that
and that prior to the Aswan Dam, the the
the the water would lap up and and
recharge the groundwater beneath. And
that's and that's part of why you're
getting the erosion from the wicking
water. That water is coming from the
Nile. But of course, that wasn't turned
on. And this in one of my papers that
wasn't turned on until the uh sphinx
enclosure, the quarry was created and
they intersected the capillary rise zone
and that was turned off whenever the
sphinx enclosure filled with sand which
was most of the time. It's only today,
it's only recently that the sphinx
enclosure has been cleared of sand that
wicking groundwater eroding the sphinx
has been turned back on.
And um so and the and and the water
level beneath the Sphinx is actually
risen. And there's a groundwater model
of this and they put in a dewatering
system. If you go online, you'll see
Mark Laner is there as they're drilling
and he's and he's got the cores. And I
asked him if I could study those cores.
He goes, "They're gone." The things in
Egypt, they just disappear. Those are
gone. He said, "You ever see, you know,
Raiders of the Lost Arc where you know
the at the end where it's this giant
warehouse?" He said, "It's like that.
That's where they're you're not going to
find those.
&gt;&gt; But you can tell based on his
description and you can see visually
that this is a very weathered limestone
that's beneath the Sphinx. Um, and they
he went out of his way to drill it. One
of the holes exactly where they're
saying the Hall of Records is, but now
they're saying, "Damn it, you missed it
by just a couple of meters, like a meter
or so. Damn it." Um, but you can just
see that it's just this weathered
limestone that it would act very much
like a soil more than it would a massive
rock. And yeah, so the the question is
why is the water table beneath the
Sphinx come up and why do they have to
put in a dewatering system and um
various things have been proposed.
There's a canal near there, but they
dismissed the canal that's close to the
Sphinx because it was there long before
the water levels came up. They were
looking at infrastructure. They were
saying it was sewers, but if it were
sewers, you'd have nitrates from the
from the sewers, and it's not. It's
clean water. There's no nitrates in it.
Then they're saying, well, it's the
municipal water supply system that's
leaking, and it would be at the extreme
high end of what's possible,
what would could come from a leaking
infrastructure, but probably not. But
again, they're saying Mark's like, well,
this is Egypt. Don't expect things are
done well. Um, but I I've come to the
conclusion that the reason the water has
come up is because the area is now
paved. So, the Sphinx is staring at a
KFC Pizza Hut. Do you know that?
&gt;&gt; I didn't know that exactly. I mean, I
knew Cairo is right across the river,
but I didn't know that. Uh, that was the
building that you would see. So, I guess
uh if you're if you get hungry at the
Sphinx, you're probably thinking KFC,
Taco Bell.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Well, I don't know about a
taco. I didn't see a Taco Bell, but the
the Pizza Hut is there. And there's
[clears throat] actually people that you
you can take pictures from inside
&gt;&gt; and um you can see Pizza Hut backwards
as the as you can see the Sphinx in the
distance. So all of this used to be
farmland. And when it was farmland, the
canal is actually the source of the
water. But when all of this was
farmland, the water would evaporate.
And by paving it and making its streets
and houses and t and and I was going to
say Taco Bells, KFC's and Pizza Huts.
Um, you know, there's a bookstore right
there, too. I mean, this that's trapped
the water underneath and it can no
longer evaporate. And so, the canal is
the source. I've come to this conclusion
and I've done modeling and and I and and
if you look so there's places where
people measure the evaporation
um from water and there these are called
pan evaporation rates and the pan
evaporation rate in Cairo is 1.5 meters
per year and based upon my modeling by
uh by paving well before they paved it
about one and a quarter meters of
groundwater would evap evaporate every
year and that's what's eroding the
Sphinx in terms of the the wicking
groundwater. It's 1.5 meters. That's a
lot. And um and so that's the process.
It was just that they they paved it and
that cut it off. And so it turns out
that I don't know if familiar with the
idea that or that the evidence that the
Mediterranean disappeared.
&gt;&gt; Uh yes, I have heard about that. So that
was like six million years ago. It was
pinched off at um Gibralta. And all of
the rivers that feed the uh the
Mediterranean can't keep up with the
evaporation. Again, it's 1.5 meters
every year. And so all the rivers like
the Nile
um cut huge canyons. So, the city of
Cairo is sitting on a Grand Canyon 25%
deeper and five times longer than the
Grand Canyon in Col in Colorado in in
Arizona.
Huh. And and it's there. I mean, there's
no question. And and so when they nobody
knew much about this, but so when they
were building the Asswan Dam, they
picked a location and they're like, you
know, you typically look for solid rock
on on either side, you know, like the
Glen Canyon Dam and the and the Hoover
Dam, that sort of thing. And then at the
bottom, you just assume you're going to
hit bottom because it's a river. Well,
and it can't cut deeper than the ocean.
And so, you know, it's pretty clear
where where that would be. And so they
anticipated it would be fine, but when
they actually went to build it, they
couldn't find the bottom. And so they
had to build this earthen dam. I mean,
so that if you look at the Aswan Dam, it
doesn't look like the Hoover Dam or the
Glen Canyon Dam. It's not that typical
arch. It's just it's spread out over a
very large area. And they had to drill
and put all this concrete foundations in
to stabilize the ground beneath. And it
was then that they started looking and
they were like, you know, the only way
this could happen is you either have to
take
Africa and move it three miles up or you
have to take away the ocean. And either
one sounds like it's a viable option.
And it turns out it was it was the
removal of the Mediterranean
and and so they cut this huge canyon
there. And that has relevance um to the
Sphinx and the and and because the
Sphinx is sitting at the very edge of
that and and Shock has mapped that
geophysically and you know talks about
how at lower elevations because the
Sphinx would have been if you were to
clear it out the Sphinx would be right
on the edge of a giant canyon very much
like the Grand Canyon because it's a
roughly 10 miles across somewhere in
that range and and like I say even
deeper. So the Sphinx would be sitting
right on the edge of that.
Right.
&gt;&gt; Huh. Yeah. That's fascinating.
&gt;&gt; So then those are the kind of things
like I'm saying, the things that I've
learned,
you know. Um I mean looking back maybe I
heard something about
the Mediterranean disappearing, but now
I can tell you more about that. And then
then the islands. So all of the
Mediterranean islands,
most of the animals, you know, were were
wiped out by the flood and it and it
took it and it took it like, you know,
was it in less than two or about two
years, the Mediterranean was refilled
and,
you know, so you can imagine that's just
would be insane to watch the water level
coming up as the Atlantic refills and
talk about a massive flood. And so some
of the animals then were trapped on the
islands. And exactly how these animals
got on the islands isn't exactly known,
but there were dwarf um mammoths.
It's kind of an oxymoron, but and then
there were so on. And then there were
giant flightless geese
that were taller than the mammoths.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; These islands and the and the and the
diversity of these of of life with giant
tortoises just like the goalpicos.
Um it was each almost not all but a lot
of the islands in the Mediterranean were
like that and that diversity was killed
off as humans slowly you know about
12,000 years ago or so made it to these
islands and just killed off everything.
But yeah, I mean so there's there's you
know and h how did they get there? And
there's there's a whole I could go off
on tangents of stories and how the how
they discovered that and how you know
people are scratching their heads and
now they're still like trying to figure
out did the elephants you know that were
there did they actually evolve from 5.3
million years ago when the Mediterranean
refilled? Did they swim there? Because
elephants do swim but you know the
distances seem to be too immense for
them but nonetheless they were there. I
mean, so there's there's some really
interesting questions.
Um, and that also falls into this whole
thing about how the megapana extinction
is tied in more with humans than it is
with the climate. And um, this is
another place where um, things aren't
tied to the younger driests. And a
classic place would be in Australia. So,
prior to
um luminescence dating with carbon 14
dating, you can only go back about
40,000 years or so. And it's because
there's a second source of the the
residue. I mean, the the daughter
product and I don't remember the details
on that, but you know, it's like about
40,000 years. This is about as far back
as you can go, but there's some really
interesting stuff that seemed like it
was going on about 60, you know, 50
60,000 years ago. And so now we know
that the megapana extinction in
Australia dates back to about 50,000
years ago. It has nothing to do with the
younger dus. And when humans got there,
one of the animals they encountered as
Megalania.
And uh Tim Flannry, an Australian
geologist, describes it as a respectably
sized um Allosaurus.
It was like 26 feet long. It was
venomous. It could run uphill faster
than you could run downhill.
He he describes it as an echo back to
the age of the dinosaurs. And without
question, it was the largest reptile
that has existed since the since the
dinosaurs.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; And I'm not sure you want to classify
them as reptiles, but it it it's it is
and and this was there. There is no
question that humans encountered
Megalania.
And I mean, it's look it up.
It's just insane. And and so yeah, I
mean, but it so the and what happened
then is is that the um the native so the
natives that you know, the aboriges when
they got there, they started burning the
land. And so prior to like 50 60,000
years ago, somewhere in that range, uh
it was Australia was far more lush and
green than it is. And it didn't have all
these fire tolerant plants. They were
there, but they weren't as prevalent as
they had as they are now. And they
changed the entire environment of the
entire continent and turned it into a
desert. Humans did that with fire. You
didn't hunt them to death. That'd be,
you know, and and you know, some of
these larger animals, it would be um
they reproduce slower. And I'm guessing,
you know, if humans encountered
megalania, if I came upon the nest or if
I saw it laying a nest, guess what I'm
going to do? I'm gonna destroy those
eggs. You know, they probably make a
good, you know, a good breakfast,
&gt;&gt; right? Lifetime supply of omelets.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, why why why would you know you
I know what I would do, so I'm assuming
they would do the same thing. And yeah,
so and there was just a recent program
on on on public television, I forgot
what it's called, and they were looking
at the Labraa tar pits, and they were
looking at the extinction there and when
it occurred, and it occurred over about
a 400-y year period, and again, there
was a transition in the LA basin from
more greenery and to, you know, and
plants to these ex fire tolerant plants.
And the the person interviewing said,
"Well, I wish I could remember the
name." He goes, "Well, you know,
couldn't it be lightning strikes?" And
the woman at the Lea Tarpet says 97% of
the fires in the LA basin are started by
humans. And so, no. So, we have and and
this is a tied in with the megapana
extinction in the LA basin, which is
roughly timed in with the with the
megapana extinction elsewhere. But also
at the same time, we're now analyzing
DNA in soil, and we can reconstruct
entire ecosystems
with the microorganisms to the to the
megapana from a thimble full of soil.
And it turns out that the that the the
like the woolly mammoths and stuff, the
megapana existed long after the the
younger dus long after, you know,
because we're dating it based on the
last time we find these fossils. We no
longer depended upon just finding those
fossils. And it's opened up a whole new
door. And of course, this isn't being
brought up by Hancock and these people
because it proves them wrong.
It shows that that and and you know so
they they're going to quickly admit that
you know they were on Wrangler Island.
So they were definitely without question
was it mammoths? I believe it's mammoths
who are around on Wrangler Island. Um
I'm just trying to remember mastadons or
mammoths. Um uh as the pyramids are
being built. In fact they they survived
until roughly 4,000 years ago. But now
the DNA evidence is saying not just on
Wrangler Island, but on on the mainland
there were mammoths until roughly
something like 4,000 years ago. I don't
remember. I remember reading this. I
don't remember the exact dates. And
again, we don't have we don't have all
that detail yet, but it they certainly
survived the younger dus.
There's again no tie in to that, which
is again what they're hanging their
whole story on. It's just not there.
Well,
&gt;&gt; I guess that also ties in with um you
know, you mentioned earlier
the advent of agriculture and sort of
how that happened at the end of the last
ice age. Um, a lot of that I mean one of
the prevailing theories I've heard to
link that all back is that you know
after the last ice age was starting to
end megapana were hyperabundant
and so part of the reason why
agriculture was delayed a little bit is
because it was just easy to find and
trap animals. Um, like if you just put
your village near a a river crossing or
a stream crossing, animals will go there
to drink and you just walk out of your
house and spear down an animal and now
you got a meal. And then you can gather
some vegetation pretty easily. And I
mean, at first it was easy and then as
population grows and you start over
hunting, then that's where you have to
generate more food. And so the idea that
a lot of people have had is that's where
we start to have agriculture, possibly
discovered as a mistake at first or an
accident and then done more deliberately
over time.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, so um do you know who
Michael Shurmer is? Skeptic magazine.
&gt;&gt; Uh I have heard of Michael Shurmer.
Yeah, I think I've seen a year or two
with him.
&gt;&gt; I'm not sure exactly why. maybe but
because of my research on the Sphinx, he
asked me to write an article on Gabbecy
and I said sure and now I'm like the
hell I'm I'm no I'm no archaeologist and
I said yes and I'm like so I had to give
myself a crash course in you know
advanced archaeology very much focused
on Quebec and understanding it and and
so I I came upon something which I I
haven't seen reported elsewhere there
and that was that when they were first
looking it was it was a re they were
doing reconnaissance and it was people
from the University of Chicago and the
University of Istanbul in like 1963 I
believe it was
and they had a botonist along Jack
Harland and his responsibility was to
determine whether or not the uh seeds
were of domesticated plants or not.
And um and so he and this was his second
trip to Turkey. On a previous trip to
Turkey, he had collected um some wild
variety of wheat and brought it back and
people were like scolding him like what
are you going to do with that? I mean it
it's not productive. Look at this. It's
it's it's useless. And um but he just
nonetheless he he kept the seeds. And it
turns out that there was a blight or
whatever you call it with the wheat
called rust. and his variety of wheat
was immune to that and so they crossbred
this variety that he brought back from
Turkey and created a variety of wheat
and and I don't know you know and it
stopped people from starving to death
from a lack of wheat because the crops
were being reduced by this by this uh by
this blight whatever and and so so he
you know had so this is his second trip
and he's there and while he's there. He
I don't know if he was bored because
they weren't bringing him stuff, but one
day he decides he looks out around
Gabbecy in that part of Turkey and he
sees all this wild grain. So he went out
and with his hands he collected wild
grain and he just, you know, took it in
his in his like a fist and pulled and
then put what he collected into a sack.
and he said, "I've got the soft hands of
a professor, so I can't do this very
well. If if this were something I'd be
doing more often, I' i'd have calloused
hands and I could work much faster and
be far more efficient." And he came back
that evening and he told the
archaeologists that are all, you know,
doing reconnaissance
and and he said what he did and they
said, "Well, that's interesting." So,
they actually gave him some sickle
blades that were actual blades that they
found and he put it on I don't it wasn't
like a stick. It was it was something
artificial, but he used the actual
blades and he went out for an hour the
next day and and again collected wheat
and put it into a sack and he brought it
back to the University of Chicago and he
concluded that a family of four working
for three weeks could collect more wild
grain than they could possibly eat in a
year.
And now we have explained Gabbec,
&gt;&gt; right? they they didn't have to farm.
They're they're affluent foragers. And
there's a few places where you see that.
Another place was the Native Americans
with the salmon runs, you know, on the
Columbia River and elsewhere. And so
it's now done. And so it was this land
of resource. Then you add to that,
you're going to have these herds coming
through seasonally
to uh eat the wild grain.
And I'm like, "Okay, Don." [laughter]
And I've not seen anybody else describe
this. You know, you could if you look it
up, you'll if you go to my web page, you
you'll find I've got a link to uh to
that article. And and Yens Not who
actually worked at Gabbeckley was a
really big help on writing that article.
Um, but what's interesting is I was I
think you kind of get there from reading
people like Hancock and and you want to
kind of add your own two cents to these
wild conspiracy theories
and um turns out Yens didn't like
anything I was saying. He he deleted all
of that and I was I was okay with it.
But I I it actually I I realized at that
point that rather than allowing more
speculation, people like Hancock because
the way that they're doing it, they're
actually limiting people. They're
limiting people from suggesting
alternative ideas because they don't
want to sound like Hancock.
So, you know, I see that. I mean,
there's some positives in what he's
doing. like I was saying earlier, but at
the same time because there were some
things that I was like, I don't even
remember what they were and I was like
totally okay with it because I was like,
"Oh, it's kind of silly." But I mean, I
I did have, you know, some ideas.
Um I mean, so one of my ideas would be
like domestication of animals. If you're
at Quebec, this is me thinking out loud.
If you're at Quebec Lee and you got
these herd animals coming through and
you're going to have, you know, your big
heyday as the as the herds are coming
through, I would personally take some of
the younger
herd animals if I could and capture them
and keep them in a corral. I wouldn't
feed them because they didn't have
refrigerators. So, if you want meat in
the middle of winter, where are you
going to get it? You need a live animal,
&gt;&gt; right? And so I would think that this is
just again me thinking out loud. So then
which animal is going to go first? Well,
the one that's breaking out the one
that's not so docile. You're you're
going to take that animal and say, "No,
they're they're gone. That that that one
is just and so you're going to take and
you're going to have the most
docile and you're going to domesticate
them." that then let's say you have a
really good winter and you didn't have
to to kill it or perhaps one of the kids
becomes emotionally attached to the to
the animal and you can't kill Bambi for
supper, you know, maybe. And the dad's
like, "Yeah, maybe. Okay, I won't." But,
you know, I can see how something like
that could lead to domestication
without them even realizing
that they're domesticating.
&gt;&gt; Right. And I'm sure that's probably
about how it happened. That and also the
process of really doing agriculture in
the sense we think of it. Um I'm sure
that it was not planned out in any way
and it just kind of started to happen
and then people caught on as they were
going along. I mean also if you look at
when a lot of species were domesticated
uh they all kind of happened
simultaneously to some extent and cats
seem to have come along precisely
because people wanted to protect their
grain stores.
I mean that's exactly it and and and I'm
like again what's being presented by
Hancock and these people is is that it
was a advanced civilization that brought
you know farming to the people of
Gabbec. So it was intentional and you
know we don't and it doesn't answer the
question because okay so okay there was
let's go through there was this lost
civilization but then when did they
start farming and how did that happen?
you've just pushed it back and you
haven't
&gt;&gt; raised that. And I I still remember one
time I saw Elon Musk was on Joe Rogan
one time and Rogan brings up, you know,
the the possibility of a lost
civilization.
And I I really like Elon's response. He
goes, "But it doesn't change anything.
It doesn't change much. You know, the
Earth is 4 and a half billion years old,
and you know, humans been around 300,000
years. And you want to push civilization
back 20,000 years. It's insignificant.
It really isn't changing anything in the
grand scheme of things.
&gt;&gt; That's true.
&gt;&gt; You see Rogan and Rogan's like, "Yeah,
but but and Musk is like dismissing the
whole thing."
&gt;&gt; Well, also the the part that's always
weirded me out about the, you know,
pseudo archaeology crowd is they say
that there's a conspiracy to cover up
the truth because the truth is
dangerous. I I don't see what is
threatened by if there was a revelation
that civilization dates back to whatever
date. I really don't see how that
threatens anyone in power.
&gt;&gt; I think even more importantly what what
what they talk about is how we're all as
scientists, we don't want to rock the
boat. And I'm sorry, as a scientist,
everything I'm trying to do is to rock
the boat. Every scientist is trying to
prove Einstein wrong. every every
scientist is trying to prove Darwin
wrong. You know, the people that do
these things, science is all about
proving other people wrong and and and
and keep pushing it. So, the idea that
scientists do not, you know, don't want
to rock the boat. I mean, if you come up
with crazy ideas, I'm going to go,
"Yeah, that's not possible." But if you
come up with something that's plausible,
I mean, that's why Einstein is famous.
That's why Darwin is famous is because
they did rock the boat,
&gt;&gt; right? They did demolish previous
paradigms.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So I mean the argument doesn't
even make any sense when you look at the
history of science and how scientists
respond.
&gt;&gt; I mean I I am somewhat pleased that I am
able to say you know I've had people
like are you really saying that everyone
else is wrong? And I'm saying yes. I'm
saying that every archaeologist every
geologist who has ever studied the
Sphinx is wrong about the erosion. That
includes mainstream archaeologists and
alternative archaeologists. I am saying
that I'm proud to say that
&gt;&gt; I am rocking the boat.
&gt;&gt; Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I'm doing [laughter]
&gt;&gt; that's a
Yeah, that's a great point. Um,
&gt;&gt; also uh I guess this kind of dubtales
back to uh you mentioned before the show
that you you reside in Wisconsin and
also you know obviously you do geology.
So, I was wondering if you're familiar
with the Kettle Marine Park. And if so,
&gt;&gt; yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um, it kind of reminds me of what you
were talking about with the Sphinx and
how the head is more durable than the
body. Uh, because I visited this park
this past summer and I and you know saw
these unique formations which you kind
of have these rounded I'm trying to pull
up a picture right now, but these
rounded hubs.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, is this is this the site with the
round There's a friend of mine, a
geologist. Where are you located in
Ohio? Are you in Columbus?
&gt;&gt; I'm in the Columbus area. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; I've been down there many times. So, I
do training with a geologist down that
way. And he's retired now, semi-retired.
And he's been working on that site. And
what he described is this circular
thing. I forgot what it's called, but
it's a circular thing and it's kind of
dug into the ground.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. Those um I think there are
multiple I think they call them bells or
kettle bells. I forget exactly what they
call these formations, but
&gt;&gt; yeah. So, we have um I mean, probably
where my condo is right now is almost
certainly an effigy mound because I'm up
on a hill right next to a lake and um I
mean, this would have been the idea. And
and and there's a spot just a few miles
from me. The the whole area is just
nothing but effigy mountains. And I mean
it's interesting those that was an
extension basically and again I'm not an
archaeologist from from the south and
that was during a warm period but they
so but exactly at the same time as
people were building the you know
constructing these effigy mounds here in
Wisconsin and elsewhere they were
building cathedrals in Europe. So, uh,
you know, as impressive as these things
are, and they are,
&gt;&gt; um, you got to be looking, you know, to
pres present them as, as Hancock is
doing, you know, with with his snake
one. I forgot what it's called and say
it's a line to the, you know, it's like
setting sun and whatever. I'm like, come
on.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's in uh southern Ohio, I
think, right along the border of
Kentucky. Um, I know what you're talking
about, but yeah, that was uh yeah, he
tried to claim that that was dug out
during the very early part of the period
right after the ice age or at during the
ice age.
&gt;&gt; But of course, the problem with that is
that the, you know, ice sheet was about
where I'm at. And so the [laughter] the
area would be way too perafrosted to dig
something like that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I mean, so the and the thing
is is that they are dated and we know
when they were constructed. I mean,
there's artifacts that are buried in
them. I'm not that familiar. There's
there's a professor who retired here,
Bob. I can't think of his last name
right now. Um, yeah. I mean, they're
they're without question, they're
fascinating. What's really interesting
is, do you ever hear of an inaglio?
&gt;&gt; Inaglio.
&gt;&gt; Inaglio. Um, it sounds very familiar,
but I'm not 100% sure.
&gt;&gt; That's the opposite of an effigy mound.
It's it's a it's dug it's a shape of an
animal dug into the ground.
&gt;&gt; Ah
&gt;&gt; and there's only one remaining inaglio
in the world.
&gt;&gt; There were only 10 ever discovered all
in Wisconsin and there's only one and
it's near Fort Atinson and and I've been
there. I I you know and it and it's a
panther
&gt;&gt; and it's right next to a river
&gt;&gt; and when it you when you get a heavy
rain it fills and you get the outline of
a panther and I mean it's in this
residential neighborhood the the long
tail goes under the driveway of the
house.
&gt;&gt; It's like this empty lot where you you'd
expect a house and there's no house.
&gt;&gt; There is instead this inaglio and
&gt;&gt; that's amazing. It's really It is. And
then so there were like only 10 in the
world. There were four of them on my
10-N street that I grew up on. You look
I was like, you're kidding me. But that
had long since been quarried and the
gravel was used to make concrete to
build Milwaukee. And then they
backfilled it with trash.
But I mean it was right there. It was
right at the intersection of my I
because I I I I was like, you know, I
talked to somebody and he showed me this
and I so I went online and I found the
handdrawn map and I superimposed it. I
could tell where that was based on where
the Milwaukee River is. And I'm like,
yeah. I mean, there's no question. And
that there was a um
that there was a um Thunderbird right
where our house was.
And um here's the thing. There was a a
an artist from Japan who came here in
1968, Sachi Yamashita
and um he came to cover the 1968
Democratic Convention and he was also a
foodie and he was very much into beer
and um when he went to Chicago he wanted
to understand the United States. He said
he had to learn where their beer came
from. And they told him that it was
Milwaukee. And somehow he translated
Milwaukee into the Milky Way. So he
thought he's driving up to the coolest
city on the planet that's called Milky
Way that makes beer. [laughter]
But anyway, so he started making all of
the this artwork and he was enamored by
very much inspired and enamored by the
I'm not sure that's the right word, the
effigy mounds. And so one time he was uh
painting on the parking structure of the
Mark Plaza in downtown Milwaukee, a
giant this hotel, a giant Thunderbird.
And by chance, I helped him. I was
getting paid $100 a day to help paint a
Thunderbird on the side, you know, where
we got this big, you know, cherry
picker, this snorkel device to get us
up. And we're, you know, I was basically
operating it as other people were
painting. They were more artists than I
am. Not that it really required that,
but they nonetheless they were better
than me. And um as we So I did that for
a week and then as we got to the far end
of the building, he didn't he he he
planned out the snorkel device, but we
had dropped a full story because it was
on a hill and we could no longer reach
and to paint the head. And we tried
painting from on top. It was like doing
a somersault five stories up off a side
of a building with a long extension on a
roller and trying to paint some details.
I'm like while somebody's holding on to
your legs and you're like, "Oh my god."
And then we tried reaching up from the
snorkel device and you know we we
couldn't get up high enough and we
didn't know what to do and I finally
took the artwork from him. I still
remember doing this because he couldn't
do it as the artist. And I took his
giant bird and I I drew a head that I
thought we could paint.
And so here I am. I made a giant
Thunderbird with a disproportionately
small head that's roughly the size of
the sphinx. So I'm like, I did that.
I did exactly,
you know, helped on something that's
this massive piece of art that ends up
with a small head. And every time I
drove by, I I'd see it from the highway
and I'd laugh like it kind of looked
more like a parakeet now than it did a
Thunderbird [laughter] because the way
and even that head almost turned out to
be impossible. And so Mark Laner, I
don't know if you know this, so Mark
Laner is proposing that they didn't find
what's called the major fissure until
they were excavating and carving the the
sphinx. And that's why they elongated
it. And that's why the head is
disproportionately small. And maybe
there was some worker, not the artist
himself, who's like, "Here's what we
could do." [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I mean, it's possible, you
know, that that could have happened. I
mean, maybe the uh chief architect was
off that day and you the apprentice made
the call.
&gt;&gt; So, yeah. I mean, because I did that.
It's just, you know, I'm like, "Wow,
it's it's gone. It's long gone." And I
don't have any pictures of it. And um I
should contact the hotel. I bet that
they do. It's not been on my to-do list.
And I could, you know, tell them that I
was one of the people that helped paint
that. and Sachio, he was listed as one
of the one year he was I think it was
that year he was listed as one of the 50
most influential people of the year in
People magazine and I was like I know
this guy.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; I thought you was a really good chef.
&gt;&gt; Anyways, I think I should be getting
going here. Is there anything that you
want to talk about that we haven't?
&gt;&gt; Um I think we covered quite a few
things. Um that's really interesting. I
guess the only other thing I would point
out with the Enaglio that you pointed
out in Wisconsin is this reminds me a
little bit of the Nazca lines,
you know, the uh famous
um I guess it would be Inca or at least
Peruvian um
things where you can't really see them
from the ground, but if you look from
the sky, you can see the outlines of
animals.
Um
&gt;&gt; I know I never I've never made that
analogy. I I'm 100% with you. I'm
thinking it's it's basically the same
thing. And again, it can only be viewed
from above, whatever that implies. I'm
thinking they're doing it for their
deities.
&gt;&gt; Um but yeah, that is I' I've not I've
never heard that. I really think that
makes sense. It's sort of like the um
the ancient rock art in Africa where
they're speculating that it looks very
much like the cave art in France,
&gt;&gt; right? And you know, that's not my call,
that's their call. Um, but yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's intriguing. I mean,
&gt;&gt; you definitely see that people around
the world, one thing they enjoy is
drawing animals.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And I mean, so why would you do
that? I mean, are you trying to um
anticipate your hunt? Are you revering
these animals? Are you I mean, what's
the reason?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's hard to say. I have no idea.
Um, but it is a fascinating thing. And I
mean, I guess a whole lot of what was in
North America once in terms of these
kind of monuments, I mean, a lot of it's
been destroyed. I mean, I know here in
Ohio, they had all kinds of mounds that
were made artificially and a lot of the
early white settlers dismantled those
for raw building materials. I mean, the
Ohio State House is built out of a lot
of the mounds that were once in the
Columbus area, and a number of towns are
that way. And actually they would locate
uh these towns ba a lot of times early
on for settlement based on mounds. It
was only after they had dismantled most
of them that they figured out wait these
aren't naturally occurring
and
&gt;&gt; yeah I mean they they didn't care at
all. They just they just plowed it over
for farmland
in cities and Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And I mean to imagine
what there was.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's it's it's sad. I mean, but I
mean, it's gone. I mean, yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's
&gt;&gt; It's very unfortunate because
I I guess also with a lot of the cities
we know were here up until the Middle
Ages in North America. I mean, like
Cahokia.
Um I imagine it could have been
&gt;&gt; We've got one right here, Aelon. And
it's um it's definitely a city. And it's
on the Rock River. It's between
Milwaukee and Madison, a little closer
to Madison.
And um yeah, they they've reconstructed
part of it. you know, it's got the I
don't know if you want to call it a
pyramid, but there's a big mound and
yeah, and it's surrounded by these, you
know, poles and um yeah, I mean, it was
it was protective and from what I don't
know, but and they they cleared and they
were they had agriculture and they were
floating trees from way up river.
&gt;&gt; Oh, wow.
&gt;&gt; They had already clearcut the area and
so they're floating trees down the
river. And when I went there one time, I
could see what looked like stepping
stones. The river was very low. And um I
was like, there's got to be something on
the other side here. These stepping
stones go somewhere. It's not much of a
river. I mean, it's decent river, but
it's not massive. And um there were some
kids there. There's a museum right
there. They're like these homeschooled
kids. This is like 20 years ago. and
they said, "Yeah, that there's all these
artifacts on the other side of the river
and it's all overgrown. I mean, it's all
woods now." But I was like, "Man, there
and then there's um even a bigger hill
which is farmland which is further to
the west."
&gt;&gt; And I look at that and I've never talked
to anybody as familiar with it, but it
would seem to me that that would have
been part of this whole thing that it
it's it's right there. Um, it would have
been, as far as I know, outside the the
bounds of what was enclosed, but it's
it's very similar to the smaller one
that that they reconstructed. But I'm
thinking, yeah, that was there. And, you
know, it's farmland. And every year they
they plow it and so it becomes a little
less pronounced than it was the year
before.
But there's there's every time I every
time I stop and look at it, I'm like,
that's got to be that's got to be part
of this. And it's quite massive. if
that's the case. But again, I don't
know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's interesting. I didn't know
about Estella.
&gt;&gt; Well, um,
&gt;&gt; yeah. So, Ken Ken Feeder, if you know,
or Federer, I don't know if you're
familiar with him. He wrote a book
called The 50 Archaeological Mustsea
Sites in America, something on that
order is the title. And he puts Aston in
it.
&gt;&gt; Huh. Okay.
&gt;&gt; And I was like, wow,
that's cool. Right here. Yeah, that's
definitely something that I'll have to
check out sometime. I still need to go
see the Serpent Mound. Uh I haven't
gotten down there yet, but um but yeah,
no, thank you, Bob, for showing up today
and sharing all this with us. Um I
certainly think that your theory about
the Sphinx has a lot of merit, and I
look forward to seeing where all that
goes in terms of uh how archaeologists
and geologists will respond. and we'll
see if uh
&gt;&gt; you know maybe if you become
sufficiently famous Randall Carlson
we'll have to debate you just to try to
retain relevance.
[clears throat]
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Or just just just let me get out
there and speak. Um I am working on a
paper so I'm going to publish that as a
paper at some point and um so that's
coming. I've got a few other things I'm
working on my software right now but
within a couple of months it's basically
done. I just I just got to put the final
touches on it. So instead of just having
this discussion, we'd have a more
detailed paper and and it it's quite
comprehensive. I'm not just focused in
on the O cyershaft and yeah, but also I
want to say yeah, thank you. Thanks for
having me on. And and anybody who's
listening, you know, there if you go to
the Joe Rogan podcast, the web page that
he has, there's a form that you can fill
out and suggest a guest. If you find
this interesting and if you want to, you
know, let other people learn about it.
If you could get on that and just, you
know, say, "Yeah, why don't you have Bob
on as as a guest? We could all learn
something from that. I could learn where
I'm wrong if I'm wrong, and they could
learn where they might be wrong, and we
we could also maybe agree, you know, who
knows?" And so, yeah, if anybody's out
there, you know, put my name in. I'm I'm
willing to appear there anytime. I'm not
afraid of appearing on that program and
and and explaining what what what what's
going on with in terms of the Sphinx and
other things. So again, thanks for
having me.
&gt;&gt; All right. Thank you. And um with that,
I suppose we'll call it a day. So thank
you everyone who showed up to hear this
talk and next week I'm sure we'll also
be back with another episode. Um, but
yes, thank you, Bob, and everybody have
a good evening. For the first time,
we're ending in an afternoon, so that's
kind of exciting. So, all right, I'll
keep I'll quit rambling now. So, goodbye
everybody.
All