You're a go for landing. Over. Roger.
Understand. Go for landing. 3000 ft.
July 20th, 1969.
Astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz
Aldrin became the first men to land on
the moon.
&gt;&gt; That's one small step for man,
one giant leap for mankind.
Just like aliens visiting from another
world.
It had been the stuff of science
fiction.
Now everything that could be imagined
seemed possible.
If mankind could travel the skies and go
to [music] other planets,
why couldn't be from other planets visit
the Earth?
Amidst a wave of modern UFO sightings, a
new theory [music] emerged
that aliens visited Earth in antiquity
and were regarded as [music] gods.
But if that were true, wouldn't there be
proof?
Perhaps there was.
All we needed to do was open our eyes
and our imaginations.
The proof perhaps was all around us.
In May of 2008, a startling proclamation
was issued by the Vatican. For the first
time in its 2,000-year history, the
Catholic Church acknowledged the
possibility [music] that intelligent
life could exist on other planets and
that a belief [music] in
extraterrestrials did not contradict a
belief in God.
Which means, of course, that we are now
entering an age
in which the universe is beginning to be
conceived in different ways from what it
was before. And if it is a reality for
us, why could it not have been a reality
for other beings in the universe who
could have visited our earth and perhaps
guided culture in ancient times?
But just what sparked this sudden
turnaround in [music] religious thought?
Could the church have been influenced by
recent scientific discoveries? You can
make the argument that we are in fact
just [music] replacing angels of uh
2,000 years ago with high-tech angels
now and that we have this inner need to
feel we're not alone in the universe
that we're scientific people and we
would be embarrassed to call them angels
cuz we've stopped believing in that kind
of superstitious [music] stuff but we
still believe in in aliens from other
planets.
In 2002, the Mars [music] Odyssey
spacecraft detected enormous reservoirs
of ice beneath the Martian surface. The
presence [music] of ice and the
possibility of water suggested that life
could be sustained or even generated on
another [music] planet.
After decades of orbiting space shuttles
and robotic rovers, the idea of sending
man back into space to Mars and beyond
ignited the imagination and brought back
the notion that mankind and alien
[music] beings had crossed paths before.
[music]
In 1968,
just one year before Neil Armstrong's
epic space flight, a book was published
that forever changed the way many in the
scientific, religious, [music]
and creative communities would view
their home planet.
Written by Swiss author Eric [music]
Vonanakin, Chariots of the Gods
attempted to prove that alien explorers
had visited the Earth thousands of years
ago.
When I was a young man, I was educated
as a strict Catholic in a boarding
school. And there we had to make
translations of part of the Bible, Greek
to Latin, Latin to German. For example,
in the first book of Moses, before the
Lord descends on the holy mountain.
Moses was ordered to construct a gate
around the mountain, otherwise the
Israelites would be damaged. I was
shocked. I said, "This is impossible. My
God, he would never use first a gate to
protect himself or to protect the
Israelites. What are they talking about?
And now the work started. I started to
read thousands of pages of the beginning
of religions of every mythology. It's
always the same story. Of course, with
different names, with [music] different
heroes. Somebody descends from the sky
to the humans. Our forefathers could not
understand it. They believed that these
are some gods. I was shocked. I asked
the question were primitive human
influenced by extraterrestrials not gods
and if it all was like I suggested where
is the proof? So you start trying to
find at least indications. That's what I
have done now for at least 45 years. You
have pictorial evidence. You have
artifacts in archaeology and you have
what's come out of the old literature,
hundreds of indications which you cannot
deny anymore.
&gt;&gt; What it means is that we need new
explanations for human origins that
perhaps we're not alone in the universe
and that humanlike beings came to this
planet from some other planet elsewhere
in the cosmos. I think that's a very
good idea myself
&gt;&gt; and it really excited people. It was a
new way of looking at the past, looking
at ancient civilizations, and it put
this very modern space age spin to the
whole thing.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Chariots of the Gods caused a sensation
fueled in [music] no small part by the
popular response to books like Frank
Herbert's Dune, television [music] shows
like Star Trek and feature films like
2001 a space odyssey. [music]
The time was ripe because everybody was
talking of possible space travel of
possibility of extraterrestrials. So it
was all wonderful coming together but it
was not planned. I was accused that I
have chosen the timing. [music] So it
was all a calculation. It was not a
calculation. It was not a timing because
I was writing on this story [music]
since I was a student.
Since the date of its first publication,
Fondanakin's [music] book has seen more
than 40 printings and can be read in
more than 30 languages.
But Chariots of the Gods was a
bestseller that might never have been
published.
I sent this manuscript to 20 German
publishers. No one was interested. The
manuscript 20 times came back. It's not
professional. We are not [music]
interested. And so on.
After a Swiss newspaper printed excerpts
of it on a weekly basis, more than
10,000 copies of the book [music] were
sold before ever hitting the market. So
it was a running bestseller starting in
Switzerland first then going over to
Germany and then the rest of the world.
They had to print and print and print
and print. Absolutely incredible.
In 1970, a [music] featurelength
documentary was released to theaters,
followed by dozens of best-selling books
and growing legions of fans and
supporters.
&gt;&gt; Chariots of the Gods was tremendously
influential. It somehow spoke to people
who want to believe.
&gt;&gt; When I was a boy, Cherry to the Gods was
one of the books I first read. I mean, I
ripped it apart. I digested. I couldn't
get enough of it.
&gt;&gt; I just fell in love with that book cuz
it really opened up all kinds of new
questions. And Van Donakan was able to
point out many anomalies in history that
the mainstream archaeologists can't
answer very well. He had what was a
revolutionary new idea, that of gods
from outer space, coming [music] to the
planet, helping create civilization.
When I first read Chariots of the Gods,
I couldn't put that book down [music]
because it answered a whole bunch of
questions that I had and it was a great
combination of archaeology [music] and
adventure. And it's just a wonderful way
to see the world and pursue these
ancient mysteries.
&gt;&gt; And it truly was, I think, the catalyst
for what people like I do today. And
that is to talk about the mysteries and
the unusual and the paranormal. He paved
the way for a lot of us to talk about
these strange stories. And that
continues to grow and it's going to get
bigger and bigger and bigger. People
want answers to questions that they
[music] can't answer themselves.
&gt;&gt; But in spite of the book's enormous
popularity, or perhaps because of it,
Von Danakin's theories were scorned by
scientists and jered at by theologians.
&gt;&gt; Of course, it created a storm of
controversy. I was completely attacked,
especially by the scientific newspapers.
They said, "Come on, he's just telling
story. He's a liar or he's a fraud or
whatever."
&gt;&gt; There is not a single piece of evidence
that Vonanakin puts forward that cannot
be attributed to human ingenuity,
technology, and development.
&gt;&gt; Don't try to reduce the scriptures to a
science book or don't try to reduce the
scriptures to an explanation of our
modern world today.
&gt;&gt; I don't expect that the scientific
community now embraces and kisses me and
say, "Oh, wonderful. Great. You did. We
have to live with critics. This is
normal. Chariots of the God was full of
speculation. I had 238
question marks. Nobody read the question
mark. They always said Mr. Foden is
saying, and I did not say, I asked the
question. Would that be a possibility?
That in Chariots of the Gods, I made
clear differences between speculations
and facts.
But as controversial as many of Von
Danakin's theories are, believers
[music] point to tangible evidence. How,
for example, could a centuries old map
chart a landmass that has only recently
been discovered? It
&gt;&gt; would tend to indicate that the map was
made at a time when Antarctica was ice
free, which would be many millions of
years ago. And how could a primitive
civilization know how to harness
electricity or even build a computer?
&gt;&gt; This was tantamount to finding a jet
airplane in the tomb of King Tut.
&gt;&gt; And just who were these mysterious
designs only visible from high altitudes
intended for?
&gt;&gt; Designs are made for somebody who flies.
There's no way out this.
Could Von Danakin's theory that ancient
gods were really alien visitors contain
any serious scientific merit? The answer
involves a search around the world and
even [music]
right before our eyes.
If alien beings from other planets had
visited the Earth thousands [music] of
years ago, how would our ancient
ancestors have tried to communicate with
them?
And wouldn't there be some physical
evidence of the time they spent here?
One answer may lie in the Nazca [music]
desert of Peru. There a top an arid
plateau that stretches for nearly 50 m.
Countless geometric patterns and figures
decorate the landscape.
You fly over this desert and you see
some lines. [music] The lines look like
air strips. They start abruptly. They
end abruptly.
The longest of it is 23 kilometer right
away. Not one curve. Just incredible.
And ending in one of these so-called air
strips
in the mixture of large lines and small
lines. You see gigantic figures in the
ground. figures of fishes,
monkeys,
spiders,
apes, but of such overdimensional size
that you can see them only from the air.
They built them, the people built them,
or somebody built them hundreds and
hundreds of years ago, perhaps maybe
even thousands of years ago. They don't
erode because the conditions on top of
that plane in Peru are such that there
is no wind and it just doesn't weather
away. But I mean, they've got spiders
and monkeys and just different pictures
that could be signs of hello up there.
Here we are. It's something
when I was young, when I was the first
time in Natka, I realized that in the
ground you find some lines with a white
stuff. To me, it looked like salt. I
crashed it out with my nails. I took it
into my mouse. It doesn't smell like
salt. It smelled like nothing. I went to
the hotel. I steered it in hot and cold
water, but nothing changed. So I asked
the Dresston University, please take
some samples of this. What is this? They
analyzed it in the big microscope and
out comes a crystalline glass.
We don't understand this. So I know for
sure something is wrong in Natka. But I
still don't have the answer. Why?
Because the next step would be digging
and we are not permitted. Natska is like
a holy place. Nobody may change or do
anything.
Various disputed explanations suggest
that the lines could have been [music]
used for irrigation ditches, giant
astronomical calendars, or pathways
perhaps used for religious worship.
Looking at Nazca from the air, it looks
like an airport. And it really
[clears throat] does because you have
all these bands, wide bands that look
like air strips that are laid on top of
each other, but you also have these
gigantic long straight lines that go for
miles and miles over valleys, over
mountains.
So once again, you you've got this idea
of like, okay, people are creating this,
but what is the reason? Is it to show
these gods and in aerial vehicles? Uh
oh, land here kind of a thing because we
just don't have a good idea of of why
people would do this. And it really does
seem that they're trying to signal
people who are in the air in space or
flying around our planet.
During World War II, American troops
[music] created air bases on remote
Pacific islands.
To natives who had never witnessed
advanced [music] technology, the sight
of giant metal birds touching down
looked to them as if the gods themselves
had turned the earth into a planetary
pit stop.
They would see these big planes land and
and it was all technology that that just
was out of the sky. They didn't know how
these things worked, but they could see
them land. And what they liked about it
was they were getting free stuff. They
were getting cargo.
Suddenly when the war was over, all
these airirst strips were abandoned and
everyone left. And the islanders
scratched their heads and they all said
to themselves, "Wow, wasn't it great
when those all these planes came out of
the sky and gave us free cans of corn
beef and stuff? We really like that
cargo."
entire religions sprung up from this
where priests actually said yes you know
uh that was our dead ancestors sending
us cargo. So what they did then was they
began going to the old airirst strips
and they would build mock wooden
airplanes to try and get those planes to
come back from the sky and deliver the
cans of corn beef to them again. And so
you can see how that an analogy with
modern cargo cults plays exactly into
the ancient astronaut scenario where
something like this could have easily
happened in the past and entire
religions built around ancient
astronauts.
But gigantic geoglyphs aren't the only
mystery surrounding [music] Nazca.
I was flying over Atka for days, hanging
out the aircraft with a camera and
shooting and shooting and shooting. I
have more or less about 4,000 pictures
about Natka. This is really fascinating.
You see, this is one of the pictures
which prove that this mountain [music]
was made flat artificially because you
compare with the mountain around there.
There the mountain's cap runs up from
both sides. Here it was flat. This is
absolutely incredible. This is one of
the most craziest pictures I made about
Nazka.
&gt;&gt; The crazy thing is the rubble, the
remains of that summit or that
mountaintop gone. It's nowhere. It's not
in the valley down below. It's nowhere
in the region. What happened to it?
Because all the mountains [music] around
it have their summits. It's there. And
then you have other mountains that are
as flat as a table with bands on top
[music] that look like runways.
&gt;&gt; Another question, why would [music]
visiting ETSs be drawn to the bone dry
deserts of Peru?
Let's just say hypothetically
that a spaceship arrives here on planet
Earth and you wanted to quickly find out
what this planet consists of, NASCA
would be the perfect place to go and
visit for some sampling and for some
experimentation
because Nazca [music] still today is one
of the most abundant areas in the world
regarding raw materials. There you find
everything. You find gold, you find uh
uh uranium, what have you. It's it's
basically the cliffnotes of planet
Earth. You go to Nazca and you
immediately know everything about what
our [music] planet consists of because
all the raw materials converge there at
high volumes.
Why do [music] we have to believe that
these simply could not be an expression
of an artistic impulse? you know, is it
really that outlandish to believe that,
you know, uh that that that these
[music] natives in in Peru might have
wanted to create some large scale work
of art and and to say that that such a
large-scale work of art could not have
been created merely for the possibility
of having created it rather than the
Nazca lines are so inhumanly vast that
they could only be admired by people who
are capable of flight. Well, you know,
you [music] can say the same thing about
the Great Wall of China. And yet the
Great Wall of China has a purpose that
is that is political, that is marshal.
Somebody might have walked the Nazca
lines [music] as a spiritual labyrinth
in the shape of a spiritual toemic
object and were in their own way
supposed to get a kind of epiphany from
that.
The fact that we don't understand the
purpose of a thing opens it to
tremendous speculation.
Now, sure, could it have been people of
that time simply [music] saying, "Let's
make something for the gods." But who
are the gods to these people? Did they
come down and did they live with them
for a while? And then did they make
these pictures as uh some kind of
celebration to them? Who knows?
[music]
Natka and the Natska figures make no
sign seen from the earth. You have to
fly over it. The signs are made for
somebody who flies. There's no way out
of this. I hope archaeology sooner or
later will come to a similar conclusion.
But if visitors from other planets were
thought to be gods, wouldn't there be
written accounts of them? Perhaps the
answer can be found right in front of us
in one of the most shocking places of
all.
[music]
Ironically, Eric von Danakin's firm
belief that Earth has been visited in
the past by [music] beings from other
planets is entirely consistent with his
belief in God and the Bible.
It is merely a question of
interpretation.
[music]
&gt;&gt; One has to understand I was a very very
deep believer in God. By the way, I'm
still a believer in God. I never lost my
God. But uh for a young man, my God had
to be almighty. My God would never need
a vehicle in which to move around, a
vehicle uh to go from point A to point
B.
In what Christians refer to as the
[music] Old Testament, there are in fact
several accounts of God and his angels
visiting the earth.
Sometimes these visitations are
accompanied by tremendous noise and
clouds of billowing smoke.
In the book of Ezekiel, for example, the
prophet claims that he witnessed a
visitation by heavenly beings coming
down from the skies aboard a fantastic
flying machine.
As far as Vonanakin is concerned, it's a
[music] highly detailed description of
an alien sighting.
This is incredible. Ezekiel not only
describes what he see, he also describes
what he hears.
He describes the whole thing as being
the splenders of God.
&gt;&gt; The prophet also details several
four-faced winged creatures who appeared
in the likeness of men and who traveled
upon a gleaming wheeled device. Inside
the splenders of God, there was
something like a throne. And on this
[music] throne was a being sitting
looking like a human in glittering
closes. And beneath it, he saw some uh
vehicles. He saw some wings. He
describes the noise of the wings. He
describes the noise of the wings with
the thundering of a waterfall.
Ezekiel saw his wheel within a wheel. Uh
this sounds more high-tech than
supernatural. And [music]
we can't suppose that um people 3,000
years ago would understand the
difference between the supernatural and
high-tech.
But what if there is more to Ezekiel's
heavenly visions than the imaginative
insights of a religious man? What if
there was a scientific foundation for
them?
Yes. I once had the opportunity of
meeting and spending time and traveling
with a gentleman by the name of Joseph
Blumish.
He was a senior chief engineer at NASA
person involved in the Mariner
expedition to Mars. He was also in
charge of the landing gear for the
Mariner spaceship. And he told me
himself that the idea of the design used
for the Mariner spaceship that landed on
Mars came to him from the reading of the
biblical text in which there is talk
about wheels within wheels. So here you
have another example of a person of
curiosity who conceives of these ideas.
Another biblical figure who continues to
fascinate [music] Von Danakin is the
character of Enoch. Enoch is not part of
the Bible. In the Bible, in the Old
Testament, you find maybe just one
phrase about [music] Enoch. That's all.
But among the apocryphic texts there are
volumes and volumes, [music] if you know
them, you find the book of Enoch. Enoch
is the first person in antiquity who
writes in the first person. I did. I
here. I was there.
&gt;&gt; In one of the ancient texts, this
greatgrandfather [music]
of Noah is said to have been taken away
by God for 300 years.
He was taken up to the sky. Up there he
meets the highest, the so-called
highest. In religion they call it God.
He meets the highest and the highest
thes to his servants. You teach this
young man in our language and then you
teach him writing. So he writes books.
Of course he knows all these foreigners
by name. He quotes them by name. He
knows their profession. He knows which
of these extraterrestrials was the
astronomer. So Enoch is the only and
first person thousands of years ago who
gives some of the names of the
extraterrestrials and [music] gives some
of their professions. How is this
possible? We have an eyewitness and
nobody speaks about it. So I really was
confused.
I mean that that would be the argument
[music] that the the followers of
Fontenicanin would say. Why is it so
absurd for aliens to come when it's
completely acceptable for God to
intervene [music] in human history?
The difference is Fontenkin's arguing
that aliens came and gave technologies
to people to advance those cultures.
So basically they gave objects. They
gave new ideas and new technologies
[music] and that those cultures advanced
because of them. Whereas at least in the
Bible it's not like God gave humankind a
magic watch you know or a new missile
that they could use to defeat their
[music] enemies. Um, God gives
instruction, at least the Bible records
that God gives instructions uh on how to
live, but not how to build new devices
that further or advance a specific
culture.
&gt;&gt; Can we liken Ezekiel's chariot to a UFO?
The ancients used myth and metaphor and
images [music] to describe their
experience of God. I think what we don't
want to fall to is a type of fundamental
literalism. The stories of the Old
Testament [music] emerge out of the
people of that time, out of their own
context to make sense of their
experience of God. We can gain insight
[music] by reading the Old Testament and
reading about Ezekiel's chariot. But
it's not to draw a strict analogy
between his chariot and a UFO.
When all of these stories were written
down, writing [music]
was a fairly new invention, the very
first thing they wrote down is something
that actually happened to them. It was
so important, so compelling, so
significant to them that they had to put
it in writing. Why can't modern society
come to grips that these stories [music]
might be true? After all,
Bonanakin's research turned up evidence
of other arguably extraterrestrial
phenomena. And not only in the Bible.
Almost every religion has similar
stories about deities with spectacular
powers and abilities who come to earth
and directly influence the lives of men.
Suddenly one day I said to myself, "No,
come on. This is similar the stories in
so many old religions. Are they talking
about extraterrestrials?
This so-called gods are here. They give
orders. They force the humans to do
certain things and one day they
disappear but they always disappear with
the promise to return in a far away
future.
If as I believe people in ancient
civilizations were familiar with space
travel,
people in ancient civilizations were in
communication with humanlike beings from
other planets. Then I think we should
expect to find evidence for this in
their literatures which we do find.
&gt;&gt; Throughout the ancient Sanskrit epics of
India, there are numerous descriptions
of vimmanas or mythical flying machines.
One of these accounts even dates back
over 5,000 years. In the Bavat Piranha,
which is an ancient Sanskrit history,
there is a description of a spacecraft
that was piloted by a king named Shalva.
It's described that was made of metal.
It was described that it sometimes
appeared to be in two places at once. It
was described as having a motion similar
to that of a butterfly. And these
descriptions are consistent with what
people who observe UFOs today report.
In other Sanskrit text such as the
Mahabara, the Rigveda, and the Ramayana,
there can be found descriptions of
vimmana measuring as wide as 100 ft and
often equipped with the capabilities of
modern aircraft.
One vimmana produced a shaft of light
which when focused on a target consumed
it with [music] its power.
It's like a Buck Rogers or Flash Gordon
movie from the 30s.
They read like the wildest science
fiction. People are flying around in
airship called the manas blasting each
other and having aerial fights
destroying entire cities.
And the crazy thing is that all of those
stories are totally accepted in the
modern society of India.
I don't think we can say that these
descriptions are simply imagination
because even though they were written
thousands of years ago, they match what
many people [music] today report in
terms of observing the actions of UFOs.
&gt;&gt; Were they just mythological tales that
they're making up? fantasy
or these physical real events and
they're trying to describe them as the
best that they could. That seems to make
more sense to me.
I got to tell you this, [music] I would
be out of a job in India because there
if I were to talk about ancient aliens
and ancient gods, they would say, "Okay,
so what else is new?"
When backing up their claims of
extraterrestrial visitation, ancient
alien theorists draw upon two kinds of
examples. [music]
There's the evidence you can read, such
as that found in ancient texts,
and then there's the evidence you can
actually see.
Among the earliest types of physical
specimens, numerous cave and rock
drawings, and stone sculptures found all
over the globe. You know, pictures are
worth a thousand words. Absolutely. When
you see pictures depicted, for example,
on a cave in Italy that show two
astronauts with helmets on, I mean, what
the heck could it be? What could it be?
Each of these ancient illustrations or
statues depict figures dressed in
strange attire for the times and
sporting unusual headgear. But could
they really be representations of alien
astronauts? Visitors from other worlds
who touched down upon the Earth
thousands of years ago.
All over the world, we have statues and
sculptures and paintings and depictions
of these extraterrestrial beings. Even
in the United States at Sega Canyon,
Utah, we have petroglyphs of very weird
looking creatures that have antenni on
their heads, helmets, and halfway around
the world. In Kimberly, Australia, for
example, we have the exact same
depictions of these helmeted beings with
a halo around their heads. And the
question I have is, what did our
ancestors see that compelled them to put
this on their cave walls?
On yet another continent in Guatemala
City, we have a sculpture that looks
[music] eerily reminiscent of a
modern-day astronaut. I mean, that thing
is wearing a helmet. There's some type
of a mouthpiece and on his chest are
some type of controls or a breathing
apparatus. How is this possible? 1500
years ago
and in Colombia, there were thousands of
tomb artifacts that look like modern-day
airplanes. It has fixed wings. It has a
fuselage
and [music]
it has an upright tail fin which is not
intrinsic to nature, but it is intrinsic
to modernday aerodynamics.
Did our ancestors see something similar
flying in the air? Absolutely. [music]
Another compelling artifact that was
found was at the East Ambul Museum where
you have this headless spaceman sitting
inside some type of a space vehicle. You
can see his hands and you can see tubing
that go to some sort of devices. He's
wearing a suit. His legs are crammed in
there. I mean, even to the untrained
eye, this looks very aerodynamic and it
looks something that, you know, came
[music] from outer space.
These people witnessed something. They
were told something and they tried to
depict it the best way they could with
the kind of technology they had at the
time. And that was simple tools and
simple artwork. Many of these ancient
civilizations were widely separated in
space and time. They weren't in
communication with each other, but still
they have the same kinds of accounts. I
think it's because they all experienced
these things and they all have the idea
that we're part of a cosmic hierarchy of
beings. So, I think we can't explain
things away so easily.
But for Eric Vonanakin and other
proponents of his ancient astronaut
theories, perhaps the most significant
illustration can be found in Mexico.
The Mayan archaeological site of Fenke
had been abandoned for centuries before
it was stumbled upon by Spanish
explorers.
So get to the top of this and suddenly
here are the great pyramids [music] of
Penke. Here,
deep within a secret tomb, under one of
the [music] age-old temples, lies the
7-tonon sarcophagus of Palenke's 7th
century ruler, PLL the Great.
&gt;&gt; Lord Pal apparently died here at
Palenke. He was apparently this
mysterious
Mayan leader. He was a giant, seven or
eightt tall actually. And then they
built this pyramid around his tomb. The
Mayans literally worshiped him as as
some kind of a god.
King PLL sarcophagus is adorned with a
carving that has become a famous example
of classic Mayan art. Most believe the
illustration shows PLL descending into
the Mayan underworld,
but ancient astronaut theorists
interpret the carving a vastly different
way. on this lap and incredible in
chiseling. You see a man and he's
sitting in a sort of capsule. He has
some sort of mask on his nose and you
see his upper hand he's manipulating
some controls. From the lower hand he's
turning something on. The heel of his
left foot is on a kind of pedal and
outside of the capsule you see a linking
flam. This is incredible. This is
absolutely a proof for ext.
If we look at the similarities of what
our astronauts look like when they are
in a rocket ship or in the space shuttle
and have gear attached to them, there
are similarities being shown. So one
just has to ask the question of you know
is this just an artifact symbolically
showing something or are they trying to
depict with their own limited
understanding of the time what [music]
was taking place.
Was Lord Pall just some Mayan king that
everyone liked? Was he some important
visitor from some faroff land? Or was he
even possibly some extraterrestrial from
another planet?
Although most scientists and
archaeologists [music] discredit
Bondanakin's interpretation of the Penke
carvings,
visitors to the site are often treated
to stories and offered souvenirs that
support his claim.
&gt;&gt; This is Eric Bondenkin's theory, the
chariots of the gods. No, you see PAL is
supposed to be driving the rocket,
holding the controls,
the pedals,
the engine,
and the fire of the rocket. This will be
the cabin.
And this is the oxygen.
&gt;&gt; Mainstream archaeologists claim that
it's really a depiction of Lord Pakal
and his journey to the underworld. He's
going under the ground rather than out
into space.
Both are interesting theories and either
could be right in my mind.
&gt;&gt; In recent [music] years, Poll's tomb has
been closed to tourists and casual
visitors. Although the sarcophagus is
off limits, ancient astronaut theorists
can still find a wealth of evidence in
the carvings along the walls of Palenke.
&gt;&gt; This is very similar to what's on the
lid of Lord Pall of his tomb. Uh the way
he's got his left hand right here in a
like a odd position and his wrist also
some kind of rocket exhaust or something
is coming out of him.
But Lord Beall may not have [music] been
the only alien who once walked the
Palenke ruins.
&gt;&gt; The Mayans had such a advanced calendar
and mathematical system. [music]
Why were they so obsessed with the
stars? one of the most advanced of any
ancient cultures.
And yet the Mayans just vanished around
500 AD. We don't know where they went.
And one explanation is that the Mayans
were some kind of extraterrestrials and
they literally left our planet.
&gt;&gt; But ancient cave drawings and stone
[music] carvings aren't the only types
of illustrations that fascinate ancient
alien theorists. In 1929,
historians discovered a map which had
been painted onto a piece of
gazellehide.
They traced the document [music] back to
a 16th century Turkish admiral named
Piri Ree, but in stark [music] contrast
to other maps dating back to that time.
The map depicts land masses that were
still as yet [music] unexplored. It
shows the coast of Antarctica as it
exists under the current ice cover.
Now, that's really pretty amazing
because it would tend to indicate that
the map was made at a time when
Antarctica was ice free, which would be
many millions of years ago.
The map also accurately charts the
coasts of Europe and North Africa. But
it's the illustration of northern
Antarctica that truly astonishes ancient
astronaut theorists because this region
wouldn't even be discovered for another
300 years. We have to remember that
Antarctica is covered by at least a mile
thick ice. We didn't have ground
penetrating radar until 1958. So for a
map to exist in 1531 accurately showing
the topography, it's pretty interesting.
&gt;&gt; When cgraphers [music]
superimposed the Piri Reese map over a
modern map of the world, they were
amazed [music] to discover that the
ancient chart was fantastically accurate
[music] in the most minute of details.
But how could the creators of a
centuries old map have known of
mountains or rivers that had yet to be
discovered? in 1531. I really don't know
of anyone who was flying above the
surface of the Earth high enough to map
topography. And how would they see
underneath the ice?
&gt;&gt; Their maps were so accurate. I mean, we
know that they didn't go to Antarctica
and explore it, but yet they were able
to draw these maps of it.
But if ancient aliens possessed the
technology to travel the universe, would
the only evidence of their journey be in
the form of a few carvings or a
mysterious map? Wouldn't there also be
signs of a highly advanced technology?
Signs that might be too large to
overlook? You mean to tell me that
people of that time period did this by
hand? I don't think so.
When it comes to searching for evidence
of ancient aliens,
Eric Bondanakin literally leaves no
stones unturned.
&gt;&gt; I have collected for more than 40 years
information and there are two sorts of
evidences to support my hypothesis. The
one source is literature. This might be
archaeological or mythological
literature. And the other swords are
practical objects. For example, the
pyramids are linked to the gods. The
gods who once descended from the sky to
us earthlings.
Without a little interplanetary help,
how else could early Egyptians have
learned to stack the nearly 2 [music]
million limestone and granite blocks
that create the Great Pyramid?
How could prehistoric man move the
immense boulders [music] at Stonehenge?
And how could ancient builders at Cusco
fit stone so closely together that even
a razor blade can't fit [music] between
them?
As you travel around the world trying to
piece together the this this puzzle of
the ancient world, there's not that much
to really get a good grasp on. But what
there is is giant blocks of stone, huge
articulated granite or bassalt blocks in
many cases. Sometimes they weigh a
thousand tons.
These things are the size of railway
cars and you find them in Peru and
Bolivia and Mexico and ancient Egypt.
You have to ask yourself why and how
could ancient people have dragged these
railway carsiz blocks of stone, stacked
them up together into these giant
buildings.
Perhaps the most familiar and most
mysterious megalithic structure in all
the world is the Great Pyramid of Giza.
The [music] oldest and largest of
Egypt's three great pyramids. This
miracle of engineering is believed to
have been constructed during a 20-year
period ending around 2560 BC.
But to ancient alien theorists, [music]
those numbers just don't add up.
The Great Pyramid was not built in only
22 years because logistically speaking,
you would have to cut, transport, and
put into place one stone every 9
seconds.
And there are modern engineers who have
come forward and said we couldn't do
this in 22 years either.
There are all kinds of theories on how
the great pyramid of Giza was built. So
many theories you just sit back and
shake your head. And that includes ET
visitations,
uh, levitating the the blocks with some
kind of sound system, anti-gravity,
thousands of workers pulling long ropes
on a ramp that had to be almost 2 mi
long to get it up to [music] where it
is.
All I know is that they are so finely
aligned and that the architecture is so
precise that even modern people today
with great technology would have a
difficult time being that good.
How, for example, in the inside of the
pyramids and the tombs, could they build
granite and marble areas that were just
so perfect and so clean?
You mean to tell me that people of that
time period did this by hand? I don't
think so.
The enormous size and weight of the
stones multiplied by the sheer number of
them makes one thing certain. The
construction of the Great Pyramid
remains one of the greatest marvels and
mysteries of architectural engineering.
I don't want to discount human ingenuity
because I do believe that we do have the
ability to do these things over a longer
period of time. But the knowledge to
build some of these monuments, there had
to have been some type of intervention
or some type of knowledge given to
ancient man to carry out those
instructions. They couldn't have just
come up with it on their own.
In Egypt, there are old traditions
saying the great pyramid was constructed
by a pharaoh with the name of Saurit.
And then they say Saurit is the same
which the the Hebrew community calls
Enoch.
Enoch is [music] a prophet in the Old
Testament. There are books of Enoch
called the apocryphic texts. You make a
connection with Enoch to these
extraterrestrials.
He clearly says he met [music] this
extraterrestrial.
Now we have writings in the book of
Enoch and he gave the order to construct
a building which cannot be destroyed by
the thousands of years of the future.
And the ancient Egyptian texts speak
that the pyramids were built by human
beings with the assistance of the
guardians of the sky, meaning the
[music] gods.
And so we have proposed that the
pyramids were built [music] by human
hands but with the assistance of
extraterrestrial technology.
As one of the seven wonders of the
world, [music] the Great Pyramid remains
not only an archaeological mystery, but
a geographical marvel.
In 1877,
author and theologian Joseph SC
demonstrated that the Great [music]
Pyramid resides at the intersection of
the longest line of latitude and the
longest line of longitude, the exact
center of all the land mass in the
world.
Also, each of its four sides align
almost precisely with the four points of
[music] the compass, though such an
instrument wasn't even designed until
thousands of years later.
But is it just mere coincidence that
pyramid construction, very similar to
that practiced in ancient Egypt, was
also evolving halfway around the world.
There are pyramids on remote Pacific
islands
and in India
and in Mexico.
So, this is something that that's all
over the world. Archaeologists haven't
really been able to explain why
dissimilar cultures separated by huge
oceans are building the same structures
and and in many ways the same way.
[music] Here
in central Mexico stands an ancient city
that dates back more than 2,000 years.
Its name, Teayotiwakan,
literally means city of the gods.
And located at its center is the pyramid
of the sun.
Incredibly, this pyramid's perimeter is
virtually the same as that of the Great
Pyramid of Giza.
a structural coincidence? Or could it be
that both were inspired by the same
designers?
&gt;&gt; Couple theories for that. Okay. One,
maybe they were all taught the same
thing by an extraterrestrial race. Two,
there were ancient travelers from within
this planet who went from one area to
another over the thousands of past
years. [music] And then, as some
skeptics will say, hey, that's the
greatest archaeological way to make it.
So they just knew it. I don't think
that's the case
&gt;&gt; at Doot Wakon. Here you have a giant
pyramid of the sun and a giant period of
the moon. According to the legends,
these things were built by gods who were
giants at the end of one of the
destructions of the world.
[music]
Civilizations such as the Aztecs and the
Mayans and the Hopy Indians of Northern
Arizona. They believe that the world has
been destroyed four times in the past.
One time by ice, once by fire, once by
water. [music]
Each time mankind rebuilds again. And
Tiwakon supposedly was built just at the
beginning of one of these four worlds.
You may ask the question, why build
these huge, huge structures? For what
purpose?
Well, in Egypt, for example, either the
pharaohs had incredible egos and they
wanted to outdo themselves, right? So,
they built these huge museums for
themselves. Or it's also possible that
these ancients wanted to leave behind
something for us.
It is written in ancient Egyptian texts.
The purpose why the pyramid was built
was to store knowledge.
300 books which allegedly contained the
knowledge of the universe
dictated by the guardians of the sky.
Of
course, the pyramids aren't the only
ancient monuments that continue to
baffle scientists and archaeologists.
There are literally hundreds of them,
and they can be found in every corner of
our world.
In a remote area of the Pacific Ocean
lies one of the most isolated [music]
yet inhabited locations in the world,
Easter Island.
Here over 800 stone guardians called
Moai stand watch over the island's
coastline.
But are they primitive [music] native
carvings or eerie portraits of alien
visitors from thousands of years ago?
&gt;&gt; Whatever they were for, they're made to
last for thousands of years. They're
built out of blocks of stone that weigh
many, many tons. Not only are people
building structures out of these huge
megalithic blocks of stone, but this was
going on around the world. And yet
supposedly it's just primitive people
doing this for no really good reason it
would seem.
&gt;&gt; I think one of the things that comes
into our considerations of what ancient
cultures could have accomplished is
whether they were able to write it down
or not. We're very tied to if we have
evidence that they wrote down how they
did it then we believe we know how they
did it. So Egypt we have a lot more
writings and drawings that show them
building the pyramids give us an idea of
the technology. If you go somewhere like
Easter Island, we don't have any real
written evidence of what they did. And
sometimes that leads us to question
their innovativeness.
3,000 m away in the Republic of Bolivia,
stonework exists which is amazingly
similar to the statues of Easter Island.
Tijuanakaco is in fact so ancient
[music] that it defies modern dating
techniques.
It is estimated to be over 17,000 years
old, perhaps the oldest city in the
world.
And somehow [music]
the sculptures at Tijanago were
constructed in the same style and with
the same enigmatic expressions as their
distant cousins [music] on Easter
Island.
A lot of the stuff with [music] Tijuana
you can see in earlier civilizations
all the way back, [music] you know,
before into the into the centuries BC in
Peru. You see some [music] of these same
patterns, some of the same iconography
imagery and you can see the ancestry
[music] of this.
But while tourists flock to the ruins of
Tijuana,
perhaps the most mystifying of all
ancient sites [music] lies just a few
hundred yards away. Of relatively little
interest to most visitors, [music]
Puma Punku is a field of stone ruins
that both thrills and [music] stimulates
the imaginations of ancient alien
theorists.
In my opinion, the most significant
piece of evidence that we have in this
entire ancient astronaut puzzle is Puma
Punku in the highland of Bolivia.
While the pyramids at Giza are
incredible feat of achievement,
compared to Puma Punku, the pyramids are
child play.
Logic does not exist at Puma Punku
because there we have megalithic
structures
which just lie about this entire site as
if ripped apart by by some sort of a
great force.
The blocks of Puma Punku were so finely
cut that they once perfectly interlocked
like the pieces of an elaborate puzzle.
But with the nearest quarry over 10 m
away, how did these colossal stones,
some weighing hundreds of tons, even get
here? We are talking about the place
4,000 m over sea level. That means there
are no trees up there which you could
use for rollers. Nothing grows except a
few grasses and bushes. I have stood in
front of many monuments. However, Puma
Punku takes the crown because what we
find there is so inexplicable,
so inachievable
that the question remains, how was it
done and for what purposes?
Mainstream archaeologists say that Puma
Punku was built by the Imara Indians.
And we would all have to agree that in
order to build something like Puma
Punku, you need writing, you need
planning and you need some sort of a
idea where which piece goes and how it
ultimately all fits together. But there
is one thing that all the mainstream
archaeologists agree upon that the Imara
didn't have any writing. So how was it
possible that they built all of this
without plans? What's really amazing and
why the ancient astronaut theorists are
are so drawn to Pumapunku and Tiwanako
is that the quality of the stonework and
the immense size of these blocks is so
incredible and perfect that there's
actually evidence of machining and that
they were using machine tools to cut
these blocks.
One of these platforms is 800 tons and
they are so smoothly polished. You have
some stone megalithic stones with
grooves which are just a few millimes
inside which definitely cannot be made
with stone age chisels. It doesn't work
with stone age chisels. So there is
another technology behind it. The lines
cut into these rocks are exactly
straight and precisely the same depth
from one end to the other.
It's as if only master builders were
allowed to work there because everything
is so precise, everything is so perfect.
You wonder how any of this was even
possible.
One of the most intriguing things there
is that the stones that were used there
aren't sandstone. They're granite and
diorite.
The only stone that's harder than
diorite is [music] diamond. So the only
way that this could have been achieved
is if the tools were tipped with
diamonds. American professors who were
up there with their computer and all
their meta measurements, they were
really shocked in their literature. They
say it is impossible to reconstruct
pumapunk. It's absolutely impossible.
&gt;&gt; But is it really difficult to believe
that ancient peoples could have so
precisely carved [music] these stones or
could build such an incredibly intricate
structure from them?
If it was ancient astronauts teaching
them these building techniques, why
don't we see just perfect almost
skyscraper-like vertical edififices?
Everything was all pyramid-like.
Stone cutting techniques have been
invented and reinvented and
independently invented all over the
world. If you think of yourself as a god
king and you want to have a structure
built that's going to last thousands of
years, it's much better to build it out
of perfectly fitting stones without
mortar that degrades and decays and has
to be maintained. So we see mortarless
structures, megalithic structures all
over the world.
You have an anomaly here where on one
hand these people are supposed to be
very primitive. They're just one step
out of the stone age. Yet what they're
doing are things that we couldn't even
do today apparently or would have
extreme difficulty. And that is building
with these giant blocks of stone
perfectly fitting them together with
other blocks, interlocking them.
The ancient people of our time on this
planet truly saw strange things. They
witnessed bizarre events.
But those stories, other than in
depictions and some artwork and things
like that, they're gone. For some
reason, they're just gone. But left
behind are [music] incredible things
that we have that make you wonder how in
the heck were these things built. Those
are great mysteries. And I think one of
the things that keeps people just
continuing to push for the answers are
the fact that these things are so out
there that they can't [music] figure it
out.
But uncovering the mystery of just how
these incredible structures were built
would only [music] solve one piece of
the puzzle. Finding out why they were
built and how they were used poses
equally compelling questions. Questions
that may [music] not be answerable here
on Earth?
Did aliens really inspire our ancestors
to build ancient temples and pyramids?
And if they [music] came here, did they
leave behind any advanced knowledge of
physics, astronomy, or mathematics?
If so, is there any evidence that
[music] remains to this day? One example
might be this one. Often described
[music] as the world's first mechanical
computer, it dates back over 2,000
years.
The anticothera device was found in 1900
by sponge divers diving off a small
island in the Aian called Antictherraa.
There was a shipwreck there and in it
was a coral encrusted box and it was
made of metal alloys and it then went to
the Athens Museum where a good 50 years
later they were able to x-ray this box
and they were able to discern
coged wheels that were interconnected
and give us a very good depiction of
what this thing was. And it is a
computer. It's a really sophisticated
machine.
It's a very interesting piece of
technology because it served two
purposes. One was that it was an
astronomical device where you could by
using it chart your position to the
stars and navigate your way through the
seas. It was also an astrological device
so that someone could tell you ah if you
were born on this date and your planet
sign is this then certain things are
going to happen to you when the planets
are in this alignment. So it was a very
interesting piece of technology that
literally had more complicated gears and
inner workings than a modern-day Swiss
watch. And it's found to be dated I
think like 200 BC. So, it's really an
anomaly as to who could have created
that and what it was being used for.
When archaeologists
first start to examine this thing in the
1950s, they said that they never could
conceive of the ancient Greeks [music]
having such complicated machinery. And
in fact, they said this was tantamount
to finding a jet airplane in the tomb of
King Tut.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Even older than the antithetherra
mechanism are these carvings on a wall
at the Dendara temple complex in Egypt.
To some, the strange designs look eerily
similar to objects very much in use
today.
In Egypt, there is this underground
crypt at Dendera that was always secret
and only the high priests had access to
that crypt. It's very hot in there, very
narrow, low ceiling. And on the walls,
you have these reliefs of what looks
like ancient light bulbs. Because we
have to question one thing. How did the
ancient Egyptians light [music] the
inside of their tombs?
According to most mainstream
archaeologists, torches were used by the
ancient Egyptians to light the pitch
black chambers of tombs and temples.
Yet nowhere on the ceilings is there
even the slightest evidence of soot or
smoke residue.
But if torches weren't used, how else
could these ancient rooms and hallways
have been illuminated?
Another theory that was proposed is that
the light was directed from outside by
copper mirrors
&gt;&gt; and then there was light.
&gt;&gt; Hey, that is a neat trick. And they've
actually tried to recreate that theory,
but unfortunately they failed because
only after a few corners the sunlight
dissipated because the copper mirrors
were too weak.
Also, there isn't enough oxygen inside
those tombs with which to support or
feed a flame of a torch. I was once
inside the king's chamber inside the
pyramid of Giza and somebody turned off
the lights and immediately we were in
pitch darkness and I said no problem
I'll just take out my lighter from my
satchel and I turn on the lighter and it
didn't work.
So how are the insides of their temples
lit? I mean the only remaining solution
is by some sort of an artificial light
source and that is for example a light
bulb. So at an underground crypt at
Dendera
we find reliefs of such light bulbs.
Egyptologists explanation of this and
they have to have some explanation.
There's got to be one. It has to be
pretty mundane. It it can't be that it's
an electrical device. Their explanation
is that it is a lotus flower
and what appears to be a bulb around is
the aroma of the lotus flower. And so
it's just a very odd depiction of a
flower. But another explanation of
course would be they actually had
electrical lights.
But if the ancient Egyptians had used
some kind of [music] electric light to
illuminate their passageways, why does
the visual evidence exist only in the
temple at Dendera?
&gt;&gt; In Egypt, you [music] had different
areas of specialty and dendera was the
area where the knowledge of the
lightgiving [music]
source was kept. And this secret
knowledge was kept by the high priests.
And they're the only ones [music] who
were privy to this type of information
because Dendera was [music] the special
place where this specific knowledge was
guarded [music] and kept.
The scientific community is not saying,
"Oh, there aren't extraterrestrials or
they never did it." They are judging
whether or not this is a valid
scientific theory. And what do I mean by
that? For something to be a scientific
theory, it really needs to be something
you can test with the obvious
experiment.
&gt;&gt; But how could the ancient Egyptians have
used anything resembling a modern-day
light bulb without access to
electricity? After all, electricity
wouldn't be discovered for thousands of
years. That is, of course, with the
exception of what scientists call the
Baghdad Battery.
&gt;&gt; The Baghdad Battery was discovered in
ancient Iraq. Scholars today say there's
no way that ancient man was using
electricity or light bulbs. [music] So
they look at this Baghdad battery.
There's about a dozen of them that have
been found in Iraq. And the only
mainstream theory is that they were
using it for electroplating jewelry.
Two major proponents of ancient alien
theory. Jason Martell and Giorgio
Suculos demonstrate just how the Baghdad
battery could generate electricity using
a modern mockup of the device. Well,
basically this is made out of a clay
pot. Clay just found naturally in that
region in southern Iraq. And then they
would use a small copper lining and
something of along the lines of an
asphalt stopper wrapped around an iron
rod. And these all applied together and
the combination of some weak acidic
acid, vinegar, grape juice, orange juice
in this case, wine would be able to
generate a charge by combining these
elements with the the iron [music] rod
and the copper. And the combination of
that creates an abundance of
electricity. So, what we're going to do
is uh basically just fill the clay pot
with some orange juice here. I'll try
not to spill it too much. Okay. And then
we'll go ahead and put the copper rod
back in there. Copper and iron rod.
We'll give it a moment to kind of fill
that copper area there. And then by
turning on the voltmeter and applying
this to each side, we should be able to
generate a charge.
And there it goes into the positive.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And if we give it some time to get the
electrolytes really buzzing in there,
you'll see that this vault will actually
continue to rise.
&gt;&gt; But while some see the Baghdad battery
as evidence that [music] man was sparked
on by extraterrestrial wisdom, others
look at it and simply say, "So what?"
You could take um some ancient
technology like the Baghdad battery,
which probably was used for something
like metal plating in which you just mix
chemicals and it has certain chemical
reactions to it that they're using for
this reason. And we can take and put a
voltmeter on it and go, "Oh, look, we're
able to get a reading out of it." Well,
so what? Um that's just a chemical
reaction. If they were using it, say
this battery to operate other machines,
where are the other machines? If they
were sending the electricity down wires,
where are all the wires that would have
been all over the culture? In other
words, it's not likely a one-off
invention like that is going to survive
without all the other inventions that
would have been there at the same time.
[music]
&gt;&gt; It is a battery. Everybody agrees with
that, but nobody knows why they made it
and how they made it. What mind would
think of that? You know, electrical
current backed several thousand years
ago. It's very strange, but it's clearly
[music] a battery.
&gt;&gt; The whole idea that ancient
civilizations actually had knowledge of
electricity and used electricity is an
accepted archaeological fact today, just
like in our own civilization where about
200 years ago, Benjamin Franklin and
other scientists began experimenting
with simple electrical devices. [music]
We now have evidence that over 3,000
years ago, people were also
experimenting with electrical devices.
Where might it have led them? What other
electrical devices would they have been
able to create?
I believe they probably created all
kinds of electrical devices.
Tombs, temples, ancient light bulbs,
even electricity.
Here on Earth exists evidence of
architectural and technological wonders
centuries before we ever believe them
possible.
But if evidence of ancient astronauts
exists here on Earth, what about
elsewhere?
Might we find what we are looking for by
looking in the sky?
Here at the ancient city of Teot Tiwakan
[music] in Mexico, evidence suggests
that ancient cultures possessed an
incredibly accurate knowledge of our
neighboring planets.
Some [music] scholars have even
interpreted the number and orientation
of its pyramids to perfectly reflect a
model of our own solar system.
&gt;&gt; Along the Aven de los Muertos, the
Avenue of the Dead, the pyramids there
align [music] in perfect distance of
each of the orbits of our planets in our
solar system.
Perhaps significant is the fact that the
large pyramid of the sun [music] is
positioned at the center of the other
structures reflecting the fact that the
sun is at the center of our solar system
and that the [music] planets revolve
around it.
It was a known fact back then already
that the sun was at the center of our
solar system, which western science
didn't find out until much, much later.
But just how could Teot Tiwakan's
designers [music] have known so early on
that the planets in our solar system
revolved around the sun?
Didn't that take many more centuries of
scientific progress and investigation to
figure out?
&gt;&gt; Interestingly enough, debunkers will
say, "Oh, this is just coincidence that
these pyramids are aligned with the
planets of our solar system. But if we
go on the other side of the planet to
Stonehenge, we have another ancient site
which is way older by the way than
Teotuakan
where if you look at Stonehenge from a
bird's eyee view, you see that these are
[music] all concentric circles
and each of these circles corresponds
exactly
with the orbit of all of our planets in
our solar system. So we have two places
on Earth where we have the same thing.
In recent years, Stonehenge has also
been interpreted by some archaeologists
to be a kind of [music] astronomical
calendar, one which could be used to
calculate events such as solar eclipses.
But if that were true, whoever aligned
these massive stones on the barren
English landscape would have to have had
precise astronomical knowledge of the
path of the sun.
Built between the 7th and 9th centuries,
the stone temples of Tikall tower more
than 200 [music] ft above the Guatemalan
rainforest.
Tikall [music] is home to one of the
largest excavation sites in the world.
One where thousands of structures still
remain buried beneath the jungle.
According to most scientists, Tikall's
pyramids [music] played an essential
part in helping the Mayans devise their
calendar.
By aligning the sight lines between the
highest points of the structures,
ancient astronomers could pinpoint the
most important dates of the year, such
as an upcoming equinox or solstice.
But what also excites ancient astronaut
theorists is how perfectly the layout of
Takal's pyramids [music] correlate to
the star map of the Pletes Orion region
of the sky. An [music] overhead view of
the structures almost exactly mirrors
the alignment of the constellation.
This same outline has been spotted in an
area far from Tal much, much farther.
Recently discovered on Mars [music]
is a cluster of landforms that offers a
near perfect replication of the pyramid
pattern [music] of Tikall. Three
distinct locations, one unique [music]
pattern.
Coincidence or design?
At Teal, the [music] legends and the
mythologies that we have all speak of a
time when the gods intermingled and
[music] interconnected with our
ancestors. So, Tical also was built
as a message for future generations to
see that a long long time ago we were
visited by extraterrestrials.
&gt;&gt; Someone who had seen this had to have
actually relayed the information to them
because they couldn't have just guessed.
So, it really starts to raise the
question of saying this ancient
astronaut theory really needs to have
more light shed on the topic.
It's certainly possible that the ancient
people not only measured all of these
astronomy events, but were able to come
up with a mathematical theory to put
them together and then to predict new
things. We shouldn't think that the
ancient people were dummies.
&gt;&gt; Early man, people in ancient times
didn't have dashboard mounted GPS units.
They had the path of the sun through the
sky, the path of the moon through the
sky. They could see the stars at night.
These were permanent fixtures that they
could navigate from. So, it's not
surprising at all that almost every
culture recorded astronomical
phenomenon.
&gt;&gt; We never look up at the sky and enjoy
the beauty of it. Ancient people would
not have been able to avoid looking at
the sky with no electricity. The skies
would be so dark and the stars would be
so bright. Not only that, but they
relied on the sky for directions, for
seasons in which to plant and for a
variety of things. Today, with our GPS
units and navigation systems and
computers, we don't need to look at the
sky.
Now I want to be very clear about one
thing that our ancestors were as smart
as we are today. However, I don't
believe that ancient astronauts visited
the earth in the remote past. I am
convinced of it because of all the
countless indications and pieces of
evidence [music] that we can find from
all around the world in different
ancient cultures in different
mythologies and legends. I know it
happened because if you look at all the
pieces, it's the only conclusion that
you can draw.
But just why [music]
were ancient people so focused on the
sky and the stars in the first place?
Were they waiting for something to
happen or perhaps for something or
someone to return?
Four decades may have passed, but the
ideas put forth by Eric von Danakin are
still captivating his followers and
frustrating his skeptics to this day.
Like an Old Testament prophet or an
ancient shaman, the author is still out
there spreading his firmly held message
that we are not alone.
But while the proof of von Danakin's
theories may be debatable, their
influence on movies,
TV series,
and even radio programs is undeniable.
It's it's a tremendous lightning rod for
fiction and for fictional storytelling.
Now, the classic Battlestar Galactica
series started with a narration that
said, "There are those who believe that
life here began out there with tribes of
humans far across the universe that may
have been the forefathers of the
Egyptians and the Toltechs and the
Mayans." You know, that's straight out
of Von Danakin as that kind of belief.
You know, it puts us in contact with an
idea of a mythological intelligence. And
that is one of the things that we as
human beings crave desperately is to
know that we are not alone in the world
and that somebody else out there is
either looking after us or coming to
fight for us and that will unite us
against the common enemy.
I was reading a lot of books from Eric
Fonden [music] and I can imagine that's
the true what he wrote and his books and
so I can imagine this that we had help
from aliens but I don't know I'm not
sure
&gt;&gt; we only know so much in this world and
what we do know is so limited and every
day we're finding more that require us
to ask more questions and bigger
questions and think bigger
It's possible that something from
another planet came, some other life
form, um, intelligent life form came and
did this.
&gt;&gt; I mean, who knows? It could be because,
uh, the origins of many things are lost
in antiquity. All we have are remnants
and shreds of evidence to suggest what
might have happened.
If
&gt;&gt; someone told me that it was proven that
aliens uh, had a part in this, I
wouldn't be that surprised.
Why not?
To be honest, ancient astronaut theory
has never cropped up in a discussion
with my colleagues. I don't care how
many pints into it we've been, we have
never discussed ancient astronaut theory
in any credible way whatsoever.
One of the good things about ancient
astronaut theory is that it makes us
think. It it it brings out the what
about this, what about that? We need
explanations for all these things. And I
think that one of the main reasons why
mainstream archaeologists
get a real knee-jerk reaction to the
ancient astronaut theory is that it's
very disturbing to them because they
don't have all the answers. Now, some of
them may believe that life could exist
in the universe, but their bottom line
is, "Show me the proof. Show it to me
for real. I want to see the spaceship. I
want to see something concrete, not just
a few pictures that everybody [music]
can interpret as being this or that.
Far-fetched, [music]
ridiculous, insane.
Ancient aliens visiting Earth centuries
ago, building monuments,
influencing scripture.
But what if it all turned [music] out to
be true?
What would happen if just one piece of
evidence turned up? One stone, one key
that proved that Vonanakin had been
right all along.
And if he is right, what does that
suggest [music] about our future? If
alien visitors had come here before,
would they come again?
Even I think the idea of aliens and them
visiting us is very exciting and
interesting and it would be really cool
if that happened. So it gets people
excited about the question. Maybe they
start thinking about it and like many
things they might ultimately come to
thinking about the physics or the
archaeology and get involved in the
scientific process. So that can be a
positive side effect of these theories
and their popularization.
If it turns out that the ancient
astronaut theory is wrong, I will be the
first one to say, "Okay, no problem."
But so far, certain pieces of evidence
have not been debunked.
If the ancient alien astronaut theory is
somehow proven to be true, this would be
a huge boon to my work and to the search
for other planets like Earth with life
on them. Because if alien astronauts
have visited Earth in the distant past,
it means they're pretty nearby. And it
means that we don't have to look very
far to find planets like Earth with
signs of life on them.
But evidence has to be treated with a
great deal of caution because it has
different meanings.
I'm not sure what the reaction of the
population will be.
It will strengthen the general concept
that our history of religions in the
world needs to be looked at again with
more respect and also with more wonder.
meaning what are we supposed to make of
this now and what are we supposed to be
doing with this now?
&gt;&gt; If science detects life on Mars, if
science detects a UFO, then we need to
take what science is saying to us
[music] and begin to rethink about
ourselves on Earth in light of the
possibility of new life. Does that
change our understanding of God? It
should, if anything, broaden it. If we
do find alien life, we should rejoice.
&gt;&gt; And honestly, [music] the way things are
going on this planet right now, I would
welcome a visitation every once in a
while. A little help.
&gt;&gt; There is no doubt that my hypothesis
will be accepted by the mainstream. It's
maybe a question of just five or 10
years.
Sooner or later we will have contact
with someone out there and then the
thinking changes completely and one day
they will return and if you don't listen
to Eric Fonden you will have the shock
of the gods,
President Thomas Jefferson
Christopher Columbus,
crusaders in the Middle Ages.
What did they have in common?
They either experienced or believed in
the possibility of alien encounters.
The fact is there have been so many
descriptions by various chronicers
talking about a strange cloud in the sky
that glowed red.
Columbus on his first voyage, he noted
in the log a glowing object rise out of
the water and head off into the
atmosphere. Could alien beings have been
responsible for biblical floods,
medieval plagues, and even ancient
nuclear attacks?
Visitations [music] occurred since
before recorded history all the way to
today.
Millions of people around the world
believe we have been visited [music] in
the past by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true? Did ancient aliens
really help to shape our history? And
what if these [music] visitations didn't
only occur thousands of years ago, but
much more recently?
Might there be evidence of real life
close encounters?
Yeah.
[music]
Alamagordo, New Mexico.
White Sands Proving Ground. July 16th,
1945.
Early in the morning, a number of US
military officers and scientists
gathered to watch a powerful new weapon
being tested. Some believe the [music]
device will be a complete failure.
Others think it might destroy the entire
state of New Mexico. As a precaution,
viewing stations are [music] placed from
10 to 20 m away from the test site. At
precisely 529 and 45 [music]
seconds, the first atomic bomb is
detonated.
&gt;&gt; 3 2 1
fire.
The blast emits a fireball over 600 ft
wide and produces an explosion equal to
20,000 tons of TNT.
The mushroom cloud reaches over 7 mi in
height and the reverberations can be
felt nearly 100 m away.
The world had a new weapon. One so
terrifying it left even its creator, Dr.
Robert Oppenheimer, shocked and shaken.
&gt;&gt; Few people laughed.
Few people cried.
Most people were silent.
&gt;&gt; For the first time in its history, the
Earth had been assaulted by a man-made
weapon of incredible power.
But what if [music] it had all happened
before?
What if an explosion of even greater
force and destructiveness had long ago
shaped the Earth's history?
Some people have suggested on the basis
of a number of lines of evidence that
there may have been atomic warfare,
atomic bombs, atomic explosions in the
very distant past.
Atomic warfare among ancient
civilizations may sound like something
[music] out of a science fiction novel,
but descriptions of similar deadly
occurrences can be found in the very
same text Dr. Oppenheimer quoted after
the New Mexico atomic test.
&gt;&gt; I remembered the line from [music] the
Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad Gita.
Now I am become death, the destroyer of
worlds.
Part of an ancient Hindu scripture known
as the Mahabharata,
the Bakvad Gita was written sometime
between the 5th and [music] 2nd century
BC.
This massive 100,000 verse text contains
stories about the ancient empire of
Rama, which it is said existed over
12,000 years ago or roughly 5,000 years
before the earliest recorded
civilization in Mesopotamia.
If you read the ancient Indian epics,
they read like modern-day science
fiction. Yet, they're thousands of years
old with references not only of flying
chariots and of these gods that had
these incredible technological
capabilities, but incredible weapons
that they used in those epic battles.
They had what was called a Brahma
weapon.
There were many people that were singed
and burned and and melted [music] by the
Brahma weapon.
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the
Brahma weapon was an early nuclear
device because the descriptions of
[music] its deadly after effects are
eerily similar to the effects of
exposure to intense radiation.
It is a theory largely discounted by
conventional science. There is no
evidence that a nuclear bomb was
described in the Mahabara or the
Bavagita.
It describes a battle.
In battles, there are explosions, big
explosions.
It's one thing about suggesting that,
you know, battles have explosions, but
that's not really what we're looking at.
You got to look at the whole picture.
One reference that we have, for example,
speaks of these explosions that were
brighter than a thousand suns.
And when these blasts occurred, the suns
were twirling in the air. Trees went up
in flames and there was just this
[music] mass destruction.
After those blasts, people who survive
started to lose their hair and nails
[music]
started to fall out. I mean, right there
we have a concise reference to radiation
poisoning, nuclear fallout, and those
texts are thousands of years old.
But if the Mahabarata is based on fact,
wouldn't archaeologists have uncovered
physical or radiological evidence?
According
to ancient astronaut theorists, [music]
they have
the Indis Valley, southern Pakistan.
In 1922,
an officer with an Indian archaeological
survey group discovered the ruins of an
ancient city known as Moenjodaro.
According to mainstream archaeologists,
the city whose name means mound of the
dead had flourished between 2600 and
1900 BC. However, scientists [music] in
Pakistan have suggested Moenjodaro is
much older.
Mainstream archaeologists believe
[music]
the city was abandoned as a result of
climatic changes or possibly a decrease
in trade.
But when the ruins of Mohenjodara were
discovered in the 1920s,
44 skeletons [music] were found lying
face down in the street, many holding
hands,
their faces and body positioning,
suggested they suffered a sudden violent
death.
You have a culture of people who
literally were lying that in the street.
Archaeologists have found human remains
and something big has happened to these
people.
&gt;&gt; What in fact did happen to the people of
Moenjodaro?
Why is there evidence that wild animals
avoided scavenging their remains? And
why even after thousands of years had
their bones not decayed?
In certain areas of that site, you find
increased levels of radiation
and radiation exists all over the place.
When all of a sudden you have higher
levels of radiation in in certain areas
of the world, the question arises, why
is it possible that Mohenjodaro
was one of the cities mentioned in the
Bavad Gita,
a city that suffered the equivalent of a
sudden atomic attack
in His 1979 book, Atomic Destruction in
2000 BC, British researcher David
Davenport claimed to have found a 50yard
wide epicenter at Mohenjodaro,
where everything appeared to have been
fused through a transformative process
known as vitrification.
Vitrification is a process in which
regular type stone gets molten into a
magma state
and then it hardens again. But once the
stone is hardened again, it feels like
glass.
At Moenjodoro, we find evidence of
vitrification, which could have only
been achieved if the material was
exposed to extreme heat by some type of
a blast.
When British and Indian and Pakistani
archaeologists began doing excavations
in the Sin Desert on the borders of
India and Pakistan in the late 1940s and
early 1950s. What they found in these
cities, Moenjodaro, Harapa, Kot Digi was
archaeological evidence to show there
were apparently atomic weapons only it
happened in ancient times.
There's other evidence in parts of
Africa and the Middle East where it
would seem to be like some sort of
atomic explosion had taken place there
and had turned the desert sand into
glass.
And that's exactly what happened at
Alamagordo in New Mexico when they
detonated the first atom bomb in the
desert.
Could the strange [music] ruins found in
the Indis Valley really contain evidence
of an [music] ancient atomic explosion?
If so, where did these powerful weapons
come from? Who was using them and why?
In the ancient [music]
Indian texts themselves, it says, and I
quote, "At [music] one point, three
giant cities were orbiting the Earth.
And those giant cities were often
described as being made of gleaming
metal and iron.
And at one point, those three cities
went to war with each other.
And it's described how the gods threw
weapons at each other,
destroying those cities. that they all
went up in flames and fire came raining
down onto earth.
So when you read those passages, the
question I ask is what is it that our
ancestors try to describe here?
[music] And I think that it was some
type of a technology that was [music]
witnessed. Yet our ancestors while being
highly intelligent didn't understand the
nuts and [music] bolts aspects behind
that technology.
And so they created something divine out
of it. Something [music] supernatural.
Yet it never was divine. It never was
supernatural.
If in fact the Mahabarata is [music]
describing historical events, might we
also find similar accounts in other
[music] ancient writings?
As far as ancient astronaut theorists
are concerned, we need look no further
than in the pages of the Holy [music]
Bible.
According to one of the stories
contained in the book of Genesis, angels
were sent by God to destroy the cities
of Sodom and Gomorrah. Because of the
sins of their inhabitants,
only a righteous man named Lot along
with his family was to be spared. But
while making their [music] escape, Lot's
wife ignores the angel's warning not to
look back and upon gazing at the horror
and devastation is turned into a pillar
of salt.
When you are at a nuclear testing range
and you witness a nuclear blast, you're
told to look away and not to look
straight into the blast. And here we
have a similar description in an ancient
biblical text
where instructions were given, whatever
you do, don't look back because you will
die. And sure enough, it happened to
Lot's wife.
Could
it be that the story of Sodom and
Gomorrah is really a description of a
nuclear explosion similar to the one
described [music] in the Hindus
Mahabarata?
Do the stories of the Mahabarata and
[music] the Bible represent actual
historical events?
For ancient astronaut theorists, the
answer is a resounding yes.
And they believe the so-called angels
who brought forth the devastation were
in fact beings from another planet.
Alien visitors armed with [music]
advanced weaponry.
September 2000, the Black Sea, Turkey.
Marine archaeologist Robert Ballard and
his team of underwater scientists
discover what appears to be a farmhouse
some 330 ft below the surface.
Estimates suggest the submerged dwelling
to be approximately 7,500 years old.
Ballard and other scholars speculated
that rising ocean levels could have
caused the Mediterranean Sea to burst
through a natural dam, creating a flood
so great it drowned an estimated 58,000
square miles under 500 ft of water.
But more than finding the ruins of an
ancient dwelling, had Ballard actually
discovered proof that the biblical story
of Noah and the great flood was true.
And those villages of course weren't
built underwater. So Ballard concluded
that the
Black Sea as we know it was only created
some 8 9,000 years ago. And that is
exactly what we're talking about with
Noah's arc in the flood, the same area
where all that happened. And in fact,
mainstream archaeologists know that in
the Mediterranean, there are over 200
known sunken cities. Those cities too
were somehow flooded the same time that
the Black Sea was flooded.
Also written in the book of Genesis,
[music] the story of Noah tells how God
saw that the wickedness of man was great
and decided [music] to destroy all of
creation.
Only Noah, his family, and the animals
aboard the ark were allowed to survive
and repopulate the planet.
But is this the whole story? Was Noah
selected only for his virtue? Or was
there another reason he was chosen to
save the planet?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the
Bible doesn't tell the whole story.
In the late 1940s and early 1950s,
a series of ancient texts known as the
Dead Sea Scrolls [music] were discovered
in a cave located in what is now
Israel's West Bank. Among the ancient
writings are various stories not found
in the traditional Hebrew Bible. One
such story tells of Noah and his strange
miraculous birth.
One of the dead sea scrolls is called
the Lamek scroll. What is Lamek? Lamek
was a shepherd. And one day Lamek his
women was pregnant. And he said to her,
"This is impossible. I was not here for
months." But his woman with the name
Batinosh swears no one touched me. But
Lamek doesn't believe his wife Batinosh.
And he goes to his father which was
Metusalem. And Metusalem says to Lamek,
[music] "I can't help you. I don't
understand this. I believe your women
batosh that nobody touched her and I
believe you. So what shall I do? So
Musalem goes to his father, the
grandfather now of Lamek, his name is
Enoch. Now Enoch tells to Metusalem that
the guardians of the sky have made an
artificial incimination into the womb of
Batinosh the wife. [music] And he should
accept this child because this child
would be the father of a new human
generation.
And in the Bible, this is Noah.
What if, as ancient [music] astronaut
theorists believe, the story of Lamech
is true and the guardians of the sky
described in the story are in fact
aliens?
Does this mean that Noah was the product
of an artificial insemination? a genetic
experiment [music]
performed by extraterrestrials?
If so, what was the reason for the great
flood?
&gt;&gt; Well, the reason for the flood and we we
need to understand this. It tells us is
that Noah was pure in all of his
generations. What does that mean? You
know, why why would the account, you
know, specify pure in all his
generations?
&gt;&gt; According to the Bible, God sent the
flood because [music] of man's
wickedness and corruption.
But ancient astronaut theorists believe
the flood was [music] actually a means
of ridding the earth of biological
imperfections.
By using Noah and his family, they could
repopulate the planet with [music] a
genetically superior species.
Part of this human society is again
[music] genetically backward closer to
the animal. What can we do? This humans
were spread out over the planet. So they
said we have to kill them all by a great
flood and then we have to restart again.
Another familiar element in the story of
Noah
involves the collection of animals
brought aboard the ark.
In the Bible, God commanded Noah to
collect two of every kind of living
creature,
animal, bird, and insect.
But many biblical scholars and
theologians agree that such a task would
have been both physically [music] and
biologically impossible.
Could there be another more scientific
explanation?
The story of Noah's ark is pretty
implausible if you think about it. You
have two animals of each creature on
planet Earth on a boat. Not only would
the boat have to be huge, but how are
you going to collect every animal on the
planet and put it on that ship? So,
could it be possible that Noah's Ark was
once again misunderstood technology
and Noah's arc was a DNA bank?
Could it be a story? Could it be
technology somehow gathering all all
living things as in a DNA bank of some
kind? It fits together. Hard to imagine
uh how that would happen so far back,
but if it did happen, it would need to
be told as a story and the story of a
boat works.
Perhaps this is really an
extraterrestrial DNA bank as well. The
extraterrestrials need plants and
animals and minerals on this planet,
too. Just like when we go to Mars or
something, we'll be using what we can
use on that planet. So,
extraterrestrials coming here would want
to do that as well. And if they knew
that some cataclysm was coming, they too
would want to preserve certain kinds of
animals and plant life and create, you
know, what we think of as Noah's Ark.
Alien DNA bank. [music]
Is there any evidence that such a thing
is even possible?
In 2008, on the Arctic island of
Zvalbard, a vault was built to store the
seeds of hundreds of thousands of
[music] plants in the event of a global
catastrophe.
Elsewhere, similar efforts are
reportedly underway to store animal and
human DNA as well. cutting edge science
or merely history repeating itself.
&gt;&gt; The frozen ark project is a program that
was initiated by the London Natural
History Museum. What they've done is
they started to store DNA of endangered
species for future generations for
preservation. And as of today, over a
thousand species have been preserved in
small little vials.
And so the question arises, could it be
possible that Noah's ark wasn't
necessarily a boat made out of wood? But
what if Noah's Ark was some type of a
DNA storage facility that was used in
order to preserve all the species on
planet Earth.
If each species [music] can be held in a
tiny vial like this, then it all becomes
very logical. And once again,
we have to look at it from a
perspective. What did our ancestors
[music]
try to describe? What did they witness?
Aliens artificially inseminating humans,
ancient DNA banks.
Could such ideas really help our
understanding of the Bible?
And is it possible that
extraterrestrials have influenced the
development of [music] mankind?
There are many who claim that the proof
can be found in some [music] astonishing
places.
For those who believe that close
encounters with [music] alien beings
have helped shaped Earth's history, it
is important to remember that it isn't
only ancient history that has been so
influenced.
There have been literally hundreds of
credible accounts [music] of strange
creatures, UFO sightings, and other
worldly phenomena that took place even
in the so-called dark ages.
There have been sightings all over the
world throughout the Middle Ages.
There are stories going from Scotland to
England to Italy [music] to the
Crusades.
Remember the Crusades took place over
hundreds of years.
And at certain points in the battle,
[music] in some cases over Turkey, in
some cases over Jerusalem, there are
images
captured in writing by various
chronicers talking about a strange cloud
in the sky that glowed red.
A strange image coming out of a cloud in
the sky. [music] Why would we say this
is a UFO? Because traditionally UFOs
mask themselves by forming a cloud
around themselves and it's a cloud
that's going through the sky. That's
their invisibility cloak.
&gt;&gt; In his 13th century historical work
titled Otto [music] Imperiali, Gervas of
Tilbury wrote about an aerial craft over
the city of Bristol, England, [music]
which caught an anchor in a church
steeple.
uses specifically the term anchor. Now,
we don't know what kind of anchor that
is, but a creature, a man, climbs out of
this craft and tries to [music] free the
anchor from the steeple. And all the
people in the village start stoning him,
thinking he's some sort of evil demon.
But for ancient astronaut [music]
theorists, evidence of an alien presence
during the Middle Ages isn't only found
in literature.
All throughout the Middle Ages, there
are some magnificent paintings.
And in certain areas of the painting,
[music]
there are what looks like to be UFOs.
They're always floating up in the sky,
[music]
usually above the Virgin Mary or above
Jesus on the crucifix or somewhere.
[music] We have sceneries that depict
what looks like UFOs.
One very interesting painting is where
Jesus sits up in the clouds with quote
unquote God and they're holding on to
the antenna of what looks like Sputnik.
And theologians say what is depicted
here is nothing else but the Earth.
But why would Earth have two antenna
sticking out of it?
And why would it be round? Because the
mainstream viewpoint at the time was
that the Earth was flat.
Here are pictures of the crucifixion
dated around 1350 from Kosovo.
Here
are presumably vehicles [music] with
people driving them in attendance at the
crucifixion.
Could this be a crude an attempt on the
part of the artist drawing on a
tradition? Obviously, he wasn't there.
Drawing on a tradition.
Could he be reflecting of folklore?
Possibly.
The people of the Middle Ages depicted
devils and angels frequently in their
art.
They did not depict what we today
consider aliens specifically.
But angels are heavenly creatures that
come from outside of our sphere, [music]
aren't they?
Did the medieval artists include strange
creatures and flying [music] spacecraft
in their paintings because they had seen
them in real life? Or were they trying
to communicate their belief that the
miraculous events of the New Testament
had otherworldly origins?
[music]
The most famous painting that without
any doubt in my mind depict a UFO with
its laser beam was made by Clli in 1486.
the annunciation to Mary
&gt;&gt; in medieval art in the enunciation
when Mary is told that she will have a
child but she will still be a virgin and
the angels tell her this
over Mary's head
is a space capsule
but what's a UFO or a space capsule
doing over Mary. Maybe the artist saw it
and he's putting it in the painting to
bring together his own vision of a UFO,
the enunciation from the Bible, and the
mystery of salvation that there could be
a virgin birth.
According
to ancient astronaut theorists, the
UFO-shaped objects found in medieval
paintings aren't the only evidence of an
alien presence during the era.
In his book, The Gods of Eden, author
William Bramley cites private journals
and other publications throughout
Europe,
which contain accounts of cigar-shaped
flying objects emitting noxious mists.
The first reports of this kind began
during the mid14th century, closely
corresponding to the outbreak of the
worst health epidemic in human history,
the black plague.
The black plague back in the 1300s, many
have said was caused by uh virus from a
rodent bitten by fleas. this disease
that wiped out 75 plus million people on
the planet at the time.
But there's another theory by a fellow
by the name of William Bramarley who
says that [music] the black plague was
created by ETSs that they wanted to
eradicate human beings for whatever
horrible reason.
We know that plague can be spread by
rodents, but there weren't that many
rodent infestations being reported back
then. at least not enough to account for
all of the breakouts that we had. So
what you find in the literature from
that time are numerous reports of bright
lights moving through the sky emitting
gas or what they call mists
and we find them in China. You find them
in Europe. There are similar reports
from the Justinian plague from earlier
in history and even later plagues the
Yala epidemics. You find similar stories
of mists that are the cause of the
plague.
We have weapons like that, biological
warfare. As for the motive as to why
this happened, I can only kind of
scratch my head because in the UFO
phenomena, we see certain consistent
patterns, but we don't always understand
the motive.
Italian historian Matteo Velani, who
both chronicled the Black Death and died
from it in the 14th century, wrote of
pestilential fogs reported by travelers
from Asia.
He even wrote that people were [music]
convinced they could actually see the
plague coming through the streets.
But what some ancient astronaut
believers find to be even stronger
evidence of alien involvement are the
numerous reports of mysterious black
cloaked creatures who would appear on
the outskirts [music] of villages just
before plague broke out. Contemporary
accounts [music]
describe them as having terrifying faces
and waving long scelike objects [music]
dispensing noxious mists. It's the image
we know today
as the Grim Reaper.
These figures in black would appear
usually on the outskirts of a town. They
were carrying these long devices. They
looked like scythes. These figures in
black would just start sweeping in the
fields. They would as though they were
cutting down the wheat.
Then immediately there would be an
outbreak of the plague.
Although ancient astronaut theorists
[music]
are divided on Bramley's proposal that
aliens were behind the plague, his
research, like the artwork of the
[music] time, has led to one important
conclusion.
What is evidence is the fact that
visitations occurred since before
recorded history all the way to today.
It's not like ancient astronauts only
happened thousands of years ago and then
all of a sudden we have Roswell.
The fact alone that these visitations
have been going on for all this time,
thousands of years, that's sensational.
Flying cylinders spreading plague from
the sky. Black clad aliens looking to
destroy humans.
But even if possible, why?
And if true, wouldn't there continue to
be evidence of even more close
encounters? Encounters that would take
place much closer to home.
When Columbus and his [music] men first
set foot in what to the Europeans was
the new world, the indigenous people
[music] had never encountered anyone
like them. Their skin was pale. They
wore strange clothes made of bright,
often shiny materials. They arrived in
massive ships and had powerful weapons.
To the natives, the visitors were truly
aliens from a strange faraway world.
Powerful beings who might just as well
have been sent from the heavens.
Columbus wrote in his journal that the
inhabitants eagerly came out to see
their ships and asked them if they had
come from the heavens. And despite the
fact that Columbus and his men
indicated, "No, we didn't come from the
heavens." They called out to the people
still on the shore, "Come out and see
the people who have come from the
heavens." Certainly, it seems
interesting to wonder why it is that
instead of thinking that possibly they
came from some other part of the sea,
that they'd come from the sky.
But there is more to the story.
Less wellknown is that Columbus had an
alien encounter of his own, one reported
[music] in his log just days before he
reached the shores of the new world.
At about 1000 p.m. on the 11th of
October 1492,
the anxious explorer was on the deck of
the Santa Maria when he saw a light
glimmering at a great distance. Columbus
wrote, "The admiral standing on the
quarter deck saw a light." Calling to
Perog Gutierrez, he told him he saw a
light and bid him look that way, which
he did and saw it.
The admiral again perceived it once or
twice, appearing like the light of a wax
candle, moving up and down,
summoning another member of the crew.
The two watched as the light vanished
and reappeared repeatedly.
Seeing lights in the water isn't really
an anomaly. We all know that certain
kinds of underwater life give off
lights, but this light actually traveled
along with the ship.
Columbus noted in the log a glowing
object rise out of the water and head
off into the atmosphere.
What did Columbus see? A phosphorescent
sea creature?
An hallucination?
Or was it something more? Something from
out of this world? What did Columbus's
men see? What they saw was a luminous
object that upon breaking the water's
surface became a UFO.
To UFO researchers like Bill Burns,
Columbus' sighting is significant.
Not only because of when it occurred,
but also because the object was spotted
coming out of the sea, ruling out the
possibility that what he saw was a comet
or a shooting star.
What's intriguing is that this was in
what we call today the Bermuda Triangle.
The Bermuda Triangle, that area,
particularly off of Biminy and the
Bahamas, may in fact be, and I'm way out
on a limb here, colony headquarters
underneath that.
Your UFO goes down into the water and
then into a subterranean
What better position would be to monitor
South America, Middle America, Egypt
than the Caribbean?
&gt;&gt; Many people believe that it's possible
that UFOs could have established bases
on the seafloor. To some extent, it's
true that we know more [music] about the
moon or some parts about our space than
we do about the deepest parts of our own
oceans.
This event is extremely important
because it is the world's first recorded
event
that illustrate the appearance of UFO as
object emerging from the water.
&gt;&gt; If Columbus's sighting was so
extraordinary, why do we only find
record of it in his log? Some believe
another account of this event exists. In
the official records of the Spanish
Inquisition,
UFO researcher Maxmleon de Lafayette
claims that Columbus's shipmate Pedro
Gutierrez reported him to the
Inquisition after hearing Columbus
describe the lights in the sky as
resembling the Jewish manora.
When they went back to Spain, Gutierz
went directly to the infamous
Inquisition. This is the Catholic
organization created by the Vatican to
persecute and kill the infidels.
The infidels means the Jews, the Muslim
and Christian who are not Catholic.
The Inquisition called him for
explanation, the position. Did you say
that you saw Minora? Why did you say
Minora? Oh, so you are a Jew. He said,
"Uh, I'm not a Jew." In the deposition,
which is lengthy, you find more details,
eticulous details of what Columbus saw
above the water.
The file of the Inquisition is in the
vault of the Vatican. And good luck if
you can go to the secrets file of the
Vatican and try to dig for document as
explosive as this one.
Secret [music]
files of the Spanish Inquisition,
UFOs and alien sightings in the time of
Columbus. Far-fetched perhaps, but
[music] to proponents of ancient
astronaut theory, these pre-colonial
close encounters are considered
commonplace [music] events. For them, it
offers additional proof
that we are not alone.
&gt;&gt; They have several sightings of what we
could call UFOs [music] today along the
discovery of America during the conquest
of America. Columbus was not the only
one. Also in the trip of Maggillian,
Fernando de Mcgillian, the discover of
the strait who still could navigate the
war after Columbus. He have all
societies.
&gt;&gt; Seafares often encounter strange lights
both in the sky and below the surface of
the ocean. Skeptics argue that
Columbus's sighting, like many others,
was simply a natural phenomenon.
At night, there are all kinds of things.
For example, bolides. Bollides are these
very large comets, and they're
spectacular. [music] It's just like this
enormous bright light with a trail that
just arcs through the sky. But we can
tell the difference when you have a
meteor like that or a bolite
characteristics are [music] very
different than the ones of genuine UFOs.
&gt;&gt; As far back as the 19th [music] century,
people have speculated about what that
light could have been. Explanations
[music] have centered around the
possibility that it could have been a
light or a torch being carried by an
island inhabitant.
They were in fact more than 35 miles
[music] away from any land which he
makes that impossible.
The other possibility is that it was a
meteor traveling very close to the
horizon and that the movement of the
ship is actually what made the light
appear to be moving up and down.
&gt;&gt; But what if conventional science is
wrong and the ancient astronaut
theorists are correct? What if Columbus,
Mellin, and the early explorers really
did see evidence of extraterrestrial
creatures visiting our planet?
What does this say about our past, our
history,
and our future?
Germany. April 14th, 1561.
At dawn, the citizens of Nuremberg awoke
to what was described in a local news
flyer as a very frightful spectacle.
Various strange objects were spotted
[music] in the sky,
engaged in what appeared to be an aerial
battle.
Could they have been witnessing a close
encounter?
They see this incredible sight as the
sun is coming up. They see what they
describe as cigar- shaped objects,
circles in the air, and crosses, flying
crosses.
And suddenly, these shapes began
emitting other shapes.
The spheres and discs [music] were seen
for a long time as they apparently were
fighting in some kind of a battle over
the city. In fact, the [music] battle
was so evident that the people in
Nerburgg were actually able to perceive
which side was winning. Some of the
objects were seen [music] to crash into
the ground and disappear in a cloud of
smoke or steam.
Other objects were seen [music] to fly
off and disappear in the direction of
the sun.
This entire event [music] becomes
memorialized in a broad sheet. Now, a
broad sheet in the [music] 16th century
was literally a newspaper.
And that broad sheet exists today in
Zurich, Switzerland.
&gt;&gt; The Zurich Central Library to this
[music] day retains a copy not only of
the famous woodcut that shows the 1561
sighting over Nerburgg, but also a 1566
[music]
woodcut showing a sighting from that
year that was quite similar in Basil,
Switzerland. What's fascinating is it's
a very similar event. People saw a bunch
of circles in the air. in fact a
proliferation of circles in the air.
They didn't necessarily interpret that
as a battle in the air, but they did
interpret it as some kind of heavenly
sign.
The broad sheets that were distributed
both in Nuremberg and in Basil 5 years
later, advised people to repent for
their sins and interpreted these
extraordinary events as signs from God.
In all time everything paranormal extra
extra hyphen ordinary belongs to realm
of divinity of gods. God's doing this.
God is punishing us. God is blessing us.
Go repent. Go to church. It's
interesting to read the Nermberg
description because [music] it is
written with religious iconography in
mind. They talk about crosses seen in
the sky on the previous day during that
sighting. Now, what we might think of as
a fuselage with wings might have
appeared as a cross to people who saw
religious symbolism constantly in their
everyday life. It's difficult to imagine
how these things might have appeared,
but it's certainly possible that [music]
if these were to appear in the sky
today, we would describe them quite
differently.
Could the people of Nuremberg have
actually witnessed a battle between
[music] waring alien factions? an event
eerily similar to the one written about
in the Bavad Gita over 3,000 years
earlier.
And if not, what else would explain the
vivid accounts [music] of luminous
globes and blood red crosses appearing
in the sky?
Throughout the Middle [music] Ages,
visions of strange happenings were often
attributed to God or to the
supernatural. [music]
But moving into what is known as the
early modern period of the 17th century,
people began to look more and more
towards science and the stars for
answers.
And with the invention [music] of the
refracting telescope in6008,
there would be more eyes trained on the
stars than ever before.
Ironically, the first report of a UFO
witnessed [music] through this new
device came from colonial America's best
known Puritan minister, Cotton Mather.
There was an incredible sighting that
the very famous New England preacher
Cotton Mather had. Cotton Mather said
that he was looking through a telescope
at the moon and in the telescope he saw
a flying light over the surface of the
moon. Well, how did this get recorded?
By none other than NASA and people can
find it themselves. Go to the NASA
report on lunar anomalies over 500 years
and they will find cotton matter
sighting of a UFO over the surface of
the moon.
There are a vast number of [music]
natural atmospheric phenomena that can
appear as bright lights in the night
sky. Certainly um meteors are [music] a
possibility. Even certain kinds of
terrestrial phenomena do materialize as
glowing balls of light that seen from a
distance [music] may appear to be a
star. And it's incredibly difficult to
judge the distance of a point source of
light in the night. So he may have
thought that it was on the surface of
the moon or or hundreds of miles away
when in reality it could have been quite
close to where he was. Though it is
uncertain what Cotton Mather saw.
Ancient astronaut theorists find it
significant that a prominent religious
figure would report such a sighting not
[music] as a vision from God but as an
astronomical event. They see it as a
sign not only of the sightings's
authenticity but that views on the
possibility of extraterrestrial life
were starting to shift even within the
Christian [music] church. Cotton Mather
was known as a fire and brimstone
preacher. But there's a rational part of
cotton matter as well
because [music] this was the very
beginning the dawn of the industrial
revolution.
And in this context, people [music] were
thinking about science. They were
thinking about machines and really
thinking about could there be something
in space.
Although sightings like cotton matters
were still rare [music] in the 1700s,
the increasing interest in astronomy
sparked a new debate over a centuries
old theory called the plurality of
[music] worlds. The idea that life might
exist elsewhere throughout the universe.
By the end of the 18th century, [music]
the majority of people, at least of
educated people, were convinced
that all throughout the solar system,
there was intelligent life. On Jupiter,
on Mars, on Saturn, all of them had
extraterrestrials. Very possibly the
moon would have intelligent [music]
beings on it.
I once did a tally of the leading
intellectuals in the 18th century. Over
half of them included ideas of
extraterrestrial life in their
publications.
The premier 18th century astronomer
William Hershel also supported the
theory that life existed on other
planets. So did Thomas Payne, one of
America's founding fathers, along with
many [music] religious leaders of the
time.
Preachers were preaching about
extraterrestrials as a proof of God's
goodness. That's the idea that if there
is a good [music] and beneficent God, he
would populate all the planets, all the
stars.
Though there was open debate about the
existence of extraterrestrial [music]
life in the 1700s,
the discussion did not often extend to
the idea of aliens visiting Earth. But
in 1731,
a series of sightings occurred across
Europe that were so compelling the
possibility could no longer be ignored.
In modern UFO sightings, the
communications about UFOs are instant.
It's on the internet. It's on YouTube.
But what about some of these 18th
century [music] or Renaissance
sightings?
Here's something incredible. In 1731
over Kilkenny, Ireland, there was a
sighting of a luminous object coming out
of a red cloud. That same sighting is
reported in the span of a week over the
rest of Europe, particularly over
Romania in Eastern Europe. Now, here are
two countries that are not communicating
with each other. Newspapers don't
[music] go back and forth. They don't
speak the same language. There's no
radio and there's no television. Yet a
UFO was spotted traveling from the Irish
Sea
across Europe all the way to Eastern
Europe in towards Asia and is spotted in
different places as it goes independent
observations that don't cross-pollinate.
&gt;&gt; Could these nearly identical reports of
a strange object passing through the sky
be mere coincidence?
And if it was an alien craft, is it
possible that earlier sightings simply
[music] weren't reported because they
were interpreted as signs from God? In
colonial America, the idea that aliens
were visiting Earth was gaining ground.
And in the 1800s, [music] this
controversial theory would even make its
way to the White House.
The United States [music] officially
declared its independence from Great
Britain in 1776.
And just 14 years later, a report of the
first UFO sighting in American history
appeared in the newly published journals
of John Winthrop, the second governor of
[music] the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
His journals, which are now known as a
history of New England, 1630 [music] to
1649,
are still considered the preeminent
record for that period in American
history.
When the journals were finally published
in 1790, over 140 [music] years after
Winthrop's death, they were found to
contain an alarming account of a
possible close encounter over Boston's
muddy river.
One night in March of 1639, [music]
James Eil, who was described as being a
sober and discreet man, and two of his
companions, boarded a little boat in the
muddy river of Boston.
As they paddled along the river, they
saw a great bright light that hovered in
the sky. As they watched, the light
flared up and then contracted [music]
into what they described as the figure
of a swine. It's difficult to imagine
anybody seriously reporting a sighting
[music] of a glowing flying pig. Looking
at the sighting, one can't help but
wonder if they were struggling to
describe an oval-shaped fuselage [music]
and four short what we might now call
landing struts or landing gear in a way
that made sense in the 17th century.
Winthre's account states that the object
moves swift as an arrow, [music]
jetting back and forth as well as up and
down for 2 to 3 hours. And when it
finally disappeared, the three
passengers in the boat, who had been
drifting downstream the entire time,
were astonished to find themselves back
at the point where they began their
trip.
What Winthrop [music] describes in his
journal is really difficult to explain.
Certainly, it seems hard to [music]
fathom that for 2 or 3 hours, three men
in a boat watched a bright light moving
around in the sky over the city of
Boston. And it seems almost
inconceivable that their boat could have
been drawn back against the tide [music]
without them noticing it.
These type of strange and [music]
inexplicable phenomena are now
associated with the phenomena that's
called alien abduction.
And as the abduction cases evolved,
you heard people say all of a sudden
everything around them was slowing way,
way down.
and they associate the slowing way, way
down with whatever this event is that we
call the human abduction syndrome.
&gt;&gt; Could this event [music] at Muddy River
be not only North America's first
documented UFO [music] sighting, but
also the first account of an alien
abduction?
Those who believe the account in [music]
Winthre's journals was an actual alien
encounter point to the last [music] line
of his report, which states, "Other
credible persons saw the same light."
By the time Winthram's history was
published in 1790, the debate over the
possibility of extraterrestrial life
[music] was more heated than ever
before.
In fact, the question of whether life
existed on other planets [music] had
become so hotly contested, it caused one
of America's founding fathers, Thomas
[music] Payne, to be unofficially exiled
to Europe.
Thomas Payne enters the extraterrestrial
life debate in a very dramatic way.
He was an Englishman but famous American
patriot.
1793, Thomas Payne publishes a book
called The Age of Reason. And in the Age
of Reason, he makes one of the most
vigorous attacks on Christianity ever
made.
The bottom line on it is he says you
must believe in extraterrestrials if you
know any modern astronomy.
The idea of God who made the entire
universe going from planet to planet
redeeming people is just impossible to
believe.
That creates a sensation. Thousands of
copies of the book were sold. In
December of 1793,
Thomas Payne was arrested in France as a
result of supporting a political party
that was no longer in power.
When the American ambassador [music]
refused to speak on his behalf, Payne
believed that George Washington had
[music] abandoned him because of his
writings supporting the idea of
extraterrestrial life and refuting
traditional Christianity.
In 1802, he was invited back to America
by the third president, Thomas
Jefferson. [music]
Jefferson, an intellectual, was
considered a genius by many in [music]
his time, both for his skill as a
statesman and his scientific aptitude.
And some believe he was also a proponent
[music] like his contemporaries Ben
Franklin and John Adams in the concept
of the plurality of worlds.
The concept of a plurality of worlds
[music] was a very widely accepted
concept in the 18th century. People like
John Adams and Thomas Payne didn't view
extraterrestrial life as a possibility,
but rather as a matter of fact that
everybody [music] knew to be true.
The new rationality in science changed
the way that [music] these founding
fathers talked about religion. 1825,
Thomas Jefferson is hiring [music]
faculty for the University of Virginia
and John Adams writes [music] to him and
gives him advice on how to do that
hiring. He says do not hire any European
professors. If you hire a European
professor, they are liable to believe in
Christianity
and that [music] is a very dangerous
doctrine that we should stay far away
from.
Other founding fathers [music]
also agreed with this view which
included a belief in the existence of
life on other planets. [music] Benjamin
Franklin wondered if there were
different gods for every sun that
harbored intelligent life.
Many of them felt it was clear that
there were intelligent [music] beings
conceivably through the whole universe
and that the notion that God came to
this [music] planet as a person who was
spit on and persecuted simply [music]
was ridiculous and they rejected that
longheld traditional belief which was a
very radical thing at the time.
America's [music] founding fathers
defending the concept of
extraterrestrial life against
Christianity.
A revolutionary idea to be certain,
but perhaps not so revolutionary to the
country's [music] earliest inhabitants
who long before claimed to have met
visitors from the sky.
[music]
In northwestern New Mexico lies a vast
concentration of ancient ruins, known
[music] today as Choco Canyon.
Built from sandstone blocks and timber
between 900 and 1150 AD, the 15 major
complexes of Choco Canyon contained
fourstory structures with hundreds of
rooms [music] that required thousands of
man-hour to construct.
Until the 19th century, they were the
largest buildings [music] in North
America.
&gt;&gt; Choco Canyon was a center of activity
for a lot of different Indian tribes,
Pueblo tribes. Archaeologists,
anthropologists have a lot of theories
about what that was. But what I have
studied and what I can tell by just some
of the chants from my own tribe and
other PBLO tribes is that this would
have been a big center of activity for
technological spiritual activities.
[music]
There's a lot of places on there that
has direct bearings up into the
universe.
When archaeologists first excavated
these ruins in 1896,
they marveled [music] at their
architectural precision.
But even more astonishing was the fact
[music] that many of these ancient
structures, like those found in Egypt,
England, and South America, suggested
the inhabitants had a sophisticated
knowledge of astronomy.
A number of devices [music]
designed for tracking solar events were
found.
And at Fajab, but which sits at the
entrance of the canyon, three giant
slabs of rock are positioned near two
spiral [music] petroglyphs etched on a
cliff wall.
During the solstice and the equinox,
these [music] rocks catch the sun in
such a way as to shine daggers of light
on different areas of the petroglyphs.
But why would early Native Americans
spend so much time building the
structures at Choco Canyon along such
precise [music] astronomical alignments?
And why build them in such a desolate
area of the country?
&gt;&gt; It is one of those sites which has been
posing so many questions and which
science is only slowly beginning to
explain. But really, there are more
questions than answers at this moment in
time about Czecho Canyon.
&gt;&gt; In his 2006 book, The Orion Zone, Aru
astronomer Gary David proposed that the
geographical layout of Hopi ruins in the
American Southwest precisely mirrors the
star [music] patterns of a number of
constellations.
When you look at where the ancestral
pueblin major ceremonial sites are
actually located, Gary David has
identified that when you just map these,
you actually find that they depict
constellations.
Specifically, Orion is very important.
Orion's belt points to the brightest
star in the sky, Sirius.
If one looks [music] at the Hopy Messes
as the stars of Orion's belt, they also
point to an important location, Choco
Canyon.
But why Orion?
And could it be merely a coincidence
that this constellation pattern has been
found at other important sites around
the world and always with the belt
pointing toward a place of significance?
Ancient [music] astronaut theorists have
discovered the constellation of Orion
lining up with the Mayan complexes
[music] along the street of the dead in
Mexico City. And here, Orion's belt
points to Cholula, the largest pyramid
in the world.
They also find it at the Giza pyramids
[music] in Egypt, with the belt pointing
toward the city of Helopoulos, a place
of worship for ancient Egyptians.
One thing we know about Orion's belt is
that this is a theme which is recurring
in Mayan mythology.
It's also actually a theme which is
occurring in Egyptian mythology. Orion's
belt and the stars around it was seen as
the heart of creation. It is where
everything began.
And it's probably not coincidental that
the hope see the place where they are
living as the heart of the world.
These are ancient people. All they had
to go by were the stars. And so they
believed, as astrologologists believe
today, that the stars have certain
powers over what goes on on planet
Earth.
[music] According to their legends, the
Hopi believe there were three worlds
that preceded the one we are in today.
Each of those worlds was wiped out when
Guardians of the Sky called to the
creator to tell him that his finest
[music] creation, humans, were no longer
living according to his plan.
And they called to him by setting off a
warning through the [music] Earth's
axis, a vibration strong enough to shift
the balance of the planet.
Is it possible the structures at Choco
Canyon were built along precise
celestial alignments so that the Hopi
could predict the periods of Earth's
devastation
and renewal?
Could the Guardians of the Sky have led
them here so they could monitor the
position of the sun? Why in the world
people settled at that location wasn't
wasn't something that they did on their
own. There's no running water there.
There was no reason to live there.
There's no good soil. They did that
because their guardian told them to live
there.
&gt;&gt; During the times of the summer and
[music] winter solstesses
as well as the spring and fall
equinoxes,
the people at Choco Canyon could gauge
the Earth's balance by watching the path
of the sund daggers at Vajute.
If the daggers did not pierce the
petroglyphs at the same points as the
previous [music] year, they would know
that the earth was out of balance.
And since the earth fell out of balance
at the end of the previous three worlds,
this could mean the end was coming
[music] once again.
Scientists from NASA determined the
earthquake that hit Chile on February
27th, [music] 2010 shifted the Earth's
axis by 3 in.
Would the ancestral Pueblo people have
seen this as a sign from the Guardians
above?
What do you think that's going to show
up at Choco Canyon on that dagger stick
that comes down at the time of the
solstice? You think the Indians were
watching that?
It's what the hopy call coanoscatsi.
We are living in coanoscatsi. [music]
Right now we are living in a life that's
out of balance.
Could these Native American legends be
more than just myth? Is it possible that
these stories along with the ancient
texts of India and the stories of the
Bible are all describing [music] alien
visitations?
For ancient astronaut theorists, the
answer is yes. And the proof may lie on
a small uninhabited island in Nova
Scotia, Canada.
In 1795,
three Nova Scotia farm boys set out to
explore nearby Oak Island after
witnessing strange green lights coming
from its shore in the middle of the
night.
As they came to the island, they saw
that there was one little, you know, pit
that they thought, well, this is very
odd. So they started to dig in that
particular spot. They came across
different platforms made out of wood,
especially out of oak. And the deeper
they dug, they also came across a mat
made of coconut fiber. And they came
across a stone slab that had very
bizarre writing on it.
The one thing is crystal clear. Canada
does not have any coconut trees. So the
mat made of coconut fiber, where did it
come from? It's a very intriguing
question how all these different levels
were made. The initial excavation
stopped at a depth of 30 ft.
But since that time, over a dozen
professional excavations have been
attempted and funded by everyone from
actors John Wayne and Errol Flynn to
Franklin D. Roosevelt. Mining and
excavation companies have dug multiple
shafts surrounding the whole money pit
with the hopes of achieving or reaching
whatever is buried down there. They've
even tried [music] to dig in sideways
and even that didn't work. Based on the
findings from [music] numerous
excavations, the money pit contains a
series of oak platforms starting at a
depth of 10 ft and recurring every 10 ft
thereafter, going at least 200 ft down.
In between these platforms [music]
are slabs of flag stone, not indigenous
to the island, and layers of puddle
clay.
Efforts to [music] reach the bottom of
the pit have proven so dangerous,
six people have died in the attempt.
Its underground is covered with canals,
flooding canals that lead seawater into
the system.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Each time there seemed to be progress,
underground floods in the canals would
make further searches impossible.
So this is what we know. Many centuries
ago, someone constructed [music] a giant
hydraulic system under this island.
It couldn't have been pirates. [music]
It had to be someone with great
expertise for architecture and
hydraulics.
We still haven't been able to access
whatever is down there because of the
incredible flooding system.
These treasure hunters poured red paint
into one of these shafts. And not only
did it come out on one side of the
island, but also on the other side. Up
to three shafts have been discovered. I
mean, it's ingenious.
But who or what constructed this
elaborately booby trapped pit? And
perhaps more importantly, what if
anything lies hidden at the bottom?
Some have speculated that it might be
the crown jewels of England, pirate
treasure, Viking hordes, [music] and
even the original manuscripts of
Shakespeare.
But perhaps the most audacious theory of
all is that the money pit is the hiding
place for one of the most sacred objects
in the world. There is a possibility
that the Ark of the Covenant with its
contents [music]
has been hidden on Oak Island.
The Ark of the Covenant,
the most sacred object in all of
Judeo-Christianity,
the gold chest that is supposed to
contain the tablets on which the Hebrew
God wrote the Ten Commandments.
Why would this religious [music] relic
be placed at the bottom of an
elaborately booby trapped pit in
northeastern Canada?
Ancient astronaut theorists believe the
ark may have been hidden because of the
powers it held. [music]
Powers from out of this world. According
to the ancient Asen hypothesis,
the Ark of the Covenant housed an
extraterrestrial device which was given
to the Israelites during their 40-year
wandering through the desert.
When you go back to the biblical
descriptions, it becomes a weapon.
It rises up into the air. It rushes
towards [music] the enemies of Israel.
When the Philistines briefly capture it,
um, they make the mistake of [music]
opening it and filing past it. Suddenly,
thousands of people start to die. The
biblical account states quite clearly
that the cause of death was cancerous
tumors. This is a very mysterious and
puzzling thing. What kind of object
could have these almost machine-like
attributes and cause deaths that sound
like radiation sickness?
What powers the ark held is the subject
of wide speculation. But an even bigger
mystery is what happened to the ark and
where it might be located today.
One legend says that it was taken during
the Crusades by an elite band of
monklike warriors known as the Knights
Templar.
The cover story, and it feels like a
cover story, is that they were to
protect pilgrims on the route between
the coast and Jerusalem in the Holy
Land. But they don't ever seem to have
done any of that. um right soon after
they were founded, they took possession
of the Temple Mount uh in Jerusalem.
And uh for the best part of 80 or 90
years, they devoted themselves to what
looked like an archaeological expedition
on the Temple Mount. And I'm pretty
certain they were looking for the Ark of
the Covenant.
The legend tells of the knights taking
the ark [music] to Scotland where they
formed an alliance with the powerful
Sinclair family. Some historians believe
William Sinclair may have taken the ark
to Oak Island in Nova Scotia in the
1400s to protect it from English
invasion. Here, Sinclair and his men
could have built what might be the most
impenetrable vault ever made,
the notorious money pit.
But if so, where is [music] the
evidence?
&gt;&gt; In the 1990s, some scientists were able
to send cameras down into one of the
shafts.
There they discovered strange objects
that had a rounded tubular shape.
Their C14 values were diverse and their
radiometric age ranged from very old to
futuristic.
Now that is basically impossible.
However, there is some chance that that
effect could be caused by some kind of
radioactivity.
That's why we suspect that a nuclear
reactor may have been taken there and
hidden inside this ingenious hydraulic
system
so that it would be kept safe forever.
[music]
What would it mean if the Ark of the
Covenant really was discovered at the
bottom of the money pit? Would it
provide the proof of alien intervention?
The very proof that ancient astronaut
theorists have been waiting for.
If the Ark of the Covenant is found at
the bottom of the money pit, well,
story's over,
perhaps. But an even greater question
persists. [music]
Why
has mankind been helped by the
intervention of beings from other worlds
as ancient astronaut proponents contend?
Or was there a more ominous intention?
Could the ark, if discovered, be a sort
of Pandora's box that once opened, would
reveal more about our [music] origins
than we would ever want to know?
As the 20th century dawned, the
industrial revolution suggested that
nothing conceived by man could be
impossible.
We could now ride through the
countryside in horseless carriages,
sail the seas and huge ocean liners,
fly through the sky in airship.
Even the idea of building rockets and
flying them to the moon, Mars, and
beyond
seemed well within our grasp.
It was the era of science fiction
writers like HG Wells and inventors like
Einstein,
Tesla, Edison,
and Ford.
In 1896,
there were widespread reports of strange
airships hovering over various locations
in the American West.
Coincidence or consequence?
There were sightings throughout history,
and of course, there were a large number
of sightings in the 19th century, but it
wasn't until 1896
that there were waves of sightings.
Thousands of people in 1896 and 1897 in
the United States saw phantom airship,
the origin of which was never explained.
These reports were cataloged, discussed
in newspapers. [music]
There were sightings in 1896,
1897, [music] 1898.
And in fact, we kind of know from
newspaper reports from the Southwest
[music]
that people were seeing craft with wings
and the Wright brothers didn't fly an
airplane until 1903. So what were these
craft? Well, on the one hand, people
were flying balloons in the 19th
century. So balloons were not high
technology. What was high technology
back then was affixing a gasoline engine
to the gondola of a balloon.
&gt;&gt; That whole airship mystery, my guess is
that some of those were just derigibles
that people were flying around. On the
other hand, during that time, we also
find reports [music] of objects that
moved really too quickly to be
derigitables, and some were maybe too
shiny really to be the types of balloons
that they were making at that time.
&gt;&gt; The prevalence of these balloons powered
by gasoline engines flying around in the
late 1890s, in the turn of the century,
probably opened up people's minds to the
possibility that there could be
literally unidentified flying objects.
people began, to put it bluntly, looking
up.
So, it could be said that modern UFO
history began with these mysterious
airships of the 1890s.
[music]
It certainly seems possible if we
believe that the airship sightings were
sightings of extraterrestrial spaceships
[music]
that perhaps the aliens were interested
in human activity at the time because of
the rapid increases being made in
technology.
Some people have suggested that aliens
have been interfering with the lives of
human beings for thousands of years. And
because they were always here at
significant points in human history,
they introduced various kinds of
technologies to spur development along a
certain line.
Could the same alien presence that some
believe had been visiting the Earth for
centuries
have been responsible for inspiring our
great leap into the modern age?
Or could the increased close encounters
with UFOs, which would persist through
the next century, be a sign that we were
in danger of going too far? A very
common idea that we have today is that
as we develop technologically, we're
going to see an increase in UFO
phenomena. That UFOs are basically
monitoring us.
Decades ago, we saw a lot of UFO
activity around air bases, around atomic
bases and also UFOs following airplanes
and maybe following our aircraft. I
would say that certainly as we keep
developing, we will continue to see that
monitoring aspect to the UFOs,
especially as we continue going into
space, we're going to continue seeing
more UFO activity. Whether it's for our
benefit or not, that's hard to say. our
history, the history of human beings on
planet Earth, whether we ourselves are
the aliens seated from another planet or
whether the aliens created us, as the
stories of the Anunnaki say, regardless,
it may be that human beings are being
directed toward a certain end.
In the 20th century, the inhabitants of
planet Earth were capable of blasting
off and touching the stars.
We were also capable of harnessing the
atom
and using it to inflict the deadliest
[music] of devastations.
We would send satellites [music] into
orbit, land on the moon,
and reach Mars. [music]
But what would we find? A barren, empty
universe of dead planets or something
else?
In the 1960s, mainstream scientists were
already exploring the question of
whether or not we're alone in the
universe.
And there was only a handful [music] of
scientists who actually proposed the
idea that yes, there are other
civilizations out there.
Now, fast forward [music] 50 years.
You'd be very hardressed to find any
scientist today saying that we're alone
in the universe.
What we're coming up to now in the 21st
century is going to be a redefinition.
Our entire history may have to be
revised in the context of nonhuman
intelligences coming and going. And what
else is out there in this incredible
universe of which [music] we humans are
a part?
Perhaps the dawn of the space age was a
signal to whatever or whoever was out
there. That after centuries of writing
on cave walls,
building temples, and mapping the skies,
the inhabitants of planet Earth
were at last ready,
ready for their return.
Certain places around the globe have
baffled scientists and scholars for
decades.
Locations with names like the zone of
silence, the gate of the gods, and the
Bermuda Triangle.
Visitors to these [music] mysterious
sites report a variety of strange
energies, unexplained disappearances,
and supernatural phenomena.
Numerous legends [music]
describe star beings traveling in and
out of these places from other worlds.
Might these myths be describing real
events?
Have the [music] strange energies in
these locations been attracting visitors
from other worlds for thousands of
years? An alien coming here 10,000 years
ago could use the magnetic spots on
Earth as signposts.
You have to enter through certain
doorways and portals into our planet.
&gt;&gt; And is there a pattern to where these
spots are located? Somebody told them,
"Use the word star for your village for
eternity. Don't change it.
&gt;&gt; Millions of people around the globe
believe we have [music] been visited in
the past by extraterrestrial beings.
What if it were true? Did ancient aliens
[music] really help to shape our world?
And if so, did they concentrate [music]
around specific locations? Could a
better understanding of ancient alien
visitation unlock the secrets [music]
behind some of the world's most
mysterious places?
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Perhaps the most famous or infamous of
all the world's mysterious places is the
Bermuda Triangle. For decades, this
stretch of ocean covering over [music]
500,000 square miles located between
Miami, Puerto Rico, and Bermuda has
baffled scientists, experienced sailors,
[music] and even military investigators.
&gt;&gt; Planes disappearing,
various kinds of strange lights being
seen, a whole bunch of weirdness, all
conglomerating into this very tight
corner of the Atlantic.
ships that have shown up absolutely
empty. [music] No sign of any struggle
and yet the crew has just vanished.
&gt;&gt; This is something that's very real. They
exist in records. And now that they're
all gone in fair weather,
that is not supernatural phenomenon to
me. That is something unexplained.
What caused ships and planes to
disappear without a trace?
Why has aeronautical and navigational
equipment stopped working or changed
course by itself?
Historical shipping records show that
the mysteries of the Bermuda Triangle
are much older than many people realize.
Ever since the earliest days of oceanic
exploration, sailors have witnessed
strange sites. Really the awareness of
the Bermuda Triangle started with
Christopher Columbus being such an
esoteric navigator and a wellrespected
sailor. Uh his log traversing to the new
world is very accurate. And it turns out
just as Columbus got into the area known
as the Bermuda Triangle. He recorded
having compass malfunctions. The
following night he saw a large fireball
hit the ocean.
He saw strange lights. He saw strange
weather phenomena happening there. So,
it's definitely a case that the story of
the Bermuda Triangle is not just some
modern or some urban myth at the
threshold of the 21st century. It is as
old as there are accounts of people
going into that area.
About 450 years after Columbus on
December 5th, 1945,
the US military experienced the Bermuda
Triangle's most perplexing mystery. At
2:00 in the afternoon, five US Navy
torpedo bombers flew from a naval base
in Fort Lauderdale, Florida on a routine
training exercise.
But not long into the 2-hour mission,
all five planes were suddenly gone.
The mystery was compounded when the Navy
sent out a rescue plane, and it too
disappeared.
Six planes
all flown by skilled pilots
had vanished into oblivion.
&gt;&gt; That struck everybody as very odd. This
was now the modern era. We have radar.
We have radio. Still five aircraft
vanished. Now the question is where have
all of them gone? It really is as if
they have been snapped out of our
reality into something else. And of
course, what that something else is,
that's the mystery of the Bermuda
Triangle.
&gt;&gt; Over the years, few have lived to tell
of any strange anomalies that have
occurred to them in the Bermuda
Triangle.
But American pilot Bruce Gernan is an
exception.
In 1970,
Gernan, his father, and a business
associate were flying from the Bahamas
to Florida.
When Gernan reported scene, a strange
cloud directly out in front of their
plane.
Then, as he approached, Gernon claims
the cloud formed a donut-shaped hole or
vortex.
The tunnel was huge at first, but then
it started getting smaller rapidly.
And when I penetrated into the tunnel,
an incredible thing happened. These
lines instantly formed. It was like
looking down a rifle barrel because the
lines were swirling slowly
counterclockwise.
I encountered some intense electricity.
There were like flashes going on and
off. And all I could see was this
strange grayish yellowish fog. I call it
electronic fog.
I noticed that my instruments were
malfunctioning and at the same time I'm
[music] feeling this unbelievable
sensation.
Gernan says when he finally exited the
tunnel, he radioed Miami air traffic
control, but they couldn't find his
plane on their radar screen.
And then about 3 minutes later, the
radar controller came back on the radio
and he's all excited. He had identified
me over Miami. And I couldn't believe it
because I'd only been flying for 33
minutes. It should have been more like
an hour and 3 minutes.
Could such a discrepancy in time and
location really happen?
And could extraterrestrials be using
this kind of gateway to travel to Earth?
According to Albert Einstein's general
theory of relativity, it is possible.
Through Einstein's principles of being
able to bend space using a gravitational
pull, it's very possible that
extraterrestrial craft could somehow get
a higher charge of energy from these
locations like the Bermuda Triangle,
which allow them to do a burst of
energy, if you will, a warp [music]
speed, and harness some type of extra
particles or energies from these
locations to get them where they're
trying to go.
What happens is is that anytime you have
energy generated at all, especially from
a higher plane, a higher dimension, it's
going to come out by spin. It's going to
be rotation and spin that allows that
energy to get through. So, by
definition, such energy emissions are
going to be vortexes. So, a vortex and a
gateway [music] are the same thing.
Since wormholes are theoretically
located throughout the universe, could
these same types of gateways exist in
smaller areas on Earth?
If so, are strange electromagnetic
[music]
levels the key to discovering them?
completely unconnected people report the
same thing and it always has something
to do with electromagnetic
phenomenon usually involving an
unexplained vapor or cloud.
This phenomena indicated UFOs
materializing or dematerializing in our
dimension.
It's quite possible that the Bermuda
Triangle is exactly one such
interdimensional doorway that's used by
these aliens.
With reports of [music] UFOs appearing
and ships and planes disappearing, some
claim [music] the Bermuda Triangle is a
portal that works in both directions.
So, if as ancient [music] astronaut
theorists claim, other worldly visitors
have been using them to come here since
ancient times, might we someday use this
shortcut to visit them?
And if there really is a portal in the
open waters of the Bermuda Triangle,
might there be others [music] on land?
400 m south of El Paso, Texas,
in northern Mexico, stretches a remote
and rugged section of high desert.
This area near the town of Sabios is
referred to by the locals as the Zona
del Salencio or the zone of silence.
It's an epicenter for some of the
strangest phenomena ever experienced on
Earth.
Nothing works there. If you go there
with your cell phone, the cell phone
stops. If you go with a radio, it stops.
If you go there with a compass, the
needle just keeps spinning. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; it's completely bizarre. There's strange
rocks everywhere. You have strange
mutated animals uh living in the desert
in this area. You feel a strange
tingling when you're there.
The zone of silence was first identified
in the 1930s by Francisco Sarabia, a
Mexican pilot [music]
who claimed that his radio had
mysteriously failed to function while
flying over the area.
They call it Mexico's [music] Bermuda
Triangle. It's located practically on
the same peril, 28th and 26th [music]
peril. And as a result of that, it goes
and connects with the Egyptian pyramids.
So around that whole sector, there seems
to be some connection between the
[music] anomalies that are occurring
through these different parts of the
world. As a scientist, you're trained to
be skeptical or maybe you were born that
way, but we really don't believe
anything. You know, nothing is proven
until you actually have evidence. But I
[music] can say that Earth's magnetic
field does vary across the surface by up
to a few%.
One of the strangest cases involving the
zone of silence took place on July 11th,
1970
when the US Air Force launched an Athena
missile
from its military facility in Green
River, Utah.
The missile was programmed to land 700 m
away at the White Sands Missile Range in
New Mexico.
But for some unexplained reason, the
Athena missile flew hundreds of miles
past the White Sands range towards the
zone of silence.
Not only did it go off course, it way
overshot as if it had been picked up or
yanked or dragged or pulled into it.
There was a NASA spokesman who even said
it was weird. It was like the the thing
just got pulled into this area and it
ended up crashing there and breaking up
into bits.
&gt;&gt; But some claim this [music] missile is
not the only thing that's been
mysteriously pulled into the zone of
silence. Ancient alien theorists believe
an unusually large number of meteorites
have crashed here.
The evidence seems to be indicating that
the zone of silence is some powerful
energy vortex area that's literally
sucking meteorites and other space
debris right into this small area of
northern Mexico.
There's a high level of magnetism in the
area that's been proven by science. We
know there's a magnetic signature uh to
the entire area. Is it strong enough to
attract uh large objects like
meteorites? I think we need more
research, but I I I don't think that
research is being done right now.
Starting 3,000 years ago,
the Anastasia culture inhabited the
region to the north in today's [music]
American Southwest.
Anazi means ancient ones,
and they paid great attention to the
stars.
Scientists have determined that in 1054
AD, a supernova explosion was visible
from Earth.
Many believe the first known drawing of
this event was found inside an Anastasia
cave dwelling
south of the zone of silence.
Other cultures, including the Maya, also
reportedly possessed a surprisingly
detailed knowledge of similar celestial
events.
Is it possible that both of these
cultures were somehow exchanging
information?
They're separated by thousands of miles,
but both the Anastasia of the North and
the Mesoamericans of the South found the
zone of silence and used it as a meeting
place between their two cultures.
You can imagine if you studied the stars
at night and plotted the constellations,
obviously one of the things you're going
to [music] see are these meteorites
streaking across the sky. If your
answers come from the sky, you probably
would follow those streaking meteorites
and find out where they ended up.
And the [music] theory is that they may
have found what they were looking for in
the zone of silence.
But what other connections exist between
these cultures?
And are they of a celestial origin?
&gt;&gt; If we look back into the ancient beliefs
of the Anastasia and the Mesoamericans
to the south, we know that there was
great belief in sky people, visitors
from the sky.
If these visitors came from the sky, who
were they?
And there's a similarity to the beings
being reported as tall, pale skin, white
hair, which is not indigenous to the
dark skinned, dark-haired people found
in that region, but does match many of
the South American descriptions of their
gods.
According to legend, these so-called
visitors from the sky made themselves
[music] known to an ancient people.
Is it possible that they are still
making themselves known today?
&gt;&gt; There are a number of reports of UFOs um
in [music] the zone of silence.
&gt;&gt; Probably the most prominent and most
popular report came [music] out of the
town of Sabios. It was on a late summer
afternoon when a number of towns people
saw an object hovering in the sky on the
outskirts of town. They described it as
being about 100 m wide. It had multiolor
lights flashing. Wasn't doing anything.
It was just hovering in the desert.
After a while, it simply took off and
headed out into the zone of silence.
&gt;&gt; I think too that as what's going on
today, the high activity, UFO sightings,
the anomalous reports that are still
going on today, perhaps there is a
connection, maybe [music] it's a vortex,
maybe it's a dimensional port. We can't
explain it, but something unusual is
going on in that area.
Might extraterrestrials be able to
detect [music] these magnetic
differences?
And would they have been of any use to
ancient visitors?
If I was an alien coming here 10,000
years ago, obviously there weren't any
road maps at the time. However, [music]
I could use the anomalous magnetic spots
on planet Earth as signposts [music]
of sorts. And so that when I come back,
those signposts
would be my guides to find my way around
planet Earth.
There are spots on planet Earth that are
highly magnetic.
But are the magnetic [music] levels,
the sky god legends,
and recent sightings of UFOs
proof that a portal exists [music] here?
And are there other places that might
offer more direct physical evidence
[music]
800 miles southeast of Lima, Peru, near
the shores of Lake Tittikaka, is a site
that has mystified visitors from around
the world.
&gt;&gt; Oh wow.
&gt;&gt; Shamans still come to perform rituals
and offer prayers at the rock wall on
this high plateau
&gt;&gt; changing frequencies
&gt;&gt; as they have done for generation after
generation.
It is known as Puerto de Hayumar
or gate of the gods.
And when you see it, it's quite
baffling.
Here is [music] this giant doorway
carved into solid rock,
and it appears to be a gateway,
but it doesn't go anywhere.
It's literally in the middle of nowhere
at 14,000 [music] ft. Yet that rock, as
clear as you can see, has a gigantic
rectangle [music]
carved out of it, cut out of it. And in
the center of that rectangle at the
bottom, there is something that looks
like a door.
The Peruvian natives actually [music]
referred to this as the gate of the
gods. But why would you make a doorway
to basically rocks that didn't let you
go anywhere? There has to be some way to
get through that doorway.
&gt;&gt; According to Inca legend, the first
priest king, Amaro Muru, is said to have
traveled through this portal using a
special object to activate the doorway,
turning this solid rock into what's
known as a stargate.
According to legend, this stargate was
activated by the help of a golden disc.
And this golden disc fell from the sky.
Well, the story goes that the first
priest, king of the Incas, took a golden
disc up to this gate of the gods, stuck
it in a special recessed area,
and this interdimensional doorway
actually opened up and he passed through
it, never to be seen again.
The shaman that were there that watched
it, that witnessed the whole thing and
reported on it basically told that that
was exactly what happened.
Archaeologists who have examined the
gate of the gods have discovered a small
circular depression in the center of the
doorway.
Some people have speculated that this
[music] depression was perhaps where the
golden disc was placed.
It really is out of the movies. This
device is said to have been made of gold
and of various other precious objects.
and whoever had it could come near the
site and somehow be able to operate it.
And then there would either be contact
with the gods or the gods would come to
them.
And we're all led to believe, oh, it's
all coincidence. It's all just fantasy
rubbish. Something happened. And in the
case of the Stargate,
it is possible that this sundisk had
some type of an extraterrestrial
connection. and that this was a
technological device with which to
travel.
And that may mean physically taking a
person and taking them into another
hidden dimension and [music] taking them
back.
Or it may mean traveling between Earth,
going through that Stargate and going to
another place somewhere in the universe.
According to the local legend, these
priest kings known as space brothers
reportedly came from other worlds.
Might they have traveled here through
the gate of the gods?
They came from the other constellations
from other planets.
In our language we have a word called uh
chakana which is some of the
constellations like the southern cross
orion belt pleadis. One of the elders
said this is the bridge to home. So in
essence all these manifestations
has to do with the space brothers.
But could a device to activate this door
actually exist?
And if so,
where would the doorway lead?
According to ancient astronaut
theorists, the gate of the gods is one
end of a wormhole,
a type of portal that connects either to
another part of the universe or another
dimension.
The wormhole is a theoretical construct
through general relativity. The concept
is really that there's a possibility of
space-time being connected, [music]
various parts of spacetime being
connected through a small channel. And
if such a construct was made, then you'd
have a shortcut between very distant
parts of the universe.
Wormholes are an accepted element of
theoretical physics.
But have they actually existed? In some
of the world's most mysterious places,
the idea that there are stargates or
that they could have existed in ancient
times. We do see many artifacts and
representations of someone passing
through a doorway or going through some
type of energy source. And ancient man
did not understand technology just as
we're trying to understand is a wormhole
possible
that it's some kind of doorway
between our dimension and another.
And what I maintain is that these aliens
who are coming here are coming here in
interdimensional type of craft.
They're able to jump through hyperspace,
come here to our planet in no time at
all, but they have to enter through
certain doorways and portals into our
planet.
&gt;&gt; Dimensions aren't really considered
something to travel along, but
dimensions are directions. And if you
could somehow travel along these other
dimensions, it would take you somewhere
else entirely.
What if one end of [music] a portal
exists here at Puerto Deay Mara?
Might that be part of the reason many
consider Peru to be a focal point of UFO
and extraterrestrial activity?
Lake Tittikaka has all kinds of strange
lights associated with it and a number
of witnesses claim they see UFOs coming
out of the lake and the locals always
describe seeing large blue balls of
light or glowing discs and sometimes
even beings reported around these
sightings. These beings are always
reported as tall, pale skinned,
completely non-indigenous to the people
that are dark skinned, dark-haired in
these South American regions.
Another theory to how extraterrestrials
may have traveled across the universe
involves the scientific [music] concept
of teleportation.
But is it really possible to have
something disappear from one spot and
suddenly appear somewhere else?
At the Max Blanc Institute, [music]
scientists have already dematerialized
subatomic particles and made them
reappear somewhere else. So, science is
just on the precipice of being able to
do this to move it from one place to
another. So, I believe that that is a is
a secret that the ancient stone builders
knew. Even though the gate might be
closed right now, the reality is you can
still access the energy because it's
still [music] flowing around the area,
it's the area itself that seems to hold
the energy and put it out and draw
people to it.
[music]
But is Puerto de Hayu Mara the only
strange site in Peru?
Are there other mysterious places here?
Some believe there are.
High up in the mountains of Peru, 850 mi
north of the gate of the gods, is a
breathtaking 2m long plateau.
Another area of reported high magnetic
energy.
For centuries, it has been considered a
powerful sacred place among the Incan
people.
It's called Marawasi.
Marawasi is a very beautiful region in
Peru. Marowasa is said to have had very
bizarre energy. People go there and they
experience bizarre energy patterns.
The local people say it is a place of
the wizards and gods and genies of old
and um they treat it with a great deal
of veneration.
&gt;&gt; When people go there they report a
special kind of frequency and energy,
a euphoria. In fact,
&gt;&gt; most geologists consider the many stone
formations on the plateau [music] to be
naturally formed, born of millions of
years of erosion and other natural
processes. [music]
But is there more here than first meets
the eye?
Some consider Marawasi to be a massive
[music] sculpture garden filled with
carvings left behind by an ancient
civilization.
This is a region whereby stones are not
just stones. What we have here is almost
like a Disneyland of the gods. The
question then is, is this a purely
natural phenomenon or is this something
more?
Could this be not just a collection of
rocks, but a sanctuary of stone
monuments made by people tens or even
hundreds of thousands of years ago.
Researcher [music] Daniel Russo was the
first to make this claim in 1952.
&gt;&gt; Daniel Russo was shown a photograph of a
huge colossal stone head up in the high
mountains above Lima and he made an
expedition there just to see this stone
head. But he was astonished to find that
on [music] this tiny messa were hundreds
of carved stones.
There are those who believe the rock
formations [music]
depict animals and people not indigenous
to South America. They see in them
figures such as an African queen,
the Egyptian god of fertility, Towret
[music]
depicted as an upright hippopotamus,
a camel,
and many others.
One formation known as the monument
[music] to humanity features what
appears to be a western face on one side
and a Middle Eastern one [music] on the
other.
Is it really possible that so many
formations which appear to depict
figures from [music] around the world
could coincidentally be found on a
single plateau?
Or if they are man-made, who may have
carved them?
&gt;&gt; The logo legends say that it is a place
of the ancient giant gods,
that the gods created this. In fact,
when the Spanish chronicers came to Peru
and investigated [music] the ancient
shamanic religions of Peru,
they told a story of Tiss Vera Coocha,
the creator god, who arrived [music] in
the guise of a man to walk and inspect
his lands.
And he had given them different orders.
And there were some rebel nations that
were not doing what they were supposed
to do. And he promptly turned them to
stone.
The name Marawasi
provides a clue to its origins [music]
and mystery.
The word itself predates the Incan
Empire.
Marawasi scholar and researcher Daniel
Russo believed the name meant twotory
house and referred to the strange
complex of buildings located on the
site.
That really raises the question that
scholars and theologians have been
trying to figure out for many years. Is
there an Atlantean or some lost
civilization? So Marowasi puts that
question back on the map. Could this be
possible? Were there trans oceanic
cultures visiting thousands of years ago
off the books of recorded history?
According to Daniel Russo, the ancient
civilization that created Marawasi were
a people known as the Masma.
And supposedly
Peru was not their only home.
&gt;&gt; The Masma was this very very ancient
advanced civilization, advanced culture
if we want to call it that that seems to
have been global, seems to have traveled
worldwide a very early period. And
[music] Russo spent much of his time
looking around the world for evidence of
this advanced civilization. and he
thought he found it at Marawasi.
He actually saw Marawasi in many ways as
being like a huge sculpture garden that
the Mazma had built there.
If such a worldwide community existed,
[music]
what happened to it? Was it, as some
believe, wiped [music] out in the great
flood described in the Bible?
It's very interesting that these
carvings are found at 12,000 ft because
that kind of implies that civilization
started at the top and then worked its
way back down as the waters of the flood
receded. It's almost as if the first
thing they did when Noah's arc descended
[music] and landed, maybe landed at
Marco, was to record all the animals
that they had collected, if you buy the
whole concept of a story of saving what
was left of humanity and saving what
they could of the animal kingdom.
If these are real sculptures or even
natural formations that were touched up,
they are so old geologically that all we
can really do is fall back to some of
the speculations of people like Daniel
Russo that this was some kind of very
ancient
civilization.
&gt;&gt; Perhaps indeed there were ancient gods.
Perhaps there was a race of beings, a
very high-minded nature that came here
in the early early times
that helped mankind and that have been
overseeing their handiwork.
&gt;&gt; I suspect [music] that they were trying
to record something about their beliefs,
their civilization, something that could
be passed on to future generations. They
may have realized that they were not
going to last forever and they wanted to
leave [music] some kind of mark, some
kind of record, maybe even some kind of
warning for future generations.
If this advanced globe traveling race
existed in early history,
where did they come from? According to
author George [music] Hunt Williamson,
who first popularized Marawasi with his
1959 book, Road in the [music] Sky,
Marawasi was a sacred forest,
where extraterrestrial beings met to
plan the future, and many UFO
researchers believe they're still
returning to this day.
&gt;&gt; The mesa has a plethora of UFO
sightings, ultradimensional visitors.
It's an extraordinary place.
&gt;&gt; What is probably Peru's most famous UFO
photo was taken near Marowasi in the
1970s by a businessman who himself was
going up the trail to the plateau of
Marawasi when he looked back down the
valley and there was a silvery disc in
broad daylight flying up the valley.
But are there really special types of
energy flowing around [music] Marawasi
that we are just beginning to
understand?
And if so, have they been attracting
visitors for thousands of years as
reported at some of the world's other
mysterious places? My suspicion is that
extraterrestrials would be more inclined
to come to these energetic places, not
just because it would make their
technology work better, but because
their bodies are going to vibrate at a
frequency that's more appropriate for
the universe or the world that they
inhabit.
As I've looked at studies and studied it
myself, I think that may be something
inherent to those spots. Um, maybe
electromagnetic, maybe geomagnetic
anomaly. You have in some cases
different types of rocks, different
types of crystal and structures, maybe
underground flowing water that will
carry electric currents. So I think
there are a lot of possibilities. We
really don't understand exactly what's
going on.
Is there a reason why these so-called
[music]
interdimensional space portals allegedly
appear at certain spots on our planet?
Is there, as some suggest, a pattern to
their locations?
And what evidence [music] exists that
shows our ancient ancestors knew the
code?
According to ancient astronaut
theorists,
the mysterious [music] energy field
sites around the world are not randomly
located. They are connected by what is
referred to as the world grid. A
geometric pattern of energy that
crisscrosses the globe.
Our planet is covered with this network
of very subtle invisible energies that
are all around us. But at certain places
on the planet, these energies come
together and they create a powerful
vortex area and that energy is is
stronger and more useful in a sense than
some other part of the earth.
The world grid theory is a concept that
all of these sacred sites all around the
world are actually connected in some
sort of mathematical geometric grid that
came from a time when we really
understood the harmony between nature
and geometry and science and
mathematics. [music]
&gt;&gt; It's well known that Australian
Aboriginals
follow these dreaming tracks as they go
on their walkabout through the desert.
they can see [music] these lines on the
ground. They claim the Chinese also
believe that they can see and track
[music] these dragon lines. And in fact,
a very popular Chinese practice of fenue
[music]
is to use these energy lines that are
coming and going throughout the land.
The unique relationship between
geometric shapes and certain locations
on earth stretches back in [music]
history to the Pythagorean school of
thought in ancient Greece.
&gt;&gt; One of the famous [music] Pythagorian
philosophers of ancient Greece, Plato,
talks about the earth [music] as a
geometric docahedron
that it's like a ball sewn in various
[music]
geometric shapes.
And the Pythagorean school is basically
saying that geometry
and the various forms of geometry
are what makes up all matter, including
the earth.
Another strange mystery surrounds the
apparent concentration of UFO sightings
along the world grid.
Before his death in 1992,
French UFO researcher Ame Michelle
mapped every alleged extraterrestrial
report since the Roswell incident in
1947.
&gt;&gt; And when he mapped them, he found that
they were very specific, namely in
lines. And he began to map these lines
and he found that these lines were not
just random but were actually linked to
degrees of latitude
and that there was really a science
behind where UFOs were [music] cited.
Ancient astronaut theorists believe that
the concentration of energy levels
[music] and UFO sightings is not a
coincidence.
They claim that other worldly beings
visited our ancestors [music]
and told them of the special powers in
these locations.
Then they say the ancient people were
shown [music] how to build incredible
structures to magnify these natural
powers.
It's a theory known as geommancy.
So in fact by building pyramids
and standing stones, obelisks and things
like that we can work with this natural
energy field around the earth and in a
similar way to acupuncture on a human
body. We can do that to the earth too.
And by putting certain structures or a
needle in a certain place in the earth,
we can accentuate these energies.
In Europe,
lines sometimes thousand kilometers of
long exist from antiquity. In Europe,
they are called Lee lines.
All the antique places are linked
together. These lay lines extend all the
way from England all the way through
France down across through Italy and
just in a straight line. And the
fascinating aspect is that many of those
towns that are on that line, the root of
the town's name is represented [music]
across 20 30
town names. Every point is on one line.
It's an archaeological point and every
[music] point has the same core of the
word. The word is always star. It's
absolutely fascinating and it's not
coincidence. Our stone age people did
not by coincidence just put their holy
places in stone age in one line.
Somebody ordered it and somebody told
them use the word star for your village
for eternity. Don't change it.
So the question is, are those guys
extraterrestrials
or is it possible that we in fact
[music] are extraterrestrial?
We did not come from here and it's
simply an older version of humanity
taking care of the younger version that
they're going to leave the planet to.
The idea was that generations in the far
future, they must struggle over these
artifacts and over these indications and
they must start to ask questions. That's
the situation we have today.
&gt;&gt; The main thing that these mysterious
places can tell us about our past is
that it's a lot more complex than they
teach us in school. [music]
&gt;&gt; Until future scientists solve the
strange issues surrounding certain spots
on Earth, we'll be left with lingering
questions.
Might these [music] locations really be
portals or entrances to wormholes? Did
extraterrestrial [music]
beings transport themselves to Earth
using special electromagnetic fields in
these mysterious places? And were these
secrets [music] known by ancient
civilizations now lost to history?