Don't believe or disbelieve anything we
discuss in spirit science. Simply have
your own experience. Better get some
popcorn ready. This one's going to be
pretty long. Back in the late 1700s,
early 1800s time period, there was a
social movement liberating the modern
world from the reign of control that
religion and superstition had on the
people. Essentially, after our darkest
part on the procession of the equinox,
we were really beginning to wake up.
Started making new inventions that were
rapidly changing the world. The
industrial era was beginning. Because of
this, we began to see that maybe
religion as an answer was not in our
best interests. And so the movement
happened. We turned to science instead
to answer our questions about the
universe. The only problem with this was
that we grouped in many things with
superstition that we probably shouldn't
have. Things like consciousness,
intuition, human connection, paranormal
phenomenon, all of it went right out the
door with superstition when in fact
we've proven these things today to be
real. So after 200 years of just going
with the same idea about what's
classified as superstition and what's
okay to talk about, mainstream science
is still going with the assumption that
consciousness is just a part of the
brain. They don't know how it works.
They don't have a single rational
explanation for it, but they keep on
believing it. Why? Well, when we toss
superstition out of the door, even
talking about it became taboo. It's just
not done. Literally, the reason that
it's tough talking about this stuff in
the mainstream scientific community is
because that's just the way science has
been for 200 years. They won't have any
of it. Even though there are scientific
institutions that prove that theory
wrong, the field of noetics and the
works of biologist Rupert Sheldrake and
his colleagues have more than proven
mass consciousness exists and is
definitely not a part of the brain. Now,
no disrespect to the scientific
community, but that assumption that
we're still holding on to has not gotten
us anywhere. It's time we begin to
question the decisions of our ancestors
because many of the things that we've
been led to believe to be true simply is
not. I'm not saying blindly accept all
of the new stuff that's coming out
nowadays, but we should at least put it
on the table and be able to discuss it
as a global community. One other thing
before we get this rolling, I want to
give an overview about what sacred
geometry really is. Sacred geometry is
the geometry of consciousness. It
revolves around the idea that all
consciousness, including human, is
solely based on sacred geometry. Because
it is, we can begin to see and
understand where we have come from,
where we are now, and where we're going.
The universe is infinite. It has no
beginning and no end. In both science
and religion, creation is often
discussed from a perspective of having a
set or a specific beginning. In science,
we call it the big bang. This is the
theory that says everything in the
universe was compressed to the point of
a single infantestimably small particle.
Something we would perceive as unity and
then rapidly exploded and expanded
outwards and created everything in the
universe.
In religion, it is generally called
creation. When God or some all- knowing
and all-seeing entity, being the only
one imbued with such power, created
everything presumably in six days before
taking a well-deserved day off. Let's
take a step outside the box for a second
and put these two sides of this cosmic
coin into a vesica Pisces. As usual, the
two enemies that never got along
actually have quite a lot in common.
Both say that the universe started with
unity and expanded outwards. Both say
that light was an important factor in
creation as well. If at the beginning of
the universe we were one essence and
somehow became everything then both are
saying the same thing that we came from
the same source. But wait a second how
can we make sense out of that statement
the universe is infinite if we are
measuring it from a sense of having a
beginning. And this is what we're going
to talk about now.
If we value the pursuit of knowledge we
must be free to follow wherever that
search may lead us. The free mind is not
a barking dog to be tethered on a 10-ft
chain. Today, I want to talk about two
specific energies that can be expressed
through this image. The energy that
flows here is male and female energy.
Male energy is focused, and female
energy is creative and random. Neither
of them is greater nor weaker than the
other, and both can be extremely
powerful when fully manifested.
Female energy is the land of unbridled
possibilities, creative potential, and
affecting the universe from within.
Focused male energy takes direct routes
from point A to point B. This energy can
be as strong as a tank, accomplishing
task and going where it needs to go with
precision and without distraction. The
important thing to know about this
energy isn't how they move. I'm going to
use some super basic sacred geometry to
demonstrate this. This is the Fibonacci
spiral. We're going to be talking a lot
more about it when we dive into the
topic. For now, all you have to know is
that it starts at one and flows outward
forever in a very specific way and is
present in all life everywhere.
As male energy flows through the spiral,
it goes from base point to point from
here to here to here to here. It doesn't
curve. It just goes straight where it
needs to be. Female energy, however,
would flow in the actual spiral. It
would go around going in and around
outside all the lines, but still getting
to the same or similar results. This is
the graphic representation of how it
flows, but it also acts in the same way.
From this understanding, you can see how
we use these energies in our lives. It's
the difference between driving straight
to work and being on schedule all the
time and taking the scenic group because
it's a more pleasant ride, even if it
means being late. It's baking a cake
strictly by what it says in the cookbook
and putting it together with what just
feels right. It's getting that promotion
for working the hardest and getting that
promotion for coming up with the best
ideas. Here's a relatable example. It's
the difference between Inception and
Sucker Punch. Both about dreams, but one
of them being the masculine story of
professional men just doing their
nononsense work trying to get the job
done, and the other being the feminine
story that was creative and random. and
according to many didn't make much
sense. Both male and female energy like
the chakras have their own traits. Male
energy is linear, analytical, strategic
and practical. However, when male energy
is constricted, it is very blundering
and confrontational. And what tends to
occur is not seeing all sides of a
situation or not being open to any other
possibility other than the one being
pursued. You can see a lot of that in
today's society. Most commonly, we call
it being close-minded. Female energy, on
the other hand, moves in curves. It does
not stay inside the lines. It is
creativity and movement and expression
and emotion. It can do anything and go
anywhere, but it has trouble sticking to
schedule. If constricted, it can get out
of its flow, running rampant between
emotions and mood swings and ideas. The
creativity could get jumbled and come
out as an outofcrol mess. We don't have
this widespread issue in today's
society, and it has a lot to do with our
brain hemispheres. We're going to look
at that in a moment. One big difference
between the two is that male energy
looks at parts and female energy looks
at holes. Before I go on, I want to make
this clear. Male and female energy has
very little to do with sexual
orientation. Like, it's in the mix, but
it's not a fundamental part of the
energy itself. For example, if you look
at the shape of male and female bodies,
men have straighter bodies. Women have
curvier bodies. We'll probably come back
to this in a lesson down the road. Okay.
Brain hemispheres. We have two of them.
And if you remember what you learned in
grade 10 biology, this will be familiar.
The left brain is the male energy side
of the brain. It is orderly,
statistical, logical, and mathematical.
It sees things in straight lines,
rational, and practical. The right brain
is the female energy side of the brain.
It is our creative side of free spirit.
It is passion and experience of taste
and feeling, movement and art. As is the
same with the energy. The left brain
cannot make sense out of the right
brain. You cannot put feelings and
expressions within boxes. They must be
felt to be truly experienced. The right
brain too cannot make sense about how
the left brain understands things. Okay?
So, as a species, we are primarily
leftrained. Well, incredibly leftrained.
This basically means that as a species,
we essentially have a male energy
imbalance. There is way too much of it.
It is dominant and is constricting on
the female side of the brain. Now, don't
get me wrong, this isn't a bad thing. In
fact, it's kind of a blessing in
disguise. But we have to talk about some
other things first. Everything in the
universe is geometric. Whether it's
people, trees, cats, planets, solar
systems, stars, you name it. Anything in
the universe can be measured on a
geometric scale. Having said that, it's
important to note that creation is also
geometric. What we're going to be
looking at today is the pattern of
creation. Essentially, what this means
is that everything in the universe comes
out of this single pattern. I'm not
making this up. This single image will
change everything. When I mentioned in
lesson 5 that the ancient Egyptians and
even more ancient civilizations knew
about a deeper basic understanding of
the universe, this is the flower of life
and it is also the creation pattern of
everything in existence. Even
non-tangible things, emotions, thoughts,
music, and its entire spectrum,
everything comes from this image. Okay.
So, there are 13 information systems
that comes out of the flower of life.
Today I'm going to show you how physical
reality can manifest itself, which is
just one of the 13 systems. In future
lessons, we will look at more. It's also
important to note that at first it may
not make sense. I ask that you do not
choose immediately to shut this out and
just watch with an open mind and try and
see this in a new way. Also, I want to
tell you that by learning about sacred
geometry simply by observing, you are
absorbing only a very minuscule amount
of information. If you really want to
learn more, you must begin to draw it
yourself. I kid you not, when you do
this, you begin to see things in a new
way. you begin to understand why things
are done in the way that they are done.
Promise. The flower of life was known
around the world in ancient times. It
was found in Ireland, Turkey, Israel,
Egypt, China, Greece, Germany, India,
and Iceland. It's also been recorded to
have been found in England, Tibet,
Japan, Sweden, Lapland, the Yucatan, and
I think 14 other places. This thing is
everywhere. Not only that, but
everywhere around the world, it has the
same name, the flower of life. Now, to
understand the flower of life, first we
have to talk about how it's formed. This
could get incredibly complex, so I'll
try and keep it simple. Imagine
consciousness or spirit floating in a
void, which means it's nothingness and
then spirit. No physical body or mind,
just spirit and that's it. Then
blackness, essentially nothing all
around the spirit for infinite. Spirit
decides to do something. So it expands
its consciousness all around itself as
far as it can go without moving. It
creates a sphere around itself. This is
the first circle in the flower of life.
Then spirit has an awareness of what's
around itself in 360°. It moves to the
very edge of the sphere anywhere and
repeats what it did the first time. It
creates this image which also creates
the vesica Pisces. Within the vesica
Pisces is a vast and incredible amount
of knowledge about width, proportion,
depth. Also comes the square roots of 2,
3, and 5 which are all numbers that go
on forever. But even more interestingly
comes geometric information about light.
We'll talk about that in a moment. Now
spirit has no choice but to do it again.
Spirit is flawless and therefore it will
move flawlessly creating the next circle
either here or here. exactly one radius
away from the other circle next to it.
Every time spirit moves another sphere,
more and more knowledge comes out of the
image that is created. The first
complete image to be formed is this. It
has two names. The seed of life or the
Genesis pattern and for good reason.
Now, let's look at the book of Genesis
for a second. Each of these movements or
creations of circles can be seen as
another day. On the first movement, the
second sphere, it created knowledge
about not only mathematical proportions
but light. The first sentence of Genesis
says the earth was without form and void
and that the spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters. In the very next
sentence, God says, "Let there be
light." The key here is in the order.
The movement happened first, then light
happened immediately after. Well, but
what about the waters? Well, you have to
remember the Bible has been changed over
time a lot. The ancient Egyptians would
say that the way our modern Bibles begin
creation is impossible, especially if
you think about it from a physics point
of view. Imagine a dark infinite space
that goes on forever and ever in all
directions. You're just floating there
with nothing. You can't really fall. But
where would you fall to? From a purely
physics or mathematical point of view,
motion itself or kinetic energy is
absolutely impossible in a void. You
can't even rotate because motion cannot
become real unless there is one other
object in the space around you. So the
ancient Egyptians would say that before
God moved upon the face of the waters,
it would first have to create something
to move relative to. So Genesis pattern
after three spheres, you get the Holy
Trinity. Another interesting one, it
says in many Bibles of the world, not
just the Christian Bible, that on the
fourth day of Genesis, exactly 1/ half
of creation was completed. Starting from
the first motion, exactly 1/ half of the
circles were formed on the fourth day.
Fifth day of Genesis, sixth circle, more
information. And then on the sixth day,
a geometric miracle takes place. The
last circle forms a complete six-pedal
flower. This is what many earlier Bibles
meant when they said, "In the beginning,
there were six." Our Bible even said
creation was formed in 6 days. And this
fits exactly. This is the pattern of
Genesis. And so it's called the Genesis
pattern. It's also the beginning of the
creation of the universe that we live
in. These original movements of spirit
are really important. But now let's look
at something even cooler. Another image
that comes out of this pattern is this.
It's called the tree of life. Many may
recognize this as the Jewish or Hebrew
Cabala. But the Cabala did not originate
this image. And there is proof. The tree
of life does not belong to any culture.
Not even the Egyptians who carved the
tree of life on two sets of three
pillars at Carneak Temple Luxor over
5,000 years ago. It's outside any race
or religion. As with all of these
images, there are patterns that are
intimately connected with nature. You'll
also notice that every circle on the
tree of life is either the length or
width of the vesica Pisces. The second
image beyond Genesis in the flower of
life is the egg of life. This is formed
during the second vortex motion. Upon
its completion, it creates an image like
this, a three-dimensional shape that you
can hold in your hand. If you were to
connect their centers, you would see a
cube. So, what? Who cares? Well, the
ancient Egyptians did because they were
concerned with creation, life, and
death. They called this cluster of
spheres the egg of life. You probably
won't believe me just yet, but this
shape is the morphogenic structure that
created your body. Your entire physical
existence is dependent on the egg of
life structure, and everything about you
was created from that form. Everything
from your eye color to how long your
fingers are. This is a whole lesson on
its own. So, let's move on for now. All
around the world, the flower of life was
always made the exact same way. See,
this pattern can clearly go on forever.
However, they always always stopped
after 19 circles. Why? Well, because
they didn't want you to see what I'm
about to show you. Back then, this image
and knowledge was so sacred that they
couldn't allow it to become common
knowledge. It was appropriate at that
time. However, now we either use the
information or fall further into
darkness. In biology, all cells have a
zona palucida around the edge. These
circles around the flower of life are
the zona palucida of the flower of life.
You must remove these. Then complete the
spheres that were cut off by the zona
palucida. With one more step, you will
have the secret. Finish the drawing. Add
the final missing circles, giving you
this. This image is the fruit of life.
This pattern of 13 circles is one of the
holiest, most sacred forms in existence.
It's called the fruit because it is the
result, the fruit from which the fabric
of the details of the reality were
created. Remember when we talked about
male and female energy, lesson 4? As you
can see, this image is female. It has no
straight lines. However, when you
combine male lines with these female
circles, something amazing happens. What
you do is draw a straight line from the
very center of every single circle to
every other circle in this image. When
you do this, you get an image which is
known throughout the universe everywhere
as Medatron's cube. It is one of the
most important informationational
systems in the universe. One of the
basic creation patterns in existence. So
what is Metatron's cube? Well, anyone
who has studied sacred geometry or even
regular geometry for that matter knows
that there are five unique shapes in the
universe and that they are crucial to
understanding both regular and sacred
geometry. They are called the platonic
solids. A platonic solid has certain
characteristics by definition. First of
all, all of its faces are the same size.
For example, a cube, the most well-known
platonic solid, has a square on every
face, so all of its faces are the same
size. Secondly, the edges of the
platonic solids are all the same length.
All edges of the cube are the same
length. Third, it only has one size of
interior angles between the faces. In
the case of the cube, this angle is 90°.
And fourth, when put inside of a sphere,
all of the points will touch the edge of
the sphere perfectly. With that
definition, there are only four shapes
besides the cube that fit that
description. So, what are they? Well, we
have the dodcahedron, the tetrahedron,
the octahedron, the isosahhedron, and
the hexahedron. All of these shapes are
found within Metatron's cube. This
knowledge is also where original alchemy
came from. The ancient alchemists and
great souls like Pythagoras, father of
Greece, considered each shape to have an
elemental aspect to them. The
tetrahedron was considered fire, the
cube was earth, the ocahedron was air,
the isosahedron was water, and the
docahedron was ether. Ether, also known
as prana and tachon energy, are all the
same thing. They extend anywhere and are
accessible at any point in space, time
and dimension. This is the great secret
of zero point technology. The sphere is
voidness. These six elements are the
building blocks of the universe and they
create the qualities of the universe. To
summarize, this is the first
informationational system that comes out
of the fruit of life through Metatron's
cube. In alchemy, they rarely discussed
ether. I've read that in the Pythagoran
school, if you even uttered the word
docahedron outside of the school, they
would kill you on the spot. That's how
sacred this shape was. 200 years later
when Plato was alive, he would discuss
it, but only very carefully. This is
because the docahedron is near the outer
edge of your energy field and is the
highest form of consciousness. There's
quite a bit more here, but I don't think
I can go much further on it right now.
Anyways, recognize this, the periodic
table of elements. Every single element
on this table has a geometric relation
to one of these five shapes. Modern
scholars ridiculed this idea until the
1980s when Professor Robert Moon at the
University of Chicago demonstrated that
the entire periodic table of elements,
literally everything in the physical
world, is based on these same five
forms. In fact, throughout modern
physics, chemistry, and biology, the
sacred geometric patterns of creation
are being rediscovered. Another example
is the egg of life that I showed you
earlier. Hopefully, that will help you
to understand just how incredible and
important of a discovery this truly is.
We have five platonic geometries that
form everything in creation, but we
don't have a hexagonal shape. If we look
at the flower of life, we see that its
ultimate basic form is in a six-pointed
shape called a hexagon. Want to see
where else hexagons form in life?
We have all of these hexagons and yet
there is no platonic solid that is
formed with a hexagon. So what gives?
Well, I want to introduce the vector
equilibrium which was coined by
Buckminister Fuller. It is actually
formed from three two-dimensional
hexagons that swivel around each other.
And its basic shapes that make it up are
an equilateral triangle and the square.
These are the two smallest shapes that
you can make with straight lines. And
together they balance at each other's
corners to create the perfect shape. Why
is it the perfect shape? The reason is
that every single line which is
connected in this shape is the same
distance away from every other point
including the very center of the shape
itself. Not even the platonic solids
have that definition which also makes
this the most stable shape and
polyhedrin and the basis of the
three-dimensional flower of life.
Finally, the only reason it's not a
platonic solid is because it has both
squares and triangles within it.
Platonic solids are platonic because
each face is the same, which makes me
think that other shapes must exist that
are balanced between two different
shapes as well and construct everything
in the universe.
Now, in the comments or end credits,
depending on where you're watching this,
I posted links to a TED talks video by
Garrett Liy, a particle physicist who
tells us of an amazing discovery in the
scientific field. I want to show you and
talk about his findings and then we'll
look at dimensions after that. Okay, so
Garrett has discovered that by examining
coral, they found that each coral head
has thousands of different polyps. These
polyps are constantly budding and
branching into genetically identical
neighbors. Through performing heat
experiments on these polyps, they were
able to find that every single polip is
part of a whole, a single unit of being,
but each one is experiencing its own
reality individually. From their
findings with the coral, they were able
to look at quantum mechanics. See, the
mathematics of quantum mechanics shows
us exactly how our universe works. And
we see that everything in the reality is
just continually branching into new
possibilities. Just like the coral, as
humans, we are individually experiencing
only one of these possibilities. Much
like the individual polyps, what physics
is telling us is that everything comes
down to geometry and the interactions
between elementary particles. Things can
happen only when things are perfectly
balanced. So Garrett starts showing us
some subatomic particles and the things
that make up electrons and protons and
neutrons. We always consider these to be
the smallest particle, but we never
think about what's creating them.
Garrett demonstrates to us how the
particles that create point particles
really work. He shows that when you plot
them out in how they move, this is what
they look like at the tiniest scales of
the universe in how it works is very
beautiful. Now look at this. This is one
of the ways that these charges branch
off from each other. As you can see, it
flows in a hexagonal pattern. The same
pattern that we found in the expanded
flower of life. Then if you rotate this
pattern in sixdimensional charge space,
you see it forms yet another pattern.
Many of you will recognize this as the
shape of the star of David, but its true
name is the star tetrahedron, which maps
perfectly over the fruit of life. This
entire pattern created by the particles
is mapped across over precise places on
a 200dimensional spherical shape
scientists have called E8 of which also
has a geometric shape. By rotating that
shape as well, you can see how there are
nearly infinite possibilities as to how
these elementary particles interact with
each other. The details of the reality
begin to take form. Now, as this shape
is rotating in eight dimensions, you can
see a myriad of different patterns here.
Look at this one in particular. This
looks a lot like Metatron's cube,
doesn't it? At the heart of particle
physics is pure, beautiful geometry. By
now, you probably can begin to see where
sacred geometry falls into this. Where
do these shapes originate? Do they just
come into being at random, or does the
first shape come from somewhere else? In
lesson six, we talked about the flower
of life, the original perfect geometric
symmetry that created the universe. This
shape, as we learned, is not only the
root of all mathematical proportion,
light, the platonic solids, but is also
the source of every musical system in
the universe, including systems both
used and unknown to modern man. It is
also the source of energy patterns and
well everything. It all comes from the
flower of life. I believe this is what
is at the heart of what's forming every
subatomic particle formation and it
probably goes at least a few levels
deeper than what Garrett is showing us.
Fi, also known as the golden ratio or
golden mean, is a very simple
relationship. If you had a rod and were
going to put a mark on it, only two
places would mark the fi ratio, which is
here or here. The length of a plus b is
equal to the length of c. This ratio is
1.618339. 6180339
and continues on forever. If you
multiply the length of C with phi, it
will create the exact same image only
bigger. C and D is equal to E.
This ratio could then span on forever
going smaller and smaller or bigger and
bigger forever. This ratio is infinite.
It has no beginning and no end. It is
also believed that phi is the
mathematical root of all other
sequences. See, every mathematical
sequence in existence needs a minimum of
three numbers to figure out the
sequence. Five only needs two. It is the
only one. Similar to how the circle and
square are the source of all shape, but
we'll get to that later on. The next
thing that you need to know is that this
ratio is found in all life everywhere.
Sort of. By sort of, I mean it's really
Fibonacci, but we'll look at that in a
moment. Look at your hand. Not only does
each finger have its own ratio moving up
each finger, which is fi to the next
bone, but it oscillates back and forth
from the tallest finger to the thumb.
You wonder why the human hand is like
that? It's based on fi. This
relationship is found throughout the
body in various ways. Moving up the arms
and legs, in your face, throughout the
entire body. This is a Greek statue that
accurately represents this. The Greeks
were very precise when they made their
art because they understood fi Fibonacci
and the importance of these sequences.
When the Romans took over Greece, you
could see the perfection in statues just
completely disappear. I'm not saying the
Romans were bad artists. They just
didn't measure everything to the same
caliber that the Greeks did. Here is the
fire ratio in butterflies. You can see
this ratio everywhere from the wing size
to the body to the antennas. They're all
thigh ratios. Here's dragon flies. It's
the same story. Fly runs along the
entire body and the relation to the body
and the wings. Here it is in frogs. Fly
is found throughout the body in relation
to the head, to the arms, to the
fingers, and so on. Well, what about
fish? You'd think they wouldn't be found
in fish. Well, here's three kinds of
fish. Once again, the ratios are
consistent. It doesn't just apply to
these creatures, though. Regardless of
what mammal, insect, aven, plant, or
living creature of any kind, you will
find this ratio one way or another.
There's a reason for this, but we'll get
to that in a moment. Let me show you the
importance we used to place on this
golden ratio. In ancient times, we built
many structures based on fi because we
understood divine proportion. This is
the pagota of Yakushiji temple in Japan.
It's built with these same mathematics
from the doorway to the ball on top of
the temple. It is a structural
embodiment of the proportions that all
life holds. The Parthonon in Greece also
has the exact same mathematical
structure, but even more. I recommend
watching Nova's Secrets of the Parthonon
if you wish to learn more about this,
because the stuff that they find is
really cool. The Great Pyramid in Giza
also has these proportions. They're
incredibly precise, perfect in every
way. You'd think that by building these
structures, using the logical and
mathematical proportions so carefully
that they would hinder the creativity
behind these buildings, but they really
don't. In fact, the left brain
understanding all of this can even
enhance creativity if used correctly. It
makes me wonder about all of the world
famous buildings of the modern world.
Could fi be a large factor in what makes
them stand out? Let's move on to our
next sequence which is called Fibonacci.
Now the Fibonacci sequence is life's way
of creating the golden mean. Allow me to
explain. This sequence is continually
made from adding the previous number to
the current. 1 and 1 is 2. 2 and 1 is 3.
3 and 2 is 5. 5 and 3 is 8. You can see
how it continues. Now, what most people
don't know about Fibonacci is that it
actually continually strives closer and
closer to the fi ratio by dividing the
current number into the last. You can
see this happening. 1 into 1 is 1. Well,
that's not close at all. 2 into 1 is 2.
This time it's over five, but closer. 3
into 2 is 1.5, which is under, but
closer still. 5 into 3 is 1.666. This
time it's over, but even closer.
Continuing with that, it's 1.6 and then
1.625, 1.615384. 615384,
1.619048,
and so on. It continually oscillates
over and under the thigh ratio, never
quite making it there, but continuing on
closer and closer every time until
eventually you can't even tell the
difference. Because fi is an infinite
number, this sequence will go on
forever. Let's look at some spirals in
nature. Another way that fi and
Fibonacci can manifest. This is a
nautilus shell. Many people will say
it's fi, but it's really Fibonacci. See
how when it's in its earliest form, it's
crude, not smooth or anything. One look
and you can tell that's not fi. But as
it goes out farther and farther, it gets
closer and closer to fi. It becomes a
nearly perfect fi spiral by the time
it's all the way out here. This also
happens with sunflowers, pine cones, and
many plants in nature. In many cases,
such as the pine cones and sunflowers,
it flows in a double spiral or more.
Much like the spiraling arms of a
galaxy, from the microcosm to the
macrocosm, spirals are always present.
So fi is basically source or spirits or
god in a mathematical way of thinking.
The math of god. Don't forget that this
sequence is an intimate part of nature
itself. I'm going to call it source. It
is the source of all mathematical
sequences and all life in existence
grows based on fi. However, fi has no
beginning and no end. Life doesn't know
how to deal with that. It's like source
says go and replicate this and life says
we don't know how because life doesn't
know how to create from something that
has no beginning. So it creates the
Fibonacci sequence instead, which has a
beginning, but starts out crude, very
basic, and then continually goes closer
and closer to source, becoming more
divine every step. It does take steps,
too, which actually has quite a bit to
do with evolution. Let's move on for
now, though. The only other sequence you
need to know for this is binary
sequences. This is a sequence like 2 4 8
16 32. We're just doubling the last
number instead of adding it to the
previous one. We're all very familiar
with this. Binary sequences are found in
life as well. For example, motic cell
divisions are binary. We go from being a
single cell being to having over a
100red trillion cells in only 46
divisions. Binary sequences are also how
computers work by turning on and off
chips. Computing at its core anyways is
binary.
This is how a polar graph usually looks
with 36 radial lines in 10° increments
representing the 360°.
Then concentric circles are drawn, each
with the same distance away as the last,
creating eight equal demarcations as the
one before, counting the inside circle
as one. Think about what this represents
too. It's a two-dimensional drawing of a
three-dimensional sphere, one of the
sacred forms, by projecting it onto a
flat surface. This is also called the
shadow form, and casting shadows is a
sacred way to obtain information. Also,
a polar has both straight male lines and
circular female lines, both male and
female energies interacting at once. If
you plot a golden mean spiral at 0° on
the polar graph, it will loop all the
way around before hitting zero again
exactly at the eighth circle, you'll
find that this golden mean line crosses
five specific places as it goes out.
These places are where the female
circular lines meet the male lines. It
crosses at 120°, 190°, 240°, 280°, and
then it jumps to 360, or back at zero,
depending on how you look at it. What's
interesting about this is that it
creates both a binary and Fibonacci
sequence. Looking at the radial
increments from the center, it crosses
at 1 2 3 5 and 8. Well, that's
Fibonacci, but it also crosses at 2 4
and 8. Well, that's a binary sequence.
We're going to look at the binary
sequence in particular, though, because
what you find is very cool. If you draw
lines from the outermost circles on the
lines where the binary sequence was
formed, you get this image. It is an
equilateral triangle. If you continue
the spiral outward, it would continue to
hit these exact same places and continue
to form larger equilateral triangles.
Let's divert yet again to look at
something very interesting. There was a
man named Keith Critslau who discovered
something very important to
understanding the geometry of music.
First, he drew a straight line through
an equilateral triangle and then he
measured from the middle of the center
line and drew a straight line up to the
top edge and back down to the bottom
corner. Then he did the same but passed
through the center line of the top and
back down again. He did this yet again
on the other side. You can keep doing
this on either side as well. By drawing
this funny little form, he discovered
something of great importance. He
writes, "Continuing in this way, each
successive proportion will be the
harmonic mean between the previous
proportion and the total length. And all
of these proportions will be musically
significant. 1 over2 being the octave, 2
over3 being the fifth, 4 over 5 being
the major third, 8 over 9 being the
major tone or step, and 16 over 17 being
the half tone or step. In other words,
he discovered the geometries of music,
or at least one aspect of them. Then he
tried measuring it in a different way,
starting at a different point of the
center line. At 3/4s he found the
measurements were 1 over 7, 1 over 4, 2
over 5, 4 over 7, 8 over 11, and 16 over
19. All of these numbers are musically
significant. This is very interesting.
It means that the harmonics of music are
somehow related to the proportions of
the central line moving through a
tetrahedron. Back to the polarraph, you
can see that this drawing has a much
greater value all of a sudden. Not only
that, but it becomes even easier to make
your measurements thanks to the
polarraph itself. You can just draw a
straight line through the drawing on the
graph and it will give you the center
line. This information has been taken
light years beyond what I just showed
you. Though a research team found that
you can draw these lines not only from
the center but from any nodal points
inside the upper half of the triangle
and you'll come up with all known
harmonics in existence. Basically this
means that anywhere the straight line
and curved lines on the polar cross from
0 to 120° and start making the pattern,
you will come up with all known harmonic
systems. Not only the western keyboard,
but the eastern and even many unknown
systems that have never been used. As
I'm not a musician, there's not much
more I can show you related to this. But
I would love to see what a musician
could really do with this knowledge.
Remember when we talked about spirals in
nature? They often travel in twos.
Usually this is male and female. So on
this polarraph, if you're going to copy
nature, you don't just plot one spiral,
you have to plot two. When you do that,
it gives you this image, which is a star
tetrahedron inside of a sphere. We
mentioned this in lesson 7. And this
image is more commonly known as the star
of David. Do you remember the face on
Mars? NASA obviously tells us that it's
just a random formation on the surface
of the planet. But right next to the
face, there are also a few pyramids and
other anthropomorphic structures. I know
what you're thinking. Why on earth would
I bring that up all of a sudden? Well,
Richard Hogland and his colleagues have
spent a long time researching and
deciphering a message on the surface of
the red planet. Want to know what that
message was? It was a star tetrahedron
inscribed in a sphere. Holy balls,
right? It's pretty crazy and very eye
opening now that we have this
information about what this really
means. Inside the star tetrahedron,
another one fits perfectly. We can
continue to put more and more star
tetrahedrons inside or outside of the
other star tetrahedrons. The same way
the golden mean spiral can wrap around
the polarraph infinitely big or
infinitely small. You'll notice that
this smaller tetrahedron also happens to
fit perfectly around this sphere. Well,
check this out. If you put this same
size sphere centered on the point of
every single star tetrahedral point,
guess what suddenly reveals itself?
&gt;&gt; The fruit of life. It's back. According
to the Egyptians, this is one of the
holiest, most sacred forms in existence.
Of course, we already learned one of its
informationational systems in lesson 6,
and what you just saw was the second,
only in reverse order. What this means
is that all of the information of music,
harmonics, sound, and spirals come out
of this image. Not only that, but light
and the dimensional levels work in the
same way as harmonics, which we've
already discussed in lesson 2, 7, and 9.
Meaning that the geometric information
about light and dimensions are also
related to this star tetrahedron
pattern. So, what you just saw was the
second unraveling from the third
rotational pattern of Genesis, the
geometry at the heart of creation.
Now, we can start talking about
dimensions. These wheels are some of the
oldest symbols known. The only places
that they've been found is on the
ceilings of certain very old Egyptian
tombs. They are always found in sets of
four or eight, and nobody knows what
they are. Even the most famous
Egyptologists have no idea. But this is
actually proof that the Egyptians not
only understood the flower of life, but
they lived it. Today, I'm going to show
you what these wheels meant. And in
future lessons, we will go over the
details of this unraveling. There's a
lot to cover before we get there,
though. For the record, the unraveling
looks like this. Yeah, it's a doozy. So,
on the walls with these wheels are
drawings of seven people with animal
heads. They're called neers, and each of
them has an orang-ish red oval above its
head. This is called the egg of
metamorphosis. The needers are showing
us a time when we go through a certain
stage of resurrection, which is a rapid
biological change into a different life
form. Not the average type of
resurrection. I know. As you can see
here, they're changing directions 90°,
and in doing so, they're changing
dimensions. See, the dimensional levels
are separated by 90°. Musical notes are
separated by 90°. The chakras are also
90°. It's a number that continually
appears. Probably at this point, we
should get a common understanding of
what dimensions are, like third
dimension, fourth dimension, fifth
dimension. What are we talking about
here? Most people think of dimension in
terms of time and space, the x, y, and z
axis, with time becoming the fourth
dimension. This is not what we are
talking about. What we're seeing as the
various dimensional levels has more to
do with music and harmonics than
anything else. A piano has eight white
keys from C to C, which is the familiar
octave, and in between there are five
black keys. Together, this creates what
is called the chromatic scale, which is
13 notes, well actually 12, with the
13th being the first in the next octave.
So from 1 C to the next is really 13
steps, not eight. This also correlates
with the 7, 8, and 13 chakra system I
mentioned in lesson two. Keeping that in
mind, I want to show you a sine wave.
Sine waves correspond with light and the
electromagnetic spectrum and the
vibration of sound. We're all very
familiar with this. In this entire
reality we're in, every single thing is
based on sine waves. There are no
exceptions to this except for maybe
spirit and void. Quantum physics and
quantum mechanics looks at everything in
the reality of one of two ways. You can
look at anything like the computer
you're watching this video on to be made
up of tiny particles like atoms. Or you
can forget about that idea completely
and look at it as a vibration, a
waveform such as electromagnetic fields
or even sound. If you look at it as
atoms, the laws can be seen to fit that
model. But if you look at it as
waveforms, the laws can be seen to fit
that model. Both of these systems come
out of the flower of life. One being the
one we just looked at, fruit of life to
Medatron's cube and beyond, and the
other being this beautiful mess of a
picture. Just looking at it hurts my
head. Everything in this world is a
waveform or can be seen as sound. All
things, your bodies, planets, absolutely
everything are a waveform. If you choose
this particular way of looking at
reality and then superimpose that view
over the reality of the harmonics of
music, we can begin to talk about
dimensions. The dimensional levels are
nothing but different base rate
wavelengths. The only difference between
this dimension and any other is the
length of its basic waveform. It's just
like a radio set. Turn the dial, you
pick up a wavelength. It's the same with
dimensions. If you were to change the
wavelength of your consciousness, and in
doing so, change all of your body
patterns to a wavelength different from
this universe, you would literally
disappear out of this world and reappear
in the one you were tuned in. It's been
theorized that the base rate wavelength
that we're currently living in is 7.23
cm. There's a few reasons for this. In a
spiritual sense, the 7.23 wavelength is
M, the Hindu sound of the universe.
Maybe that's why oming is such a
powerful tool in meditation. Not only
that, but if you were to take a 100
people and measure the distance between
their eyes, the average length is 7.23.
Same with the distance from the tip of
our chins to the tip of our noses and
the distance across our palms and
between our chakras. This 7.23 23 length
is located throughout our bodies in
various ways because we are emerged
within this particular dimension.
There's another reason as well. Bell
Laboratories found this wavelength when
they were setting up the microwave
system around the United States. They
found static in their system because
they chose a wavelength just slightly
longer than 7.23 for their system. In
order to get rid of the static, they did
something that we, as a planet, are
still suffering from. They upped the
power 50,000 times over what we would
normally need, which created a very
powerful field so that the 7.23
wavelength would not interfere. It's for
those reasons that I believe 7.2 23 is
the wavelength of our dimension. As you
go up in dimensional levels, the
wavelength gets shorter and shorter with
higher and higher energy. As you go down
in levels, the wavelength gets longer
and longer with lower and lower energy,
more and more dense. Just as with a
piano, there's a space between the notes
so that when you hit one note, there's a
very definite place where the next note
is. In this waveform universe we exist
in, there's a very definite place where
the next dimensional level exists. It's
specific wavelength relative to this
one. Most cultures in the cosmos have a
basic understanding of this and
understand how to change between
dimensions. However, because of certain
events that happened on Earth 13,000
years ago, we have all forgotten, but
we're about to remember. So, if we show
each note in the chromatic scale as a
circle, we have 13 circles. Each circle
represents a white or black key, and the
shaded circle at the end would be the
13th note that begins the next octave.
This circle here represents the third
dimension. This is where we are, and
this circle next to it would be the
fourth. In lesson 3, we talked about
channeling, and this is typically where
channelneled beings are. This is also
where you explore when you are astrop
projecting or lucid dreaming. You'll
notice now that the musical system goes
upwards and downwards forever. Octaves
over octaves over octaves.
Theoretically, this is how the universe
goes, too. An infinite spectrum of
universes in both directions going
upwards and downwards forever. I mean,
come on. We thought our universe was
big, but everything in our universe, as
far as we can see, well, that's just
this one dimension. You may have heard
people talk about 144 dimensions and how
144 relates to other spiritual subjects.
This is because there are 12 notes in an
octave and 12 overtones between each
note. 12 * 12 equals 144 dimensional
levels. To be specific, there are 12
major dimensions and 132 minor
dimensions within each octave. Though in
truth, this progression probably goes on
forever. The diagram we've been looking
at represents one octave. The 13 note
repeats and then there's another octave
after that. I want to show you this. I
was watching ancient aliens not long
ago, and one of the natives who has
communication with beings in higher
dimensions told the man who was
interviewing him
&gt;&gt; that they have always been here, even
right here where we're sitting right
now. but you just don't see them.
They're in a different frequency.
&gt;&gt; And no one really got what he meant. So
that's kind of a fresh perspective on
that. An apocalypse is a disclosure of
something hidden from the majority of
mankind in an era dominated by falsehood
and misconception.
Today we're going to be looking at
another way that humans grow through fi.
Instead of looking at fi inside the
body, we're going to be looking at fi
outside the body and what it means for
us in this pivotal point in human
history. Do you remember the fruit of
life? The first system created the
platonic solids which created structure
throughout the universe. The second
system was the basis of how vibration,
sound, harmonics, music, and matter are
all interrelated in all of creation.
Today we will look at the third system.
The fruit of life will reveal itself in
the process. We'll call this system the
circles and squares of human
consciousness. It is what the Chinese
called circling the square and squaring
the circle. Remember when we discussed
the platonic solids in lesson 6? I
showed you that all of them will sit
perfectly within a sphere, each with
every corner touching the sphere
perfectly. Well, there's one other shape
that can do that. It's a characteristic
that only one of the platonic solids
have, making it special. It is the cube,
which you can put every single platonic
solid inside, and an edge or point will
touch the inside of the cube perfectly.
Through truncating the cube in different
ways, you can create all of the other
shapes. Because of this characteristic,
it essentially means that the cube is
like the father of all shapes. It is a
male form. And the sphere is the mother
of all shapes. It is a female form. All
levels of consciousness in the universe
are integrated by a single image in
sacred geometry. It is the key to space,
time and dimension as well as
consciousness itself. Each level is a
geometric image or lens that spirit
looks through to see the one reality
resulting in a completely different
experience. In the case of humans, this
image is the circle and square. This is
what Leonardo da Vinci was doing when he
drew this drawing. And I'm going to show
you what the circle and square
combination mean. If you put a circle
inside a square perfectly and then
continue to put another circle and
square each with the same diameter one
radius away on all sides going outwards,
you get a drawing that looks like this.
You'll notice that with the first circle
and square, they fit perfectly within
the other. This also happens with the
second circle and square. However, then
the squares begin penetrating circles.
The male form begins interacting with
the female form. Why is this important?
Well, the circles and squares begin to
equate the fi ratio. See, when the
circumference of a circle and the
perimeter of the square are equal, this
equates the Pi ratio. So, as you can see
on this diagram on the fourth square and
the fifth circle, it begins to create
the Fi ratio. It's close but not
perfect. It's only a6 difference. I'm
measuring in radi. By the way, the inner
circle has a radius of 1. So, it's two
radi across. The next is four and then 6
8 10 and so on. So the one we just
looked at makes a close fi ratio and
then it moves out of sync staying out of
sync for a bit and then bam again it
moves into yet another fi ratio. This
time the difference is only.52 even
closer to perfection than before. This
will continue on forever. If you were to
continue this drawing outwards to
infinity each time it would go into sync
drop out of sync for a few circles and
squares but then eventually hit fi again
closer than it did the last time. Right
now there are three primary levels of
consciousness that we are going to be
talking about. They are essentially who
we were, who we are, and who we will be.
We'll call it the first, second, and
third so that it's easy to understand
what we're talking about. The ancient
Egyptians were very concerned with these
three levels as well. And much of their
culture was based on this information.
Each of these levels has their own
geometric lens too, which look like
this. We'll come back to these soon.
This is the first level of
consciousness, and this is the third. We
are on neither of these two five levels
on the circle and square chart. Where we
are, the second level of consciousness
is here. We are on the fifth square
relative to the sixth circle. For quite
a while now, I've been saying that we're
at a disharmonic level, and it's
something that we're passing through as
a species. Now, you begin to see the
bigger picture of what I meant. The
reason it's disharmonic is because it
does not equate a pi ratio. Not even
close.
Disharmonic levels are important because
they bridge a gap between the divine
pure levels. However, when a species is
here, it has to get in and get out as
fast as possible, or else they will
destroy themselves and everything around
them incredibly quickly. You can see
this happening all around the world
today because we're at the very end of
it and everything is crashing down on
us. We've discussed this all before,
notably in the intros of lesson 1 and
two. So, the reason that we're on this
circle and square combination and not
the six square relative to some other
circle is because of this. If you take
the square and rotate it 45°, it
actually creates a bridge. It connects
us from two harmonic levels of being.
We're moving from one state of being to
the other. This time, even closer to
source. This is a very exciting time for
us. Oh, let me show you this, too. This
is how the Great Pyramid is set up. This
chamber here is called the king's
chamber. If you cut the Great Pyramid
horizontally at the King's Chamber,
which was the main initiation chamber,
and rotate the top half 45°, it makes
the exact same image as our level of
consciousness. There's a reason for
that. The Great Pyramid is the key
instrument in allowing humans to reach
the third level of consciousness, both
as a species and individually. In fact,
that's part of the reason why the Great
Pyramids were created in the first
place. Let's talk more about these
levels, though. So what Leonardo was
drawing was actually the first level of
consciousness. See how he hid lines in
this drawing. If you complete this grid,
it creates an 8x8 grid. This is the same
64 square grid found on the first level.
Measuring in radi, this grid is 8x8.
However, the circle has 10 radi across.
So we'll call this first level an 8x10.
This is where we were. The first level
is the first time self-aware
consciousness began. The second level
has 10 squares across the large square
and a 12 red eye circle. So we'll call
it a 10 x 12. This is where we are now.
This level is the third level which is
also called Christ consciousness. It is
a 14 by8. Now there's always a reason
for everything in sacred geometry.
Nothing, absolutely nothing happens
without a reason. Everything is
connected. Out of the whole spectrum of
possibilities, why did self-aware human
consciousness begin when the fourth
square went into harmony with the fifth
circle? Well, let's overlay the fruit of
life over our first level for a second.
Look at that. It exactly fits the fourth
square and fifth circle perfectly. Do
you see the perfection of life? The
fruit of life pattern was hidden beneath
this pattern all along. They're
precisely superimposed over the other.
In a right brain way, this is how to
explain why consciousness first became
self-aware between the fourth square and
fifth circle. This sacred image was part
of the pattern. The fruit of life was
completed at the precise moment that the
fi ratio first appeared. And when fi
appeared, consciousness had a way to
manifest in a new way. Throughout time,
many scholars have tried to figure out
the secret meaning behind what Leonardo
meant with the Vuvian man drawing. He
was showing us human consciousness. This
is where we were the first level. There
is a man who did draw our level though.
Da Vinci was studying the words of a man
named Vuvius who lived400 years before
Da Vinci. Hence the name Vuvian man.
Petruvius actually drew his own drawing
of consciousness as well. And this is
what it looked like. The circle and
squares in this one are hidden less
obvious than the Da Vinci drawing.
Regardless, they're there. And this is
the current circle and square
combination around our bodies. This
drawing also contains the exact
proportions of the maraba which is an
important energy system outside of the
body. Similar to how chakras are an
energy system inside the body. This
image also contains the diamond that
perfectly contains the man from head to
feet. This is the same image we saw in
the consciousness chart as well as the
great pyramid. Further proof that this
was what Vituvius was demonstrating to
us when he created this image. So here
we have drawings of the first two levels
of consciousness. From what I know,
there is no drawing of a third. If there
is, it's sealed up, locked away
somewhere, and is probably one of the
most sacred drawings in existence. All
right, I know talking about geometry all
the time can be a little daunting. So
many circles and ratios and everything.
If this is something you want to learn
more about, I'm providing the flower of
life books and PDFs in the comments.
This information is found at the very
beginning of volume 2 and much, much
more. I could probably do four or five
lessons about the geometries of the
human body and still not run out of
things to talk about, but it's there for
you if you want to learn more. Now for
the last portion of today's lesson,
we're going to talk about some recent
findings in modern science. As we just
saw in the geometry, we are currently in
a disharmonic state of being, but we are
just about done with it. In doing so, we
are moving into a new state of being. We
are transferring from the second level
of consciousness to the third, also
called Christ consciousness. If we look
at evolution in Earth's history, we
always seem to make random jumps.
They're always missing links in the
evolutionary chain. Scientists say that
we just haven't found all the fossils.
And creationists say that God did it and
therefore it's part of some divine plan.
But looking at what we just learned
about consciousness, does it not make
sense that evolution and creationism are
just two sides of the same coin?
Consciousness moves through different
states of being, constantly moving
closer and closer to divinity, to fight.
Every time it reaches a new stage, it
makes a rapid biological change into
something new, like what we're doing
now. This is what the ancient Egyptians
called resurrection, which we mentioned
in lesson 7. So, if we're really going
through an evolution of consciousness,
what's happening inside of us? Surely,
this would mean that there are also
biological changes happening to us at
our core level, right? Does modern
science see any big changes that they're
afraid to tell the general public
because they think it will cause a
panic? Short answer, yes. Long answer,
we are changing. Scientists have been
studying this for almost 10 to 20 years
now. Several years ago in New Mexico,
there was a convention of geneticists
from all over the world with the main
topic of discussion being DNA mutations.
Scientists acknowledge that we are
changing, but the end result they do not
know. Through sacred geometry, we begin
to actually see where we could be going.
With 12 strands activated, you have 10
times as much information available to
you than you do with just two strands as
we do now. Not only that, but the 12
strands work in sync with the 12
chakras, providing an immense amount of
energy into the body. We are about to
become super beings, enabling us to
understand and do things that currently
seem paranormal, bizarre, or downright
impossible. From the article, the bigger
picture by Suzanne Thorp Clark. We are
being changed physically from carbon
based beings to crystallin based beings.
This is interesting because I've
actually heard this from various
channelings now ascension and
transformation into crystallin at our
core. First the psychics were telling us
this and now we have science backing it
up. What we know for sure is that we are
going through a shift. In almost every
ancient text and Bible, it speaks about
a great shift and awakening. The Bible
speaks about the coming of Christ. This
is interesting actually because Christ
is the name of the third level of
consciousness. I didn't just make that
up. We are moving into Christ
consciousness which means not that Jesus
is going to show up with a big hey a but
we are actually moving into the level of
conscious understanding that Jesus had.
It is the coming of Christ through the
human species.
So higher strands of DNA what does this
really mean? The portions of the DNA
chain that science has presently
identified as the double helix
represents only the surface portions of
the chemical, elemental, and electrical
components of the active DNA strands.
Science has yet to understand the
multi-dimensional spectra of DNA
manifestation. Though we are beginning
to remember the human DNA imprint will
always appear from external analysis as
a two strand double helix configuration
in three dimensions. What is not
understood is that within the double
helix, there are and will be
progressively more additional double
helix strands which fuse together.
As our understanding evolves into the
multi-dimensional spectra, the
understanding of the structure and
function of DNA will progressively
advance. A team of Russian researchers
working with DNA started a project to
progressively learn more about DNA by
combining forces with linguists and have
dived into the unknown of the 90% of
junk DNA which we currently embody.
Their findings are evolutionary.
According to them, our DNA is not only
responsible for the construction of our
body, but is also used as data storage
and in communication. They learned that
the 90% of DNA follows the same rules as
all of our human language. The way that
sentences, paragraphs, and chapters work
in a book is the same way that our DNA
works. This is the first double helix
strand, the one that Western science
looks at, which is basically like a
sentence of DNA. However, if you step
back and see the bigger picture, you
begin to see the paragraph. Stepping
back further and you see the chapter and
so on. These larger and larger strands
span through the different frequencies
of reality, the different dimensions,
which makes them harder to find in our
modern science. Western science, instead
of looking at DNA like this, we're
cutting out pieces of DNA from here and
adding them over here, which is similar
to picking up words in certain sentences
and putting them with other words in
other sentences to see if they fit
together and can make a new energy, a
new idea.
This is the nature of our junk DNA of
which Western science just didn't
understand for the longest of times. The
DNA isn't junk. It's just misunderstood
and also not as used right now because
of our dense level of consciousness.
However, we are beginning to activate
and reawaken our DNA through our
everexpanding consciousness and our
desire to know more.
The very awareness of this DNA is what
is activating it. Awareness of our
higher selves and our connection to the
all and the interconnectedness to each
other. We are directly connected to the
earth as well and exist as a part of it.
Kind of like a child in its mother's
womb. If anything happens to the mother,
it creates an energetic imprint that
affects the child. The earth is our
mother, hence the name mother earth. Our
morphanogenic field exists as a part of
her larger morphanogenic field of the
earth. If something happens to the
earth's energetic grid, then we inherit
these problems into our own grid. Our
energetic anatomy is exactly like the
earth's with chakras, meridians,
axiotonal lines, and DNA.
If something happens to the planet's
grid, then that affects every person's
DNA on the planet. We are at a very
important point in history right now
because we are remembering how to
regenerate our original organic imprint
for health. We don't even need science
and fancy equipment to do this. We're
just required to learn how to use what
we came here with. By moving into a
space of love and light, opening and
living from the heart, and living in a
place of emotional stability and health,
you can once again reactivate your light
body, and in doing so, reconnect with
the higher frequencies of your being.
Energetic blockages will reveal
themselves as problems in your own life.
Depression, anxiety, temper ages or
personal problems in your life which are
causing stuckness or driving you down a
path of chaos or disruption are also
energetic blockages.
The Institute of Heart Math has shown
that generating sustained positive
emotions facilitates a bodywide shift to
a specific scientifically measurable
state called psychophysiological
coherence. Let's break this down. Psycho
comes from psychological which means
mental and emotions and physiological
means body. Coherence is systematic or
logical connection or harmony.
Altogether it means a harmony of both
body, mind and emotional functions. If
you're familiar with the four elements,
you know that earth is the physical, so
body, air is mental, mind, water is
emotions, and fire is spirit. Heartmap
has scientifically shown now that
positive and healthy emotions bring
three of those elements into coherence.
And although they don't look at the
spiritual aspect, I don't doubt that the
fire element also comes into harmony. In
an experiment done at the institute,
they hooked up scanners to an individual
who was subjected to very chaotic
emotions. For 300 seconds, they measured
the respiration, heart rate variability,
and blood pressure rhythm. After this
time, the individual on the scanners did
a technique on himself, which they have
dubbed the heart math quick coherence
technique, which activated a feeling of
love and appreciation. Instantly, all
three of the rhythms came into
entrainment and harmony with each other
and stayed in harmony for the remainder
of the experiment. One important note to
stress is that cohesion is not
relaxation. The process of relaxation is
a low energy state in which the
individual rests both body and mind.
Typically, disengaging from cognitive
and emotional processes. In contrast,
coherence is experienced as a calm and
balanced yet energized and responsive
state of being that is optimal for
mental acuity, focus, problem solving,
and decision-m as well as the physical
activity and coordination. So, coherence
is the natural state you want to be in
all the time, you know, unless you're
relaxing, you know, that's that's good,
too. So, how does one get into the state
of cohesion? Breathing. Your breath is
intimately connected to your heart rate
and your heart in general. And if you
ever find yourself in a very chaotic
mental state, take a few seconds to step
back of what's causing the chaos and
focus on your breath. Take long and deep
breaths. The Institute of Heart Math
doesn't put too much focus into
particular breathing techniques, but
they put an emphasis on using your
breath as well as positive and loving
emotions to bring you back into a state
of cohesion. They say that it's not
super necessary to put focus on your
breath all the time, but it is very
helpful to bring yourself out of chaos
and back into alignment from a spiritual
perspective. And if you're working
towards that, breath is very important.
However, breath is another huge topic
and I personally recommend focusing on
your breath during meditations. Focusing
on breathing and your heart is a
beautiful way to move into a silent
space during meditation and deeper into
yourself all while sustaining the same
healthy emotions. Now throughout ancient
history across many many religions and
belief systems the heart was always
considered a center of the being the
source of spiritual wisdom and insight
thought emotion and connection to the
divine. The ancient Egyptians believed
that all thought and life was done from
the heart which is why they threw away
the brain after the pharaoh died but
they left the heart in the body. They
felt that the being would need it in the
next life so they left it there but the
brain was useless. Western scientific
thought places the heart as just a pump.
However, in the last several decades,
science has begun to go full circle in
realizing and understanding what these
ancient civilizations knew and taught.
In the field of neurocardiology,
scientists have discovered that the
heart possesses its own intrinsic
nervous system, a network of brain cells
with over 40,000 neurons. This gives the
heart the ability to independently sense
and process information and make
decisions, even demonstrate a type of
learning and memory. In a simplified
sense, you can think with your heart.
The heart is truly an intelligent
system. The heart also has found to be a
hormone gland manufacturing and
secretreting numerous hormones and
neurotransmitters that profoundly affect
the brain and body function. Among these
hormones is one called oxytocin, well
known as the love or bonding hormone,
bringing things together. Science is
also beginning to understand that the
electromagnetic field around the heart
has a powerful effect on not just the
human body but others around you as
well. Research has also shown that the
heart is the key component of the
emotional system. Science now
understands that the heart not only
responds to emotions but the signals it
sends out dramatically affects the
quality of the emotional experience from
moment to moment and also that our heart
plays a key role in accessing our
intuition. In school, we've been taught
that the heart is constantly responding
to orders sent from the brain. But
what's less commonly talked about is
that the brain receives even more orders
from the heart. We've been doing it
backwards. Moreover, these signals have
a significant effect on brain function,
influencing emotional processes as well
as higher cognitive faculties such as
attention, perception, memory, and
problem solving. Guide yourself from
your heart, not from your brain. When
you allow your negative emotions to get
to you, you disconnect from your ability
to think clearly, remember things, learn
lessons, reason, and make effective
decisions, which explains why often we
act impulsefully and unwisely under
stress. The heart's signal has a
profound effect on the brain during
positive and negative emotions. Live in
your heart, for the heart is the center
of unity consciousness, where the brain
is the center of duality consciousness.
You can see that right in how they're
made. The brain has the two hemispheres.
The heart is a place of unity. Since we
fell in consciousness, we moved from
heart consciousness and into our brains
and all decisions were made from the
brain. In doing so, we became polarized
and lost our connections to the
universal consciousness called unity.
This shift in consciousness we are
experiencing now is a movement from the
brain and back into the heart where we
will once again know and understand the
universe and unconditional love for
everyone and all things regardless of
who they are or what damage they've done
to themselves or others. And this is why
the heart is so important right now.
Live in your heart. It is the gateway to
the divine.
The Taurus is a very fundamental part of
nature. So fundamental in fact that
science is now seeing that everything
moves through this form in one way or
another including ourselves.
Very simply, the Taurus is a
self-organizing system that all comes
together at a space of unity and expands
its energy out all around itself until
it returns back to that original space
in the center and will continue to do it
again. In quantum physics, mathematics,
and generally all forms of science, this
geometry really begins to bridge the gap
between understanding how sacred
geometry truly is the geometry of life.
This is a geometry that breathes. It has
life itself. Our very own hearts are the
first and best examples of a toid. The
heart is where it all starts. The energy
of our hearts flow outward in a toridal
fashion and are also received in a
toridal fashion. This way, everything we
send out in love, we are immediately
affected by as a result. In other words,
our emanation of love is a gift to
yourself as much as it's a gift to the
universe around you. You can look in
nature to see these shapes everywhere.
It's in oranges and apples. You can see
it around tornadoes. The magnetic field
of the earth is a very powerful example
as well as how the atmosphere of the
planet works too. Our modern scientists
haven't really taken the concept of
hollow earth very seriously. Even though
this concept does explain a lot of
fundamental theories about the earth to
which we don't really understand despite
all of our theories. Well, the idea of
hollow earth works in the exact same way
as well. It demonstrates that our planet
is designed from the core as a taurus.
The earth is multi-dimensional. So, we
can actually have both a hot iron core
as well as a 5D hollow earth interior as
well. For those who want to learn more
immediately, check out Hollow Earth HD
on YouTube.
Moving on, we all know the fundamental
principle of the universe of as above so
below. Well, this Taurus is even found
at the size of galaxies. Atoms even have
this very geometry as well. It's quite
literally everywhere. From this basic
expression demonstrates how life ought
to be. All of the energy that emerges
from the core travels around the Taurus
and fuels itself. It also has the
ability to give to other terodial
systems which openly practice giving and
receiving. It really sets a standard for
how to do things and we can mirror this
and use it in our own daily lives as
well.
When you give and receive openly, you
allow your energy to become thoral. When
we look at the interactions between one
another, we begin to see the nature of
giving and receiving. If we shift how we
give and receive with others, we give
ourselves an opportunity to receive
feedback from what we emanate
immediately. This allows for an
enlightening transaction of energy
between all light and allows all of our
communications to resonate on that
toroidal frequency of love.
Love is not just a feeling. It's a
vibration and a frequency that is
connected through all things. The pure
vibration that emanates around one's own
heart and brings things together
harmoniously is through a universal
vibration we call love. If you look at
the flower of life in 2D, it may be a
little hard to tell. However, in three
dimensions, one can truly see that it
too is a Taurus. The flower of life is
all geometries. Remember, the Taurus is
yet another one of those creation
patterns that emerged from this or
rather is this form. It's so important
to understanding everything. Even Nicola
Tesla worked with this geometry and
through it, he discovered a way to
access free energy for the entire
planet. Well, of course, all of the
corporations of the world wanted to keep
charging people for energy. And between
them and the US government, all of
Tesla's most amazing work were
destroyed.
In lesson 15, we talked a bit about this
before, and now we can go deeper into
it. The Institute of Heart Math, as well
as Stanford University, among others,
have now scientifically demonstrated
that around the physical heart of your
body, you have two toodial fields, one
inside the other, which are connected to
the sacred space and the tiny space
within the heart. Greg Braden has done a
lot of work in explaining this to the
modern world as well and Dunvalo
Malkeisedc has put a lot of focus into
teaching that this is some of the most
important information regarding physical
ascension. This is part of the
understanding that is truly bridging the
gaps between science and spirituality.
China is doing some really amazing
things. They have hospitals that are
completely dedicated to the work of
prana and energy rather than the
physical body of patients.
In one experiment in a Chinese hospital,
we see how the science of mantra is used
to remove the cancer tumor of a woman in
just 2 and 1/2 minutes. A mantra is a
sacred sound or chant that acts as an
energetic formula for prayer or
meditation. Mantras allow for us to
connect to our source and emanate an
audible frequency that focuses our mind
to the sound and thus inwardly back to
the source. When chanting from the
heart, these doctors allowed themselves
to focus on the reality that this woman
was already being healed. In this it
allowed for the mind to bypass the
normal confines of reality as its
intention towardally flowed in and out
of the source of which reality emanates
itself.
For everyone who has been skeptical of
the idea of self-healing through
intention, this video is proof that it's
not just a plausible idea, but it's very
very real. We need only understand why
it works and how it works. To come from
a skeptical place and try, you will only
see skeptical results. To come from a
pure and true space, anything is
possible.
Nasim Heramine has made a documentary
recently called Black Hole, which we did
discuss in lesson 18. He has
demonstrated that the space at the
center of the Taurus is literally the
point of singularity, infinity, and the
space where all consciousness truly
resides, the source of the source field.
and a space where all things are
connected. In our modern physics, we
don't really take consciousness and life
into the scientific equations. Russian
scientists are propelling their
understandings of life to new levels and
have even begun bridging the gaps of
understanding gravity. Our western model
is not built to understand gravity and
the Russians have developed models which
harmonically see that gravity itself is
a conscious field, an information field
of love that holds things together. It's
really profound and even quantum physics
is beginning to look at this in new
light.
Remember in lesson 18 we talked about
the vector equilibrium. This Taurus form
and the cubed go hand in hand. It is the
male and female aspects of each other
and the vector equilibrium when put into
use in science can grant access to an
infinite amount of energy through
tapping into the space of unity of the
source field. The zero point, the field
of consciousness that science now knows
connects all things.
By understanding the Taurus and the
nature of unity, one can really get in
tune with themselves in relationship to
the all.
Let's also remember that considering our
universe itself and everything within it
is a reflection of this toridal pattern,
we can free our minds from the
perspective that anything is separate
even as a void of a black hole contains
the existence of everything supposedly
outside of it. This is reflected in the
psychic nature of those who in
meditation dive into the void of
consciousness and those also who reach a
state of godhead awareness that includes
all life in unity and love. The one is
all and the all is one.
In the Taurus, the point of singularity,
whatever consciousness is present is the
purest representation of the whole. The
whole field is emerging from and
returning to its original source. And
all of it is conscious. And the
singularity at the center is the space
where it all came together and emerged
out of. This can be demonstrated with
the understanding of how the heart
emerges in the body. If you remember
from lesson 15, the heart is the first
organ to come into existence and the
rest of the body folds out of the heart
itself and then it pulls the heart into
the center. The heart is truly more
primal, more connected to source and far
more important than the brain. The heart
is the space of love and love of all is
what will get you back into the heart
and out of your brain.
In order to grow and become lighter
energetically, we as individuals and a
society must learn to understand how to
really get back into the natural flow of
things. This is what the natural flow
looks like among a few other forms as
well. For many, understanding the Taurus
from a leftbrain perspective is needed
to really get back in tune with
yourself. For others, you already
understand it intuitively and you just
have to go with the flow and everything
will work out perfectly.
According
to the Mayans, the solstice on December
21st, 2012, precisely at 11:11 a.m.
universal time, marks the completion of
the 5,125-year
great cycle of the Mayan long count
calendar. 2012 also marks the completion
of the 26,000year procession of the
equinox's cycle, which we discussed in
lesson 5. According to the calendars, it
also signifies the end of a 144,000year
cycle, a 78,000-year cycle, and a 26
millionyear cycle. The 2012 date marks
the completion of this world age cycle,
but it does not signify the end. Well,
it kind of does. It's the end of what we
know and into a transition of something
new. It is a transitional state, but it
definitely does not mean this.
We need to understand that the 2012
prophecies are signaling to us to wake
up and realize that these times on earth
are very important. We are living in a
landmark time in the history of this
planet. We are collectively as a species
approaching a crossroads that is calling
out to us to participate in our fullest
capacity. Let me show you a diagram to
try and demonstrate just how important
this is. First, this is how DNA works.
See how you can basically map it out
like a story? Here's the beginning,
which could be seen as creation or a
start of a cycle. And then it moves
outwards, expanding and moving into all
potentials until it reaches its peak in
the middle. It stretches far out and
then begins moving back towards the
center, back to its source. But it will
be a new space that it now exists in.
Then it returns back to a center point
where it ends or transitions into a
state where it expands out once more,
continuing its infinite cycle of
expansion and contraction. One could
also say that it moves through the
chakras moving from a low frequency to
an incredibly high frequency where it
will unite and transition out once more.
Now think of the human species like this
and 2012 being that point of unity where
everything comes together right before
starting off again and expanding out
into something new and different. This
is basically what's happening right now
on Earth. But there's a catch. We have
absolutely no idea how we're going to
expand out because there are so many
potentials with what's happening on the
planet right now. Cycles are everywhere.
The way in which we live our lives is
made up of cycles. We have both
biological cycles and technological
cycles.
Biological cycles exist naturally as a
part of the creation process of life.
And technological cycles are cycles that
we have created and superimposed over
top of these other cycles as a way of
measuring and understanding the reality
that we are a part of. Time is a perfect
example of this. It doesn't really exist
on its own. It has no life of its own.
It's simply a measurement of some other
cycles. So you could think of it as a
measuring tool such as an hour worth of
this or I'll meet you at 6. In the past,
we might have said it differently. Let's
gather again at the second moon cycle.
Let's get more into examples of
technological cycles. Take for example
our calendars, seconds, life cycles of
video game consoles. Some of them, like
our year-long calendar count, is our
interpretation of a natural cycle. the
earth spiraling around the sun.
Others like video game consoles are
completely based on our modern world,
current technology, the economy, buyer
demand, and what have you.
Biological cycles are nature. They
happen in relationship to each other and
are much more harmonic than the cycles
that we've created. They are natural.
The tree doesn't think, hm, is it time
to bear fruit yet? I'm just not sure. I
I think I'll hold off because I'm afraid
no one's going to eat the fruit. Right?
In nature, the tree just does it. It
knows by its inherent instructions what
it's supposed to do. It's by its natural
design. Other cycles in nature are like
solar and lunar cycles, the four
seasons, and bears that hibernate.
Notice, too, with the information from
lesson 16. You could map it like this.
There are smaller cycles within the
larger cycles. Like our celestial cycle,
we find it broken up into the four
seasons. And inside that, we have the
cycles of the rest of life on Earth. all
doing their thing in relationship with
each other, which are both influenced by
and influence the larger cycle.
Sometimes it may not seem like the
smaller cycles have no influence on the
larger cycle, but just imagine the story
of what happened to the Martians on Mars
in the human history movie. I'm not
saying that this is exactly what
happened, but if the actions of the
individual beings changed the evolution
of the planet that ultimately ended up
in the destruction of the planet, well,
that would be the smaller cycles
influencing the larger cycles.
You know, it's just an idea.
We also have cycles within our own
bodies, such as breath, drinking water
or liquids, and eating food. These
cycles are a lot harder to map out
because we are the ones who decide when
we eat, what we eat, and how much we
eat. But it actually does create effects
on us throughout our days. Once again,
those smaller cycles have an effect on
our larger day-to-day cycles.
Interesting. Our interactions with the
four elements are constantly cycling.
Fire, for example, is prana, which is
happening all the time, more frequently
than breath, drink, and food.
You can see how these cycles become more
dense and happen less often. You breathe
more than you eat. Air is less dense
than solid food. And so, it stands to
reason that a dense cycle has a longer
duration.
As you breathe in, you ride the sine
wave up, and as you breathe out, you
drop the sine wave back down. As you go
about your day, every hour, minute, and
second you are breathing. And if you
created a healthy breathing cycle for
yourself, then the other cycles you are
experiencing, the larger cycles would
become more harmonic naturally.
If you change the cycle of your
breathing, if you alter it to
accommodate technological cycles such as
pollution and obesity, then once again,
the result is a cycle that is less
harmonic with the natural order of
things. Some call this disease. The
opposite of a natural cycle which flows
with ease.
Of course, you can always correct a
cycle that is in disease. Sure, it may
take some time, but enough steps in the
direction of a natural cycle do
eventually get you back in the flow.
If you start your day in a healthy way
at the start of the morning, then the
rest of the day will flow that much more
harmoniously. If you wake up with the
sun, you ride the wave of the entire day
and are more in tune with the day
itself. This was a hard one for me to
get and put into practice because I
always used to love sleeping until noon.
If you think about it, there are
different things adapted for different
parts of the day. Cats can see in the
dark, so it makes sense that they're
night animals. I have trouble seeing in
the dark without superimposing a
technological cycle over top of it. So
maybe I should be sleeping. What I mean
is lights and night goggles. Artificial
light is a cycle of electricity, a
technological cycle.
There are positive and negative swings
in cycles. What I mean when I say
positive and negative is the presence of
something and the presence of the
opposite of that thing. Such as with a
magnet. You have a positive end and a
negative end. One is pulling and one is
pushing. Plus or minus male and female.
A lot of people think that negative
means bad and positive means good. And
that's not always the case. We're
actually going to touch on that closer
to the end of this video.
A better way to look at it is male and
female. Positive is male and negative is
female. And don't get caught up on that
positive is good and negative is bad.
Women are wonderful. And in fact, in
gender, everyone has both male and
female energy, not just one or the
other. It is the essence of giving and
receiving. The best example I can give
you is night and day. It's that simple.
When we don't allow the cycles to flow
in their natural order, we often create
things that feel uncomfortable over and
over. Sometimes we call it things we
don't want. It's actually a sort of
short circuit in the cycle or a loop.
The positive looping back on itself or
the negative looping back on itself.
It's not supposed to be a loop. There
needs to be a crossing over of the male
and female energy. That's what creates
the infinity, the oneness that we've all
been feeling and talking about.
Now, of course, we've also made the
connection before between what we have
described as cycles, this form, and the
structure of DNA. This is the
instruction set for the building blocks
that make up our being.
As we increase our awareness of these
instructions and understanding, we can
transcend our 3D perspective of reality
and shift into an awareness of the
interconnected causality of all of the
planes of existence.
There's a little trick here, though.
Understanding and awareness are not
necessarily the same thing. Just as the
tree does what it does without needing
to understand, without a brain, so to
speak, understanding is not required for
the instructions to be followed. That
simply means that sometimes the brain
just gets in the way of the natural flow
of the cycles, the natural knowing that
comes through your heart.
On that topic, I have something
important to share. There's a lot of
people who like to talk about life from
this new age perspective that everything
is just love and light all the time and
that if we just think happily, even when
things aren't going very well, we'll be
fine. In fact, I realize how I might
have even propagated that idea in
earlier lessons and flat out said it.
Now, this idea isn't wrong. It is
however only half of the equation, half
of the cycle. And if you recall, without
the other half of the cycle, we have a
loop. Think of it like a flowing river.
If you cut off the flow, such as with a
dam, it kills everything on one side by
stopping the flow, and everything dies
of dehydration, and the other side
becomes drowned in a loop, which gets
bigger and bigger until eventually it
must break. And so, yes, we should
strive to create a life for ourselves
and each other that is filled with love,
joy, and excitement. But when things
aren't going very well, recognize if
it's a part of the natural flow, or if
somewhere along the way you got caught
in the loop. If we lie to ourselves and
pretend that the loop is the flow, even
when it's not, it limits our ability to
create a real transmutation of it and
create something new in its place, going
with the flow. Do you understand what
I'm saying? Let me say it in a different
way just to make sure because this is
incredibly important.
Sometimes things go well and sometimes
things go poorly. It's not always your
fault, but you are always a factor in
the cause and influence in the cycle. If
you can account for the cycle, meaning
take account of it, be aware of it, you
can choose to actively respond or be
responsible and have an able response to
it. That's what being a creator is all
about.
I know I just said positive and negative
are not good and bad. In this example,
I'm going to use good and bad in place
of positive and negative. By good and
bad, I mean things that feel really good
and things we do want and things that
feel really bad and things we don't
want. Just go with it. I know it might
be a little confusing.
Sometimes things feel really good and
you're on the top of the wave. In this
space, it's easy to ride the wave and
feel good and be a creator. When you're
on the bottom of the wave, if things are
not excellent, sometimes it just feels
easier to go to that fourthdimensional
space and say, "Everything is perfect
and in divine order." This is true from
a 4D perspective. It is perfect and in
divine order because it exists and is in
this moment. And as it's manifesting in
3D, it is not excellent. It could be
excellent, but it takes time, effort,
and focused energy to transmute and
change it into something that is
excellent.
What we need to practice is taking that
positive flowing energy and instead of
looping itself back on itself is flow
with it through the negative energy in
order to create a transmutation into
what's next. When we say that things are
perfect and in divine order and ignore
the loops or even create them as a
justification to dam up the river of
good feelings, we actually inhibit the
flow that leads to the next. that limits
our ability to take action and
ultimately what we're left with is a poo
sandwich.
Here's the analogy. Say I'm making you a
delicious sandwich and you've got bread,
tomatoes, avocado, chives, maybe some
peppers, and a roasted porttoella
mushroom. That is an excellent sandwich.
Right now, say I just put a big dollop
of poo right on the top. Do you still
want it?
Can anyone honestly say that they would
still want this sandwich? It's perfect
and in divine order, right? Right. But
it's certainly not excellent. And I
don't care how delicious the other
ingredients are. If there's poo on this
sandwich, it's a poo sandwich. It
doesn't matter how fresh the rest of the
sandwich is or even how fresh the poo
is. It's not something we want to eat.
The moral of this story is that if
there's poop on your sandwich, if
there's something in your life that is
perfect but not excellent, don't just
sit there and let it be. Find out what
it is, why it is the way it is, and then
take some actions to turn it into
something you actually truly want. In
that process, in that alchemy, we can
really create some powerful change on
this planet. If everyone could come from
that space, we would see a new Earth
overnight.
Because no matter how you slice it,
McDonald's, landfills, oil rigs, and
this entire way of life we've made for
ourselves just doesn't work. And I think
I can speak for all of us when I say
that it could be something different,
something magical, and more in harmony
with ourselves and the world around us.
Waste-free, flying vehicles, spirit
centers, cloud cities, interstellar
travel, and the infinity of
possibilities that come along with it.
It's all in the cycles.
Check out this painting I found on
Deviant Art by the brilliant artist
Adrien Kenyon. This is his depiction of
the miraculous conception of creation
and human history. It starts at unity, a
sphere. The kaducius is seen coming from
it. Duality, then a trinity. Then as the
four elements come into manifestation,
we get physical reality. Crystals form
and water layers over top of it. All of
these previous elements were conscious
of their own, but now biological life
begins to develop in the water and crawl
onto land. We go through a few stages of
evolution. Dinosaurs, basic mammals, and
then humans show up. There's a lot of
ideas as to where we came from, and we
won't get into this now. Adam and Eve
happens. The Buddha becomes enlightened
underneath the Bodhi tree. And then
something shifts from this point to here
is where we are now. Disconnected from
our own natural spiral, paving over the
ground, killing people for telling us
that being materialistic can heed
nothing good. Then come the world wars
and the world falls into chaos.
And then something shifts again. From
the destroyed world, another seed grows.
We switch into a different reality. It
starts out small. From out of the chaos,
a tiny new Earth emerges and grows
larger. This is the new Earth, a new
realm of light and purity that we were
meant to be connected with all along.
The planet continues to evolve. Here
exists angels, archangels, and
multi-dimensional hyper cubes. The
planet becomes more crystalline over
time. The last part of the spiral is the
seventh dimension and the realm of God.
An infinite number of multiverses
dividing like cells in an embryo. An
ultimate omnipresence as everything that
is contained in all of these multiverses
is a part of God's consciousness. A
snake biting its own tail and oraoris is
the symbol of cyclic rebirth like the
phoenix. All of the information
contained in the seventh dimension is
held here like a nest for the next
cosmic egg. There are a few other ideas
that come to mind about this that I want
to share as well. First, look at the
shape of it as a whole. It's the Tryion
ray, the geometry of DNA and light that
we've been looking at before. If you
line that up with the chakras, you can
see how we go from a super dense space
up to the highest frequency until we
once again connect with the same source
that we were originally connected to.
Doesn't that look familiar on the flower
of life? If these theories about the
flower of life are true, then that means
this entire experience of human history
and ascension and growth and evolution
is just one wave of energy from one
point to another on an infinite universe
of possibilities. Each point is the
supreme awareness of some aspect of the
gods source consciousness field. And the
energy that moves between it is the
vibrations and waves of energy that we
are experiencing called the
electromagnetic field. as much smaller
fractals of the same source energy have
experiences through these waves. This
image also doesn't account for the
number of parallel realities that we
could experience at this point. If the
flower of life expands in these
directions, then this is just one
direction. Maybe instead of total
destruction, which is what this image
depicts, instead we make our first ET
contact on this spiral and join our
galactic family on this wave. Maybe
something else happens like we start
getting superpowers like in Heroes or
something. Maybe all of that can happen
right here too. Now, regardless of all
of the potentials we can come up with,
let's bring it back to this diagram.
Think about how this applies in your
life. Every day you live could be seen
as one mini spiral. However, seven small
spirals make one larger one across the
seven small ones. This is a week. Then
several weeks create a month. Several
months create a year. You can map that
over your life and see from birth to
death, which is just like the mind
calendar. Not the end, but a transition
into new level of life. This is such an
exciting time for us. As mentioned
earlier, we cannot know what is going to
happen and I'm not going to tell you
it's going to be this or that because I
don't know either. We will change the
outcome depending on our being. What's
going to happen? You decide. In lesson
one, we discussed how you create your
own reality. Many people argued that it
didn't make sense when others influence
your life from out of the blue. What we
didn't discuss, but probably should
have, is that we are a collective. We
are one species. You create your own
reality, but we are all co-creating our
realities together on a much broader
scale. Think of an ant colony. Each
individual ant decides where they want
to go, what food they want to collect,
and how they want to do it. But
collectively, they are all working
together to gather food for everyone and
do what is necessary for the group.
Whether it be digging tunnels or
gathering leaves. Humans are like that,
except our mentality of do what's best
for everyone is replaced with get enough
money to survive. Don't worry about the
starving people on the street. help
giant entities known as businesses take
more money from the people and don't
question what's going on. We're doing it
to ourselves and we're doing it
together. Together is the key word here.
Together we can break through barriers.
Together we can absolutely change the
world. But we can only do it together,
not individually. Individually, we can
change our own individual world, which
is where we need to start. When we
learned that we can all get along with
each other, regardless of race or belief
or level of consciousness, we learned
that absolutely anything is truly
possible. But it has to start here in
your heart.
There was a time when through science,
we believed that the cell was the
smallest thing, the building block of
life.
New discoveries led to the realization
that the cell wasn't in fact the
smallest thing. Instead, the molecule
was.
Now the molecule was the fundamental
building block of life. But then new
discoveries revealed that it wasn't the
molecule either. The molecules were made
of atoms. Now the atom was the smallest
thing that you could get. Then you
guessed it, we discovered even smaller
things. Now we have subatomic particles
and they are the most fundamental
building block of all reality.
Oh, okay. Hold on. Now scientists are
throwing around something called string
theory, which is like vibrating noodles
in hyperspace. Smaller than all of that
other stuff. Okay, so maybe it does get
smaller. It makes me smile. If there's
anything we know for sure, it ought to
be that there's always going to be
something more or less, as the case may
be. With all of our mathematics,
brilliant scientists, and ever evolving
understanding, we can look and look
forever, but we won't be finding a
bottom anytime soon.
So why are we looking? What is science
for? Is it just to know? Why does it
even matter? Why should it matter to
you? What difference does it make
whether atoms or cells or vibrating
noodles are the smallest thing? Perhaps
it's because our level of understanding
directly relates to the level of reality
that we have control over, which I
suppose could be a very good thing or a
very bad thing. Huh. We'll get into
that. that a little later cuz this video
is about light. Why light? That seems
pretty simple, doesn't it? It's what
powers the earth. It's what powers me,
you, everything around us. What if we
could know the shape of light, its most
basic characteristics, its smallest
building blocks? What if we could
understand the fundamental geometry and
movement that light moved by? What if it
was a three-dimensional solid form that
we could map as simple as a tetrahedron
or a cube? Would that change our
understanding of reality?
You know, I think that's what scientists
and maybe all of us at some level are
searching for. That one thing that might
just allow us to create our own
self-sustained ball of light. That one
thing that connects everything. What if
we could know that the core building
block of life and everything as we know
it? Would it change our understanding of
what light is? Well, let's put on our
science hats and see what we can find
out. Einstein said something amazing,
something which has echoed through the
halls of science since his death. He
said that science should be simple,
something that anyone can understand.
Anyone can make things complicated and
complex, but it takes a genius to make
something simple.
While doing research on Wikipedia, you
find pages upon pages with bajillions of
words describing these crazy formulas
revealing the secrets of the universe,
everything we know in modern science.
Upon seeing these pages, it led me to
ask a whole number of questions about
what I was looking at. Questions like,
why do we believe that light is what it
is? What even is light? What is particle
physics? Why is it relevant to me? Why
is it that for the average Joe, these
ideas about existence and reality are so
hard to understand? Do scientists make
them overly complex for a reason? Why
are we having trouble following
Einstein's brilliant words about
simplicity? Is there a way that we can
use sacred geometry to explain and
simplify these ideas in a way that works
and makes sense?
And most importantly, how can I use this
information in a way to grow as a
person? I don't just want to build up
beliefs about these topics. I want to
expand my ability to create with them.
And how do we do that? Where do we
start?
Well, let's start at the beginning.
It's theorized across the board from
creation myths, the basic geometry of
the flower of life, and even in the big
bang theory that light is among the
first things created at the beginning of
everything. So, exploring discovering
how light works would be a fundamental
piece to understanding everything. Let's
take a look at particle physics and
quantum physics. They may help us crack
this code.
Particle physics is the study of the
basic building blocks of matter and the
forces they exert on each other. In
particle physics, scientists are trying
to find the one the one thing that
creates everything else or at least the
phenomenon that they are observing.
It is very closely related to quantum
physics which is using that same idea to
discover the source of the universe we
live in that ties everything together.
Scientists in this field have done a lot
of work in demonstrating and exploring
the unified field theory which shows
that everything in the universe is
connected through an infinite web of
something. They're not sure what it is,
but we can see how we are connected in a
grand and mysterious way. As our
sciences have looked smaller and smaller
to find the smallest particle, we have
reached a point where things get so
small that we can no longer define what
they look like.
We try and define what particles are
through abstract concepts in mathematics
because we say that particles are
unseeable and unknowable and yet things
are always going to get smaller and
smaller. Everything is made of something
else and it fractals down to infinity or
fractals larger to infinity.
Some scientists have actually been known
to cut infinite numbers when they find
them because they're deliberately
looking for finitness instead of
embracing the infinite nature of
reality. Check out the movie Black Hole.
to see this happening in action.
Particles are called particles because
they're too small to be seen by
instruments we have in science at this
time. What that means is that we don't
really know what particles even are. If
we knew what they were, they would not
be particles anymore. They would be
described.
There is kind of a broken dichotomy that
is happening in this field. It's
something that scientists all over the
world are trying to figure out. Here's
the problem. Light and other particles
that move at the speed of light are
assumed to have no mass. The speed of
light, also known as the speed of
massless particles, is about 299,792,458
m/s.
What we know in the field of science is
that there is something that translates
these particles from one side of the
equation to the other, from the world of
no mass and into the world of mass. If
you ask the scientist this question,
they would tell you that it's the Higs
field, the ever permeating field that
gives things mass. In essence, light
speeded particles pass through the Higs
field and slow down and gain a property
of mass. The popular Higs Bzon is the
particle that is created upon the
lighteed particle merging with the
Higsfield. According to our formulas,
this Bzon, this particle is supposed to
come out with it. I think there's an
important piece of information that
we're missing here and it starts with
asking some questions.
First of all, what even is mass? And
second, why do we believe that light has
no mass?
On Wikipedia, mass is said to represent
an amount of matter, but then it goes on
to say that the term matter has no
universally agreed upon definition.
How can we say that light has no mass
when we can't even agree upon a
definition or understanding of what
matter and subsequently mass even are?
Because of all of our fancy equations as
described earlier, we have kind of
thrown all ideas about what light could
actually look like out the window in
favor of a complex equation that looks
like this.
I want to take it back to simple.
What if we could know the shape of
light? What if we could actually define
what the structure of light as well as
every particle and thing in existence
were?
What if there was a basic geometry of
the universe that we missed? Even more
interesting, what if light was a
geometric solid and there was no
difference between the geometry of light
and the simplest particle? What if mass
and no mass was not just about the speed
that it traveled, but also the density
of the information held within the
shape? Maybe the speed of the particle
is interdependent upon the information
that was carried in the form. And the
more information it holds, the denser it
becomes. I have a few examples to
demonstrate what I'm talking about. The
first is water vapor. I know that it's
not a light speed particle, but perhaps
they have the same properties. See,
water has a heavy density, but when it
heats up, it translates into vapor and
rises into the air. It takes a 90° turn
into another dimension of form and it
merges together with itself to become
clouds.
As the clouds become packed denser and
denser with so much information packed
within them, eventually they have no
choice but to release and all of the
water comes pouring down. It's changing
from a high-speed particle into a denser
one based on the density of the
information within the droplet as well
as the speed that it was traveling. Now
I recognize that this only partially
works as an example because the
particles I was describing are not light
speeded particles. But if we can take
that idea and apply it to light, it
seems to work in a very similar way.
Let's think about photosynthesis. A
burst of energy from the sun travels
towards the earth as both a wave and a
particle. It has properties of both and
it's moving at the speed of light and
passes through a plant. That plant then
absorbs the information and energy that
it needed from the wave particle that
passed through it. The plant then uses
that information, the light speeded
particles that it took from the
sunlight, and uses it to create
something with mass, merging them with
water and other plant matter to create
sugars and other nutrients.
In addition to supporting the theory of
light being a solid and holding
information and even mass, doesn't that
also seem to fit the model of the Higs
Bzon, too? I I could be wrong. It's just
an idea. If light is a solid, it can be
both a wave and a particle
simultaneously.
If light is a solid, it can have both
density or nothing inside it at all. And
if light is a solid, well, what could it
look like? What my friends and I have
come up with is a combination of three
forms, the three simplest shapes in
existence. And as you look at it, ask
yourself, can we simplify it further?
Light is composed of two primary forces.
We call these electricity and magnetism.
Thus, electromagnetic waves and
radiation. Electricity is particles and
magnetism is waves. Remember everything
we've talked about with male and female
energy. Electricity is male. Magnetics
are female curves and points both of
which are found on this shape.
Looking at the flower of life, which is
the blueprints for life in reality
itself, you can see that's exactly how
it works. You have male energy, the
particles, the dots, and female energy,
the waves, the curves. Now, you might
notice inside the flower of life, there
are two ways you can look at it. You can
see the circles, lots and lots of
circles that make up the whole image.
This is the female perspective. You can
also choose to see this this little
shape that looks like a seed, which
makes up the entire picture from these
seeds aligning themselves perfectly with
each other in beautiful six-fold
symmetry. This is the male perspective.
This seed is called the Trion ray as
coined by the man who founded Michael
Evans. He is a man who has given a large
part of his life to exploring sacred
geometry and quantum physics. And quite
honestly, his discoveries are
evolutionary.
The flower of life in two dimensions is
a flat 2D representation of the way the
universe fits together in higher
frequencies and higher dimensions.
Michael saw this and asked a big
question. If this is the universe from a
2D perspective, what would it look like
in three? So he began modeling and
molding three-dimensional flower of life
together and discovered some pretty
remarkable things. Everything has
breath. Everything breathes and
everything lives. And so at a level of
basic geometry of particle physics, we
too must have breath. He found that
every geometry we think we know of is a
static and fixed perspective of what it
really is. Tetrahedrin. How about a
tetrine and a tetrax?
An inhale and an exhale of this basic
form. Icosahedin. Here's an icosatrine
and an icosatrix.
He developed breathing models for all of
the platonic solids. And then he found a
new solid, one that hadn't been
discovered before.
Energy never travels in straight lines.
It always moves in curves. By
incorporating curves into the basic
geometry of our plutonic solids, you
actually discover much simpler particles
that before we never knew existed.
And so we come back to these three
images. The first one, as you know, is
the sphere. This is simply one of the
simplest forms and the most female. It's
all curve. It's not hard to see how this
form is used in the creation of all
things. Just look at a planet or a star
or even an egg.
Next, we have this one, the Trinity or
the Trion ray. I'd actually like to make
a distinction here. The Trinity is three
spheres put together like a vesica
Pisces. And the Trion ray is 116th of
the volume of that. In three dimensions,
they both come out with three edges,
three faces, and two points smaller than
any other shape. It's a single shape
that contains both particles and waves.
They're both equally important. And
Michael Evans proposes that with this
Trion theory, he has speculated that
light could in fact be a solid. In fact,
it's highly likely.
This Trion ray is the geometry of a
straight line. For if you were to draw
any of the platonic solids, you could
replace all of the straight lines with a
trion ray and you would get a diagram of
both the inhale and the exhale of that
platonic solid. The great artist Deloqua
once said, "It would be worthy to
investigate whether straight lines exist
only in our brains." The interesting
thing about the Trion ray and the best
of Pisces is that they both have
straight lines as well as curves and
it's just a matter of perspective.
One of the most important pieces of
information about all of these shapes
though is that this is how form comes
into manifestation from a geometric
perspective from source to the material
world. The sphere is a ball. It's all
curve. Upon adding a second sphere, you
get the first edge. And so this is
curves and edges. When you add the third
sphere, you get the first points. And
now you have curves, edges, and points
all together in one shape. As you
continue adding circles, you get more
and more shapes and forms that begin to
manifest, such as the Platonic solids
and and everything else we know about.
This is why the Vesica Pisces is so
important. As you know, we've been
looking at this for a long time, and
we're going to continue to. Over the
past year, I've been learning that the
Vesa Pisces is one of the most important
keys for waking up and transformation on
this planet. It is a model for bringing
people together to create powerful
change on this planet. As we grow
together and make powerful connections
with each other, it is our connections
that begin to alter the way that we do
things. We help each other refine our
messages. It is asking each other
questions that allows us to explore
deeper into what something really means.
And then with the newfound information
that we gathered together, we can set
off on a journey to change the world.
Ladies and gentlemen, these three forms
are what I believe to be the God
particles. We have a male form, a female
form, and a form of a merging together
of both of them. The God particle is not
a matter of scale. It is not a smallest
thing like a Lego block, but rather the
simplest geometry that we can conceive
in this dimension. It is a geometry that
makes up all manner of things regardless
of size and scale. Just look around you.
Most seeds look like this. Most leaves
look like this. Most fruits look like
this. Eggs look like this. Sperm looks
like this. It's practically impossible
not to find examples of it everywhere.
All we need to do is take a look.
Okay, grand finale. To answer that big
question from the beginning, how does
the infinite universe have a beginning?
I have a feeling you might already know.
It's a cycle. And no, I don't know
exactly what it looks like specifically,
but I can share with you some ideas
about it. Every cycle comes to an end
and then begins a new cycle. Or maybe
it's the old one continuing on again.
Some theories about the universe say
that once it was a hugely expanded thing
and it contracted to a small point, a
space of unity, and then rapidly
expanded outwards again. And today,
while we can't see the remnants of the
previous universe, at least not yet, we
can see the beginning of this cycle that
we are a part of. It's really
interesting. If the universe is
infinite, how is it that we are existing
in a finite space? And is the goal of
life to take what is finite and merge it
with the infinite to create a new way of
life and a new understanding of
ourselves?