Electromagnetic  locks  on  the  doors  to  keep  them  locked  while  the  clerk  is  occupied 
cleaning  the  store  at  night  so  robbers  can't  ambush  him  while  he's  out  from  behind 
the  bulletproof  glass.  These  locks  have  around  a  1,500  pound  hold  strength  so  it's 
impossible  to  force  them  open  manually. 

But  you  can  open  them  from  inside  easily  without  the  clerk  having  to  buzz  you  out 
because  there's  a  circuit  that  detects  when  a  person  touches  the  exit  bar  that  de- 
energizes  the  electromagnet.  This  is  a  simple  touch  sensitive  circuit  that  detects  a 
change  in  capacitance  when  a  conductive  body  (like  yours)  drains  it. 

It  won't  work  if  you  touch  it  with  gloves  since  they'd  insulate  you  from  the  circuit. 
But  touch  it  with  a  bare  metal  object... 

Take  a  flat  piece  of  steel  about  2  feet  long  and  3/8"  wide  and  bend  it  with  a  curve  on 
the  end  in  a  half-circle  4"  in  diameter. 

Now,  by  simply  slipping  the  curved  part  through  the  gap  in  the  doors,  I  can  touch 
the  bar  on  the  inside  with  this  conductive  metal  and  fool  the  lock  into  thinking  I'm 
inside  and  unlocking.  Takes  all  of  3  seconds  to  insert  this  jimmy  and  unlock  the 
doors. 

This  shows  what  an  electromagnetic  lock  looks  like.  Basically  a  flat  steel  plate 
attached  to  the  door  with  the  electromagnet  attached  to  the  frame.  These  have  a 
pull  force  of  several  thousand  pounds,  thus  impossible  to  manually  pull  open. 


Here's  the  jimmy  being  inserted  into  the  gap  between  doors. 


Here  we  see  how  the  jimmy  curves  around  to  touch  the  door  handle,  thus  fooling  the 
lock  into  releasing. 


The  end  must  touch  the  bare  metal  of  the  bar  in  order  to  conduct.  You  have  to  be 
holding  the  jimmy  with  a  bare  hand  too,  because  it  won't  work  if  you're  wearing 
gloves. 


