DELHI UNIVERSITY LIBRARY SYSTEM 
a.N..^Kjfttr JfcT 

Ac. No. <T7°snJ Oat4o 5»iMW >U 

This book should be returned on or before the date last stamped below. 
An overdue charge of 10 np. will be charged for each day the book Is 
kept overtime. 




THE HISTORY OF 

Musical Instruments 




THE HISTORY OF 



Musical 

Instruments 




New York 

W • W • NORTON & COMPANY • Inc • 

Pi ^Ushers 





Copyright, 1940, by 
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 
Copyright renewed 1968 by Irene Sachs 



ISBN 0 393 02068 1 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

5 6 7 8 9 0 




IN MEMORY 
OF 

GEORGE E. SACHS 
i 909-1939 




EMILY FLOYD GARDINER 



gave generously of her time and interest to help 
me with this book , the first that I have written in 
English. Polishing my style , discussing my 'prob- 
lems , insisting on the readers right to understand 
things without too much effort, she played a vital 
role in the preparation of this book. I am deeply 
indebted to her. 




Contents 



FIRST PART: The Primitive and Prehistoric Epoch 
chapter i: Early Instruments 25 

MOTOR IMPULSES 2 $ 

The “ invention of instruments " — rhythm — staffing 
the body — rattles — sounding amulets — shamanic 
rites — stamfers — rice ceremonials — slit-drums — 
the teetering tree — the sand drum — drums — wood- 
cutters ' and clay modelers' forms. 



RITUAL FUNCTIONS 34 

Drums ( continued ) — shaman's drumming — con- 

struction rites — the sacred drum-yard — symbolism of 
the drum — symbolism of the drum stick — slit-drum 
(i continued ) — drum language — the earliest wind 
instruments — the ribbon reed — weather charm — 
friction instruments — girls' initiations — the bull- 
roarer — woman's taboo — the scrafer — love charm 

— flutes — fhallic rites — nose flutes — nostril and as- 
trology — trumfets — solar rites — shell trumfets — 
sex connotations. 

MELODIC IMPULSES 52 

Reduflication in language and music — ‘ Father and 
mother * — stamfing tubes — xylofhone — marimba 

music — ground harf — ground-zither — musical bow 

— intimacy and meditation — the jaws' harf. 

9 





10 



Contents 



CHAPTER 



CHAPTER 



CHAPTER 



CHAPTER 



2 : The Chronology of Early Instruments 

Simplicity and complication — cultural level and 
form of civilization — prehistory and anthropology — 
geographic method — relation or parallelism — the 
three main strata. 



SECOND PART: Antiquity 
3: Sumer and Babylonia 

History — languages — script — idiofhonic instru- 
ments — toys — pipes — horns and trumpets — King 
Tushratta's gift — drums — u the great bull's hide " 
— Sumer and Japan — divination — feeding the 
drum — moon rites — sacrifices — Sumer and East 
Africa — lyres — lyre playing — harps — harp play- 
ing — orchestration — harmony — lutes — King Neb- 
uchadrezzar's orchestra. 

4: Egypt 

FROM PREHISTORY TO THE END OF THE MID- 
DLE KINGDOM 

Prehistoric contact with Sumer — history — script — 
clappers and concussion-sticks — Arbeit und Rhythmus 
— sistrum — Hathor and Isis — flutes and clarinets — 
glass blowers' technique — harps — drawing and pho- 
tography — drums — Egypt and India. 

FROM THE NEW KINGDOM TO THE GREEK 
EPOCH 

The Empire — new style in music — oboes — in 
search of the scale — trumpets , stringed instruments 
and idiophones — foreign instruments in high civiliza- 
tions. 

5 : Israel 

THE NOMADIC EPOCH 

Primitive character — ugab — King David's kinnor — 
the women's timbrel — the high priest's bell — the 
magic shofar — the two silver trumpets. 




Contents 



ii 



THE TIME OF THE KINGS 1 14 

The academy of religious music — music in the Tern fie 

— stringed and wind instruments — sistrum and cym- 
bals — the controversy of the organ — the headings of 
the Psalms. 

chapter 6 : Greece, Rome and Etruria 128 

Fine art and music — lyres and the musical system of 
antiquity — the harf and A nacreon — lutes and zith- 
ers — fifes — succinere and incinere — the Pythian 
games — bag fifes — Emferor Nero — cross flute — 
discovery in an Etruscan tomb — fan- fifes — vir- 
ginity test — the water organ — trumfets — Roman 
military music — the question of the Nordic lurer 

— drums — Dionysian cults — claffers — Mediterra- 
nean heritage. 

chapter 7 : India 15 1 

The Indus civilization — drum and harf — the hier - 
oglyfhic scrift — the Vedas — Rigveda and Atharvo- 
veda — The Dravida — the double trumfet — the 
double clarinet of snake charmers — bagfifes — drums 

— sacrifices to the drum — arched harfs — temfle re- 
liefs — trumfets — drums — the coiled drum stick — 
cross flutes — the celestial music — lute — the Gand- 
hara style. 

chapter 8 : The Far East 162 

Confucius and Plato — musical ethics — State and 
music — cosmos and music — substances and music — 
imfortance of idiof hones — universe and fitch — 
flaying and singing. 

THE SHANG DYNASTY (FOURTEENTH-TWELFTH 

CENTURIES B.C.) 1 66 

The Book of Poetry — globular flutes — the Euro - 
fean ocarina — stones and stone chimes — Kawa 
founding — bells and bell chimes — blood sacrifices 

— seasons and intervals — drums — rice stuffing — 

nails. 

THE CHOU DYNASTY ( 1 122-255 B - c -) X 74 

Percussion-claffer — a beaten book — the trough — 
rice founding — the fish — the eyelids and the carved 




12 



Contents 



fruit — the tiger — the fath of life — fitch - and fan - 
fifes — the male and the female scale — flutes — 
sacred measures — the mouth organ — long zithers — 
music of the sages. 

THE HAN DYNASTY (20 6 B.C.-220 A.D.) 

Short lutes — The west eastern fath. 

chapter 9: America 

CENTRAL AMERICA 

The Mexican civilization — flutes and trumfets — 
idiof hones — Musica muy triste — drums — level of 
Mexican music. 

SOUTH AMERICA 

The Peruvian civilization — fan- fifes — the question 
of an American origin — flutes — the rocking whistle 
— idiof hones — drums — inflation of human skins — 
trumfets — the “ Pacific ” culture area. 



THIRD PART: The Middle Ages 
chapter 10: The Far East 

Western influences — idiof hones — Turkish metal 
workers — trumfets — gigantic lama trumfets — reed 
fifes — a Tataric fibgorn — flutes — different blow- 
ing style — drums — Jafanese rhythm — bowed in- 
struments — invention of the fiddle bow — flat lutes 

— long lute — dulcimer and harf — change of musi- 
cal style. 

chapter 1 1 : India 

Gamakas — rhythmic fatterns 
PRE-ISLAMIC TIMES 

Borobudur — idiof hones — cymbals in mythology — 
acrobacy — drums and drum chimes — stick-zither 

— virus — fiddles — symfathetic strings — flutes and 
trumfets — the question of the coil. 

ISLAMIC TIMES 

Drums — kettledrums — technique — oboe — broad- 
necked lutes — the feacock. 



189 

192 

192 

196 

207 

221 

222 

229 




Contents 



13 

chapter 12: Southeast Asia 233 

PRE-INDIAN PERIOD 233 

Malayan -prehistory — drum- gongs — bronze. 

INDIAN PERIOD 235 

Indian colonies — Borobudur. 

POST-INDIAN PERIOD 236 

Dynamic style — the orchestras — scales — the xylo- 
phone — Malayan civilization in Africa — metallo- 
phones — celesta — gongs — magic — gong chimes — 
Islamic influence. 



chapter 13: The Near East 244 

The queen of Sheba — The Arabian Nights — Islamic 
cosmopolitanism — frame drums — flutes — the oboe 

— procession music — cylindrical drums — kettle- 
drums — clay and metal — short lutes — the lute 
with a frontal stringholder — the name < ud — sym- 
bolism of the strings — the spike-flddle — the long 
lute — mathematical basis — the trapezoidal zither 

— combined instruments — the dulcimer — the an- 

• 

gular harp. 



chapter 14: Europe 260 

INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCED BEFORE THE YEAR 

1000 260 

A northern and a southern zone — the harp — chrotta 
and harpa — medieval chord playing — lyres — the 
monochord — Boetius and the monks — the hurdy- 
gurdy — lutes — flddles — idiophones — horns and 

trumpets — bagpipes — the organ — musica flcta. 

INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCED IN THE ELEVENTH 

AND TWELFTH CENTURIES 286 

The portative organ — flutes — military music — 
reed pipes — drums — the trumscheit — zithers — 
the cimbalom. 




14 



Contents 



FOURTH PART: The Modern Occident 
chapter 15: The Renaissance (1400-1600) 297 

Development of a self-sufficient instrumental music — 
increasing interest in color — fofular treatises on 
instruments — Virdung — Luscinius — Schlick — 
Agricola — Bermuda — Praetorius — Mersenne — 
beauty of shafe — collections — inventories — chest 
and consort — the organ — two keyboards — stofs 

— the flein jeu — re gals — single and double — 
the fair — recorders — one-handed flute — tabor and 
fife — flageolet — transverse flute — shawms — bas- 
soon — rankets — cromome — schryari — rauschffei - 
fen — comet — trombone — trumfets — the “ noble 
guild ” — kettledrums — clavichords — equal temfer - 
ament — short octave — the Empfindsame Zeitalter 

— sfinets and harfsichords - — virginals — the chess- 
board — the dulce melos — the lute — modern lute 
flaying — the vihuela — the cittern — viols — tun- 
ing — the lira da gamba. 

chapter 16: The Baroque (1600-1750) 351 

Musical revolution — emotional style — monody — 
the first violin sonatas — dismissal of wind instru- 
ments — monochrome — rise of the violin — the vio- 
lin family — the formant — good and foor violins — 
fizzicato and vibrato — Brescia and Cremona — Ger- 
many English and Trench schools — concert halls 

— oversfinning — viola d'amore — viola fomfosa — 
baryton — the bow — drone lutes — citterns — gui- 
tar — harfsichord — Ruckers — the second keyboard 

— ravalement — the 16 foot — the fedal — carillons 

— water chimes — glockensfiel — celesta — English 
change-ringing — the flute — readmission of wind 
instruments — the oboe — slide trumfets — horns — 
the organ — the Praetorius organ — the fitch. 

chapter 17: Romanticism (1750-1900) 388 

Increasing number of instruments — blending of tim- 
bres — striving for fower — the fitch — expressive- 




Contents 



1 5 



ness — the fiano — the harp — the Aeolian harp — 
the supernatural — friction rods — the glass harmon- 
ica — the harmonium — the Boehm flute — clarinets 

— the saxophone — chromatic horns and trumpets — 
serpents and bass horns — key trumpets and key bugles 

— stopped Trench horns — valves — the cornet fam- 
ily — trumpets and trombones — machine drums — 

— drums — the Turkish music — Janissaries — the 
triangle — the crescent — cymbals — the xylophone — 
the organ. 



epilogue: The Twentieth Century 445 

Gigantic orchestras — chamber orchestras — preference 
given to wind instruments — the rise of percussion — 
the banjo — jazz instruments — electric instruments 
— archaism — the resurrection of ancient music — 
playing on ancient instruments — ancient forms — the 
organ — “The World's Greatest Organ ” — “Back 
to Silbermann ” — the Praetorius organ — the new 

style. 



TERMINOLOGY 454 

REFERENCES 4^9 

•489 



INDEX 




Illustrations 



LIST OF PLATES 

Facing Page 



PLATE I 32 

Prototype of the slit-drum. Gigantic slit-drum in its hut. 

PLATE II 48 

Slit-drum. Footed drum. Prehistoric whistle "flute. Bucium t 
Rumania. Lithuanian bark trumpet. Jaws' harp. Esthonian 
jaws' harp. 

PLATE III 64 

Sumerian lyres. 

PLATE IV 80 

Lyre-player entertaining guests. Gigantic drum. Horizontal 
angular harp. Hettite drummer. Hettite lutanist. Lutanist. 

PLATE V 96 

Egyptian stringed instruments. 

PLATE VI 1 12 

Egyptian lyrist. Semitic lyrist. Egyptian harpist. 

PLATE VII 128 

Greek lyre-players. 

PLATE VIII 144 

Etruscan flutist. Stringed instrument. Syrian with ancestor of 

organ. 

PLATE IX 160 

Indian instruments. 

PLATE X 176 



From a Chinese stela. Japanese biwa. Chinese priests playing 
stone chime. Mouth-organ player. 

17 





i8 



Illustrations 



Facing Page 

PLATE XI 192 

Reliefs from Borobudur. Javanese metallophone , gong chime . 
Javanese rejong. Javanese xylophone. Javanese barrel-drums. 
Burmese xylophone. 

PLATE XII 208 

Arabian frame drum. From an Arabic manuscript. Turkish 

drum. 

PLATE XIII 224 

Russian hurdy-gurdy player. Macedonian lira player. South 
Italian pifferari. 

PLATE XIV 240 

From a pulpit in San Leonardo , Arcetri. From cathedral , 
Chartres. From capital in Museum , Toulouse. From cathedral , 

Amiens. 

PLATE XV 256 

Harp , horn , lyre , pan-pipes , fiddle. Bowed lyre. Monochord. 

PLATE XVI 272 

Flemish master, with portative, lute , harp and fiddle. 

Van Eyck , altar in Ghent. 

PLATE XVII 288 

Melozzo da Forli , angel with fiddle. Ambrogio de' Predis , 
angel with fiddle. Italian master , youth with lira da braccio. 

PLATE XVIII 304 

Hans Memling, Altar for Najera. 

PLATE XIX 320 

Vittore Carpaccio , angels with lira da braccio and cromorne in 
the Academy , Venice. Hans Bal dungy woman with viol. 

PLATE XX 336 

Christoph Paudissy lutanist. Frans van Mieris , drummer. Pieter 
Codde } Music with violin and gamba. 

PLATE XXI 352 

Clavichord , Gerard Dow. Harpsichordy Van Steen . 

PLATE XXII 368 

1 8 th century cittern , baryton, guitar. 

PLATE XXIII 384 

J acques-Louis David, The composer de Vienne. Marguerite 
Gerard, Lady with guitar. Frans van Mieris, Lady with the- 
orboed lute. 

PLATE XXIV 400 

Jacob van Loo , Concert at Spanish Court. 




Illustrations 



19 



LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure Page 

1. Strung rattle , Tucano Indians. 27 

2. Gourd rattle , Cuna Indians. 27 

3. Basket rattle , Peru. 27 

4. Slit-drum from New Guinea. 30 

5. Portable slit-drum , Celebes. 30 

d. Footed drum. East Africa. 31 

7. Cup-handle drum. 3 1 

(?. Goblet drum. 3 1 

9. Kettledrum , East Africa. 33 

/0. Neolithic vessel , Moravia. 33 

/ /. Frame drum with handle , Greenland. 33 

X2. Ribbon reed, Madagascar. 38 

13. Ribbon reed , 5 . America. 38 

14. Rubbing tortoise shell , 5 . America. 39 

X5. Rubbed wood. New Ireland. 39 

x( 5 . Stamping tube , Brazil. 41 

77. Bull-roarer , Brazil. 41 

/(?. Scraped bone , Ancient Mexico. 41 

79. * Rattle? India. 41 

20. Whistle flute, Celebes. 41 

2 x . Vertical bone flute, S. America. 41 

22. Notched flute, S. America. 49 

23. Trumpet , Brazil. 49 

24. Trumpet, Brazil. 49 

25. Side-blown shell trumpet. 49 

26. Gopi Y antra, Bengal. 49 

27. Braced gourd-bow , Kafir. 49 

28. Sistrum, Caucasus. 70 

29. Harvesters with concussion sticks, Egypt, 3th dynasty. 88 

30. Naos sistrum, Egypt. 90 

31. Egyptian shoulder harp, section. 94 

32. Egyptian lyre, section. 10 1 

33. Egyptian lute , 18th dynasty. 102 

34. Psalterium decacordum. 118 

35. Trumpet, Madagascar. 146 

36. From an East Turkestanic fresco, 3th— -jth century A.D. 160 

37. Pan-pipes, raft form. 177 

38. Pan-pipes, bundle form. 177 

39. Modern Japanese cross flute. 1 79 

40. Chinese mouth organ. 179 

41. Laotic mouth organ. 179 

42. Ch ( in. 185 

43. She. 185 

44. Chinese lute p‘ip‘a. 189 

45. Whistle flute of clay, Mexico. 1 93 

46. From Codex Becker, Vienna. 194 




20 



Illustrations 



Figure Page 

47. From Codex Becker , Vienna . 195 

48. Mexican slit-drum. 195 

49. Pan-fife of stone , ancient Peru. 197 

50. 5/. Whistling fots , Pm*. 200 

52. Peruvian drum y skeleton. 20 1 

53. Chinese gong chime. 209 

54. Chinese hooked trumfet. 21 1 

55. Chinese straight trumfet. 21 1 

5<5. Tibetan drum of two skulls. 216 

57. Chinese fiat lute yueh ch*in. 216 

5 8 . South Indian stick zither kinnari. 225 

59. North Indian vina. 225 

do. South Indian vina. 225 

dr. Indian fiddle sarangi. 227 

da. Indian fiddle sarinda. 227 

dj. Tibetan trifle fiute. 227 

d^. Indian horn. 228 

d5. Indian double oboe. 231 

66. Siamese oboe. 231 

d7. Javanese oboe. 231 

d<?. Javanese angklung and susfended xylofhone. 234 

dp. Javanese gong-chime. 241 

70. Siamese sfike fiddle. 245 

71. Mandola. 245 

72. Rabab. 245 

73. Two-stringed sfike fiddle. 256 

74. Three-stringed sfike fiddle. 256 

75. Persian long lute. 256 

76. Gothic harf. 265 

77. Caucasian fiddle. 275 

7#. Turkish fiddle. 278 

79. AT*/. 278 

#0. Rebec. 278 

#r. Italian bagfife. 282 

82. French musette. 282 

83. Trumscheit. 291 

84. Wooden fiue-fife. 307 

83. Reed fife. 307 

86. Bible regal. 309 

87. Treble recorder. 3 1 1 

88. Bass recorder. 3 1 1 

89. One-handed fiute. 3 1 1 

po. Large English flageolet. 3 13 

pr. English double flageolet. 313 

92. Bass shawm. 316 

93. Dulcian. 316 

94. Bassoon (18 th century). 316 

95. Bassoon (19th century). 318 




Illustrations 



21 



Figure 


Page 


96. C ontrabassophon ( double bassoon). 


318 


97. Sordun. 


318 


98. Rankct. 


319 


99. Ranke t. 


319 


100. Cromorne. 


321 


1 01. Curved comet. 


325 


102. Tenor cornet . 


325 


103. Straight cornet. 


325 


104. Double-bass trombone ( 16th century). 


327 


105. Trumpet (1 6th century). 


327 


106. Jack. 


334 


107. Lute. 


346 


108. Cittern. 


346 


109. Violin. 


353 


no. Viola d’amore. 


364 


hi. Chitarrone. 


37i 


1 12. Theorboe. 


37i 


1 1 3. Pandora. 


373 


1 14. Orfheoreon. 


373 


1 13. Guitar ( c . 1700). 


373 


1 16. Flute (1 8th century). 


381 


1 17. Oboe ( c . 1700). 


382 


1 18. Oboe (c. 1900). 


382 


1 19. Oboe da caccia. 


382 


120. Cor anglais. 


382 


12 1. W al kings tick flute. 


390 


122. German Prellmechanik without escapement. 


392 


123. German Stossmechanik without escapement. 


392 


124. German Prellmechanik with escapement. 


392 


123. German Stossmechanik with escapement. 


392 


126. Pedal harp. 


399 


127. The double pedal action. 


400 


128 . The double action of the disks. 


401 


129. Nail violin. 


403 


130. Gordon* s flute. 


409 


1 31. Early Boehm flute. 


409 


132. Clarinet. 


413 


133. Double-bass clarinet. 


413 


134. Basset-horn in angular form. 


416 


133. Clarinette d*amour. 


416 


136. Saxophone. 


417 


137. Mouthpieces. 


418 


138. Mouthpieces. 


418 


139. Serpent. 


421 


140. Serpent in tuba form. 


423 


1 41. Bass horn. 


423 


142. Bugle. 


425 


143. Key bugle. 


425 




22 



Illustrations 



Figure Page 

Stopped trumpet. ^2^ 

143. P* s * on an( L notary valve , both in rest and action. 427 

146. Trench horn. 428 

147. Post horn. 429 

148. Cornet. 429 

14Q. Euphonium in oval form. 430 

iso. Bass tuba. 430 

757. Helicon. 431 

752. Saxhorn. 433 

1 S3- T rumfet with rotary valves. 433 

1 S4. Tenor-bass trombone with transposing valves. 433 

755. Kettledrum. 435 

136. Military drum. 436 

757. Crescent ( old form). 438 

138. Section of a mechanical organ. 442 

759. Evolution of the action. 443 

160. Hailed skin. 460 

16 1. Buttoned skin. 461 

162. Braces directly attached. 461 

163. Braces in N, directly attached. 461 

164. Braces in net form , directly attached. 461 

163. Braces in Y with a concealed hoop. 462 

166. Double hoop. 462 

167. Braces in W with double hoops. 462 




FIRST PART 

The Primitive 
and Prehistoric Epoch 




I. Early Instruments 



MOTOR IMPULSES 

M USIC histories written before the nineteenth century usu- 
ally start with an account of the mythological invention 
of the earliest instruments. Cain’s descendant, Jubal, is 
said to be “the father of all such as handle the harp and the organ,” 
Pan is credited with the invention of the pan-pipes, and Mercury 
is supposed to have devised the lyre when one day he found a dried- 
out tortoise on the banks of the Nile. 

Myth has since been replaced by history, and the invention of 
musical instruments is no longer attributed to gods and heroes. But 
people still clamor to know which instruments were invented first, 
and they hope for the neat answers with which amateur writers so 
readily supply them — a drum was the earliest instrument, or a flute, 
or the plucked string of a hunter’s bow. 

Scholars, however, must disappoint them, because no early instru- 
ment was “invented,” if we conceive of invention as the ultimate 
bringing into being of an idea long contemplated and experimented 
with. The supposition of such a process commits the current fallacy 
of superimposing modern reasoning upon early man. Actually he 
was quite unaware, as he stamped on the ground or slapped his body, 
that in his actions were the seeds of the earliest instruments. 

The question of which instruments probably came into being first 
cannot be answered until a more basic problem is solved: what im- 
pulses in man resulted in the development of musical instruments? 
All higher creatures express emotion by motion. But man alone, 

apparently, is able to regulate and co-ordinate his emotional move- 

25 




2 6 The History of Musical Instruments 

mentsj man alone is gifted with conscious rhythm. When he has 
reached this consciousness, and experienced the stimulation and com- 
fort that rhythm gives, he cannot refrain from rhythmic movement, 
from dancing, stamping the ground, clapping his hands, slapping 
his abdomen, his chest, his legs, his buttocks. There are only a few 
very primitive peoples, such as the Vedda in the interior of Ceylon, 
or certain Patagonian tribes, that not only do not possess any musical 
instrument, but do not even clap their hands or stamp the ground. 

Most emotional movements are audible. But primitives probably 
stamped the ground or struck their bodies long before they became 
aware of the accompanying sound as a separate phenomenon. It must 
have been a still longer process before they stamped or struck inten- 
tionally to obtain a sound and, through it, an augmented stimulus. 

They produced various effects from these simple movements: 
muffled beats with the hollow hands, clear beats with the flat palms, 
stamping with the heels or the toes, hitting either bony or fleshy 
parts. All these shades contributed to making an actual preinstru- 
mental music. 

Among the earliest instruments we find the strung rattle y used 
by modern primitives of a very low cultural standard as well as by 
paleolithic hunters, as we know from excavations of prehistoric 
strata. It was made to stress dancing — that is, a complex activity, in 
which the movements of the head, the arms and the trunk were not 
audible without an added device. 

A RATTLE, in general, is an instrument made of several sound- 
ing pieces, the concussion of which results from a shaking motion 
of the player. 

In the so-called strung rattle small hard objects, such as nutshells, 
seeds, teeth or hooves (fig. i), are strung in cords or tied in bunches 
( bunch rattles ). Suspended from the ankles, knees, waist or neck of 
a dancer, they respond to his movements with a sharp noise j but 
their rhythm seldom is accurate, as they sound slightly after the 
dancer’s movement. 

Certainly, the exciting noise is not the only quality inherent in the 
strung rattle j the shells, nuts or teeth of which this rattle is com- 
posed, have magic power. Though we do not know whether the 
sound or the symbolism of the instrument had the priority, the 
strung rattle must be considered a sounding amulet. Later, the two 
qualities were separated from each other j old-fashioned bracelets 
and watch chains with horn-shaped teeth, crosses and other things 




Early Instruments 



27 




figure 2. Gourd rattle, figure 3. Basket 

Cuna Indians. rattle, Peru. 

(After Karl Gustav Izikowitz, Instruments of South America .) 

supposed to bring good luck and to avert evil were a mute survival 
of chain amulets, while the rattling idea is perpetuated in the dis- 
enchanted ankle bells of dancers in modern India and Persia. 

Among the numberless later rattles only one will be discussed: 
the gourd rattle. A calabash, held either by its natural neck or a 
wooden handle, is filled with pebbles or other small, hard objects j 
these make a rattling sound when the player shakes his gourd. Here 
the motor impulse is much more direct and conscious. Still, as the 
shock of the enclosed objects is complex, the sound cannot yet be 
exactly simultaneous with the motion, (fig. 2) 

Gourd rattles are the essential implements of many shamanic 
rites j their sharp, exciting noise entrances both the shaman and the 
listeners. An impressive picture of such a rite was given, some sixty 
years ago, by Stephen Powers, who attended a secret meeting of the 
Maidu Indians in California: 

There was a silence of some minutes in the impenetrable darkness, 
then the sacred rattle began a low, ominous quivering close to the 
ground, in which there was sufficient suggestion of a rattle-snake to 
make one feel chilly about the scalp. ... At the same time the rattle 
rose up slowly, gaining a little in force, until finally it shot up all at once, 
and seemed to dart about the top of the roonv with amazing rapidity, 



28 The History of Musical Instruments 

giving forth terrific rattles and low, buzzing quavers, now and then 
bringing up against the post with a thud of the holder’s fist. . . . When 
they have sung for about half or three-quarters of an hour without cessa- 
tion the rattle grows fast and furious, the performer’s fist goes tunk, 
tunk, tunk on the post with great violence . . . the singers’ voices sink 
into a long-drawn, dying wail. . . . The rattle drops to the ground 
and seems to hover close over it, darting in every direction, and only 
two of the performers are heard, groveling on the ground and muttering 
petitions and responses, until finally the rattle dies slowly out, the voices 
hush, and all is over. 

Except in shamanic rituals, the gourd rattle is mostly shaken by 
women. In some tribes of eastern Africa many hundreds of women 
stand together and shake gourd rattles as if their life depended on it. 

In countries without calabashes, the gourd rattle has been imitated 
in appropriate materials, such as osier, clay, metal, wood. Basketry 
and pottery, the products of feminine crafts, have most often been 
substituted for the natural rattle gourd. As a woman’s instrument, 
the rattling vessel has entered the nursery and lives on as a toy 
given to babies, (fig. 3) 

Rhythmic motor impulse is more accurately reflected if the in- 
strument is a true extension of either the leg or the arm, thus inten- 
sifying its stamping or striking action without imperiling its preci- 
sion j or if the leg and the arm act upon an improved device, as, for 
instance, the stamped fit. 

STAMPERS. The stamped pit is a hole dug in the ground and 
covered with a rough lid of bark. When the English traveler, Henry 
B. Guppy, visited Treasury Island in the Solomon Archipelago, he 
saw as many as forty women and girls dancing round such a pit, 
while two women stamped on “a board which was fixed in the pit 
about halfway down, . . . producing a dull hollow sound, to which 
the women of the circle timed their dancing.” 

In some civilizations the pit is replaced by an artificial device j 
women stamp on a curved board so that there is a resounding cavity 
beneath, or upon a pot turned upside down on the ground. 

Another group of instruments developed when implements were 
substituted for the stamping feet, such as stamfing sticks , stamping 
gourds and, most important, stamfing tubes: hollow bamboos, or 
tubes of some suitable wood, closed at one end, were pounded against 
the ground, producing muffled sounds, (fig. 16) 

Stamping tubes are generally played by women, and they are 




Early Instruments 29 

always connected with fertility rites. Priestesses in Borneo pray every 
morning and evening at the end of the harvest while two tubes are 
stamped on a mat in a traditional rhythm. In the Celebes, three, or 
sometimes five, girls walk home the evening of the harvest sacrifice, 
stamping seed-filled tubes on the ground and singing: “Stamp, oh 
friends, for we look down, look down at the imploring, the implor- 
ing young rice!” 

In connection with the rice ceremonials of the western Malayan 
Islands and of Siam when the fresh rice is peeled, stamping reaches 
its highest musical effectiveness in the stamped mortar. A series of 
holes of different shapes are hollowed out of a wooden log lying 
on the ground, and rice, poured into them as into mortars, is stamped 
with pestles by a row of women. The sound differs according to the 
depth of the various holes, and the pounding produces a charming 
polyrhythmic and polytonic symphony that a native poet describes 
by the lovely onomatopoeia tingtung tutung-gulan gondang. This 
music is also played, even if there is no rice to be ground, when mar- 
riageable girls and widows gather on moonlight nights. 

In a less complicated ritual, taro roots and dried almonds are 
pounded at wedding feasts in Melanesia. A wooden mortar is set 
into a hole in the village square, and two men sing the mournful 
song of the pounding while eight others dance around, grasping 
and stamping the two long pestles in turn, which are “eventually 
broken by being forced with a blow against the inside of the mortar.” 

In the eastern part of New Guinea there was an even simpler 
ritual of pounding. The aboriginal tribes had a trough of stone which 
was pounded with a pestle, and the pestle, the natives explained, was 
the penis of a spirit and the trough a vulva. This symbolism, familiar 
to primitive civilizations, is one of the main features of an important 
instrument, spread over this continent, the Pacific Islands, Africa 
and, in a degenerated form, also Asia — the slit-drum. 

THE SLIT-DRUM, in its earliest form, is a tree trunk, hol- 
lowed out like a boat, placed over a pit in the ground and stamped 
upon. 

Its prototype is still found in America. The Uitoto Indians in 
Colombia fell a large tree, hollow out a long groove in the side and 
paint the whole implement j at one end they decorate it with a 
woman’s head and at the other end with an alligator as a water 
symbol. A pit is dug in the ground and covered with planks, some 
logs are placed at either end of them, and the hollowed tree is laid 




30 The History of Musical Instruments 

upon the logs so that it does not rest on the planks. While the women 
dance around the pit, the men stand in the groove of the tree trunk, 
stamping and teetering, and the elastic trunk strikes rhythmically 
against the planks. The natives say the significance of this ceremony 
is that the New Moon is vanquishing the Old Moon. (pi. I a, fig. 4) 
The actual slit-drum is a tree trunk as well, but with a cavity hol- 
lowed in it from a narrow longitudinal slit. The earliest specimens 




figure 4. Slit-drum from New Guinea. (After Curt Sachs, Reallexikon.) 

known are some twenty feet long and six or seven feet wide, and 
are stamped upon by a row of men. Later types were rammed with 
a stick instead of being stamped upon, and in still more developed 
slit-drums the edges of the slit were drummed upon with two shorter 
sticks, (pi. I b) 

Nearly always, instruments which originate in a gigantic size grow 
smaller and smaller as they develop, until finally they become small 
enough to be portable. This last, and often degenerate, stage of de- 




figure 5. Portable slit-drum, 

Celebes. (After Kaudern.) 

velopment is reached in the case of the slit-drum by the light bamboo 
instrument carried and struck by Malayan watchmen, (fig. 5) 
Many travelers, and even some anthropologists, call the slit-drum 
a “gong.” This is an intolerable abuse j the word “gong” cannot 
designate anything but the bronze disk with turned-down rim which 
is made in India and the Far East. The name “tom-tom” is also 
incorrect. 



Most instruments determined by motor impulse depend on the 



3i 



Early Instruments 

striking hands. The first step was replacing the natural struck sur- 
face that is, the body or the ground — by an artificial one, and only 
the second, replacing the striking hands by some artificial device. 

A rare contrivance, related to the stamped pit, is the sand drum, 
as anthropologists call it. Some have been found among New Guinea 
pygmies and in the Ethiopian province, Wollo. The pit is in the 
form of a small tunnel with two uncovered openings, and the sand 
bridge between them is beaten by the hand. 




figure 6. Footed drum, figure 7. 

East Africa. Cup-handle drum. 




FIGURE 8. 

Goblet drum. 



DRUM in correct terminology, however, means an instrument 
in which the sound is produced by a membrane stretched over.the 
opening of either a frame or a hollow body of any shape. It was 
struck upon with the bare hands, until in later times the hands were 
replaced by sticks. This important change roughly coincides with 
the change from the skins of water animals, such as snakes, lizards 
and fish, to the skins of hunted game and big cattle. 

Instead of acquainting the reader with the innumerable species 
and varieties of drums, this chapter may point at the fundamental 
difference between cut wooden drums and modeled clay drums. 
Cutting and hollowing wood by tools or by fire is more primitive 
than pottery, so wooden drums must be the earlier kind. 

Tubular drums , in their most archaic species, betray their descent 
from sections of tree trunks. In some places, Nias and Loango for 
instance, such drums reach a length of ten feet. They definitely have 
preserved the upright tendency of the tree, though they are usually 
too large to stand upright on the ground j they are suspended from 
the roof or slanted so that they can be played j they have one skin 
only, and the opposite end is carved to form a foot. 




32 The History of Musical Instruments 

A great many smaller drums are derived from this early footed 
drum. In some the original upright tendency is given reality j they 
can be played in vertical position because their smaller size allows 
the player to reach the skin without inclining the drum. If the ground 
was sandy, the upright drum had to be sunk in the ground to keep 
it steady, and this was easier when the base was cut to form three or 
four large teeth. Drums with teeth can be found in a primitive form 
on the New Hebrides and all over Africa, and also, more carefully 
carved, in ancient Mexico. Where the drummer had a hard, even 
floor, the teeth were replaced by a carved open work (Polynesian 
type) or a goblet shape with a flat foot, a stem and a cup (Babylonian 
and East African type), and even a pair of legs in human form on 
a plinth, both in the eastern Malay Archipelago and in Africa among 
the Bakundu. (fig. 6, pi. II b) 

A second type is due to the tendency to make drums portable. 
Some drums in Loango, on the Amazon, and in ancient Michoacan, 
could be ridden by the players like hobby horses, so that the skin, 
between the thighs, was in a convenient position for the striking 
hands. Some of the definitely portable drums have cup handles to 
be carried with the hands ( cuf-handle drums), as the New Guinean 
drum. Such a handle is generally carved in a central waist, and the 
two ends of the drum are symmetrical to maintain the equilibrium. 
In other portable drums the goblet form is preserved, which proved 
to be an excellent shape for a drum held under the arm, the slender 
stem being easily squeezed between the arm and the chest and the 
foot preventing the drum from dropping, (figs. 7, 8) 

In this stage the forms of pottery drums become confused with 
wood forms. A small goblet is an earthenware, rather than a wood, 
form, and all civilizations familiar with pottery, especially with 
pottery on a wheel, will prefer this easier technique to the laborious 
shaping with a carver’s chisel. The angular profile to which the 
woodworker hews the drum is then replaced by a softly rounded 
outline. 

There is some connection between drum making and the manu- 
facture of earthenware crocks for keeping food} the evolution from 
a hard fruit shell to a clay jar through all stages of pottery was 
similar in both cases. An excellent example of the similarity between 
drums and household pots is the East African kettledrum. The sides 
of the upper half of the drum are vertical, but they slant inwards 
to a small flat base at the ground. This cylindroconical drum corre- 
sponds exactly to a certain type of jar excavated from late-neolithic 




Early Instruments 33 

strata in Central and East Europe. The African drum is made of 
wood, not of clay, but that is immaterial j the history of crafts in- 
dicates a continual exchange of form and material, (figs. 9, 10) 

The same change from clay to wood occurs in the evolution of 
the double-headed drum t which came considerably later than the 
one-headed drum and became the ancestor of the modern drum. 
For straight, cylindrical drums, wood certainly was the original 
material} but bulging cylinders or barrels were first made of clay 




figure 9. Kettle- figure II. Frame drum with 
drum, East Africa, handle, Greenland. 




figure 10. Neolithic 
vessel, Moravia. 



though most of them, probably for practical reasons, are made of 
wood today. 

In contrast with all these tubular and vessel drums, there are 
jrame drums > in which a skin, or two parallel skins, are held taut 
by some type of hoop or frame. This category comprises two differ- 
ent groups of drums which probably had no connection. One of 
them, known as the shaman’s drum, is spread over India, Central 
and North Asia and the American continent. It is roughly made and 
one-headed} the carrying hand grasps either a network of cords 
stretched over the open side of the drum or a handle attached to the 
frame} the striking hand uses a stick and sometimes hits the frame, 
not the skin. The other one, popularly called a tambourine, and 
spread over the Near East and some parts of Europe, has one or two 
skins and is struck by the bare hands, (fig. 1 1 ) 



34 The History of Musical Instruments 

A summary of the numerous methods of fastening the skin on 
the shell or the frame will be found in the last chapter. 

RITUAL FUNCTIONS 

Although the foregoing section of this chapter was only concerned 
with motor impulse as a shaping force in the province of musical 
instruments, it could not avoid mentioning the symbolic or magic 
character of some instruments. Strung rattles are composed of 
amulets, the gourd rattle is a shaman’s instrument, stamped tubes 
and mortars are used as fertility charms. Still, these may be second- 
ary connotations. Other instruments, and among them drums and 
slit-drums, are affected by symbolism and magic ideas to such a de- 
gree that we discuss them again in a second section. 

DRUMS (continued). With the Chukchee in northeastern Si- 
beria, 

the shaman sits on the ‘master’s place’ near the back wall; and even in 
the most limited sleeping-room, some free space must be left around 
him. The drum is carefully looked over, its head tightened, and, if it is 
much shrunken, it is moistened with urine and hung up for a short time 
over the lamp to dry. The shaman sometimes occupies more than an 
hour in this process, before he is satisfied with the drum. ... At last 
the light is put out and the shaman begins to operate. He beats the drum 
and sings his introductory tunes. . . . Moreover, the shaman uses his 
drum for modifying his voice, now placing it directly before his mouth, 
now turning it at an oblique angle, and all the time beating it violently. 
After a few minutes, all this noise begins to work strangely on the lis- 
teners, who are crouching down, squeezed together in a most uncom- 
fortable position. They begin to lose the power to locate the source of 
the sounds; and, almost without any effort of imagination, the song and 
the drum seem to shift from corner to corner, or even to move about 
without having any definite place at all. 

The drum is indispensable in primitive life j no instrument has 
so many ritual tasks, no instrument is held more sacred. Certain 
rites became important even in its construction. The Lappons chose 
woods, the fibers of which grew in a certain direction, and in Melane- 
sia the drum maker climbs the tree that is to furnish the wood and 
remains there until the drum is finished. Fetishes, skulls, shells are 
often attached or enclosed before the skin is stretched across the open- 
ing, and for this reason nobody dares look into an open drum. In 
East Africa the drum is so holy that criminals and fleeing slaves 




Early Instruments 3 5 

become inviolable when they reach the drum-yard; even animals 
that enter the drum-yard become taboo. When the anthropologist 
John Roscoe came to the Banyankole, he found, at a little distance 
from the Royal kraal, a 

small enclosure in which stood the hut of the royal drums. The hut 
was always domed and might have no point or pinnacle ; inside there was 
a stand or bed on which lay two drums. At the back of the hut behind 
the bed lay a quantity of material for repairing these drums, and this 
had to be carefully guarded for it might not be used for any other pur- 
pose. To the left of the hut was a bag, in which were the instruments 
necessary for taking an augury should it be needed, and beside it lay 
some whistles and an iron rod upon which the tools for making the 
drums were sharpened, for this might not be done upon a stone. In 
front of the bed or stand was a row of milk pots belonging to the drums 
in which the daily offerings of milk were put. The chief drums were 
the two which lay upon the bed. These were covered with white skins 
with a black strip across them, making them look like a pair of great 
eyes in the gloom of the hut. A sacred herd of cows yielded a supply of 
milk which was daily offered to these drums in the pots which stood in 
front of them. It was placed there in the morning and remained until 
nine or ten o’clock, by which time the drum-spirits had taken the es- 
sence and the remainder might be drunk by the guardians. There was 
also a woman, who was known as the ‘wife of the drums,’ and whose 
duty it was to look after the milk, the churning, and the covering of the 
drums. Another woman looked after the fire in the drum-house, which 
had always to be kept burning because the drum-spirits required warmth. 
Offerings of cattle or beer were made to the drums by chiefs when a 
son had been born to them or when they had received promotion to 
some office or had been successful in some expedition and earned the 
commendation of the king. The king also made an annual offering of 
cows to the drums, so that they possessed a large herd; those offered to 
the first of them had to be red or white and those for the second black. 
These cows were sacred and the king alone might order one to be 
killed; no one but the guardians might eat the meat of an animal thus 
killed and the skin was kept foi repairing the drums. It was from these 
cows that the milk was taken which was daily offered to the drums, and 
from the surplus milk butter was made for smearing on them. . . . 

The strange beliefs connected with these drums appear also in the 
saga of the East African Wahinda. To see a drum is fatal; even the 
sultan must not look at a drum except at the time of the new moon. 
Men should carry them by night only, but they have the power to 
move by themselves. Once a drum ran away; a native found it 




36 The History of Musical Instruments 

hidden in a swamp, where a bubbling spring of milk had indicated 
its hiding place. 

In these two stories we have a series of characteristic connotations: 
drum, round, domed enclosure, earth, night, moon and milk, which, 
in the primitive mind, are connotations of woman and female sex. 

But the East African drums of which we spoke have lost the ex- 
clusively feminine character, as they are played with sticks instead 
of the bare hands. Whenever women are the players they use the 
hands; the stick is a phallic symbol. In 1901, a Reindeer Koryak 
woman (Kamtchatka) narrated: 

It was at the time when Big Raven lived. . . . While still outside, 
they heard the sound of a drum. They entered the house and found Uni- 
verse beating the drum and his wife Rain-woman, sitting next to him. 
In order to produce rain, he cut off his wife’s vulva, and hung it on 
the drum; then he cut off his penis and beat with it, instead of an 
ordinary drum stick. . . . 

In East Africa coronation drums must be struck with sticks made 
of human tibias, which likewise have a phallic significance. To 
provide fresh ones after the yearly coronation festival the royal 
drummers carry away all drums except one; whichever ingenuous 
onlooker innocently brings this last drum, saying “You have for- 
gotten it,” is immediately seized and killed, and his armbones are 
used as drum sticks. 

The masculine idea, though weakened and metaphoric, is ex- 
pressed in one of the ancient no dramas of Japan. A gardener was in 
love with a princess. In answer to his pleas she gave him a drum 
tsuzumi i if he were able to play it she would be disposed to accept 
him. More than happy, he took the drum; but it was wrapped up 
in silk and he did not see how he could play on it with his stick. So, 
despairing of his fate, he killed himself. 

When the drum was not connected with feminine ideas it often 
became associated with purely masculine ceremonies, such as cir- 
cumcisions. In some districts of southeastern Asia drums are beaten 
at men’s funerals, but never when a woman or child dies, and in 
Oceania a drum is useless if a woman sees it before it is completely 
made. 

Finally, the drum became a warrior’s instrument. In monarchies, 
when the drum was a sacred implement belonging to the king and 
an insignia of his dignity, this was more than a symbol. It was a 
talisman for luck and victory. 




Early Instruments 37 

THE SLIT-DRUM (continued). In some South American and 
Oceanian belief, the divinity creating the water is also the creator 
of the slit-drum. In the New Hebrides the slit-drum is struck when 
the new moon rises; often a pit is dug beneath it; the biggest slit- 
drum is called the mother and frequently, though not always, the 
players are women. Oceanians see a female abdomen in its hollow 
body, a vulva in the slit and cohabitation in the ramming action. 

These associations are weakened when, on the Solomon Islands, 
the upperlip of the slit-drum is called male and the underlip female. 
Gradually the symbolism of the slit-drum became confused, and per- 
haps for that reason it lost its well-defined magic power. Finally, it 
has become a means of sending signals over large distances. In 
America, Oceania and Africa, the systems of signals developed into 
whole languages which were based on human speech melody. By 
strokes of different strength and of different pitch in an appropriate 
meter, the natives are able to reproduce words and complete 
sentences of their spoken language. Rare and probably recent are 
conventional signals. The drum in a guardhouse in western Java 
that we reproduce (pi. II a) gives special signals for inundation, 
murder, robbery, theft, meeting and fire. 

The drum and the slit-drum bring to their ritual functions a 
strong rhythm. But a large group of instruments that could not 
satisfy a motor impulse also became important in tribal ritual. When 
a primitive man blows into a cane or whirls a bull-roarer about, he 
does not obey a rhythmic impulse, nor is his vitality stimulated by 
any rhythmic response. The bare fact is identical; a man’s act is 
answered by a sound. But there is a difference. It is obvious to every- 
one that stamping, pounding and striking have an audible effect. 
They are as inextricably connected with sound as men with their 
shadows. It is not self-evident, on the contrary, that whirling a small 
slab of wood should produce a stormlike rumbling, or breathing into 
a bone a shrill whistle. In both cases there is an audible response; 
but with stamping and striking the sound seems to be produced by 
the instrument, in the second case by some strange force living in- 
side it. In the former group a motor impulse finds an expected au- 
dible result; in the latter an action which is scarcely expected to cause 
an audible result is unexpectedly followed by a sound, which, con- 
sequently, has an unexplained and frightening character that appears 
to be aggressive and hostile. Something living, a spirit or demon, 
must have answered. 




38 The History of Musical Instruments 

The fact that certain objects, acted upon in a certain way, produce 
an ugly, indeed a frightening, noise, leads to using them against 
hostile beings, animals, enemies, evil spirits. These implements are, 
in the very dawn of humanity, involved in all beliefs which cause 
man to protect his existence by magic acts. 

The instruments to be mentioned in this connection are the ribbon 
reed, some friction instruments, the bull-roarer, the scraper, the 
flute and the trumpet. 

THE RIBBON REED. Boys the world over know how to 
stretch a blade of grass between their two thumbs held side by side, 
blow into the crack and make the grass-blade vibrate with a shrill 
squeak. 

The Taulipang in Guiana believe that if this blade is taken from 
a certain kind of reed rain will come, and in Madagascar it is strictly 
forbidden to make a ribbon reed from a rice stalk before getting in 




figure 12 . Ribbon reed, Madagascar. (After Sachs.) 

the harvest lest hail should be attracted. In Melanesia the initiated 
boys blow the grass-blade to keep away the women, (fig. 12) 

More highly developed civilizations use improved types. Of 
these, the most important one, an ancestor of future instruments, is 
made of a long, broad blade of grass, rolled up spirally to form a 
funnel. The thin end of the blade, or else a separate blade, crosses 




figure 13. Ribbon reed, S. America. (After Izikowitz.) 
the upper orifice. The English with horn is such an instrument. 

(% 13) 

FRICTION INSTRUMENTS. Rubbing produces a great vari- 
ety of humming and squeaking noises which are easily associated 
with superhuman sounds. Central and South American Indians take 
an empty tortoise shell, stop up the tail hole with glue and rub the 



Early Instruments 39 

projecting end of the shell over the sweaty palm of the hand. This 
is a secret instrument j uninitiated people dare not see it. (fig. 14) 
The most highly developed friction instrument is the rubbed 
wood of New Ireland in Melanesia, a rounded piece of hard wood, 
the upper side of which is cut into four unequal teeth by deep inci- 
sions. The player, sitting on the ground, holds it between his 




figure 14. Rubbing tortoise 
shell, S. America. (After 
Izikowitz.) 




figure 15. Rubbed wood, New 
Ireland. (After Sachs.) 




stretched legs, moistens the hands with palm juice and rubs them 
over the teeth in the direction of his body, thus producing four dis- 
tinct notes. This instrument also has a secret character and is chiefly 
used in death rites, (fig. 15) 

Much more recent are friction drums. In Togoland the Ewhe 
powder a small rag with ashes and rub it over the drum head. We 
are reminded of older ceremonies in which manioc, saffron or blood 
were rubbed into the skin as a sacrifice to the drum. But the hand 
is rarely rubbed directly upon the skin. Most friction drums have 
either a friction cord or a friction stick. The cord passes through a 
center hole in the membrane. Sometimes the stick also passes 
through a center hole; sometimes it does not pierce the skin, but 
makes a depression in it and is tied into this position from inside the 
skin so that it stands upright. In most cases the skin is set into vibra- 
tion when the stick or the cord is rubbed with resinous fingers. The 
shape of the drum is not important j all kinds of drums are used* 
some Bantu Negroes even dig a pit in the ground, cover it with skin 
and rub the latter like a drum. 

We do not know the origin of drums with rubbed cords or sticks j 
a vibrating cord or rod, however, fastened to the center of a mem- 
brane covering a pit in the ground and transferring vibrations to it, 




40 The History of Musical Instruments 

is one of the characteristic features of the ground-zither that we shall 
describe later, and may possibly have been taken from it. 

Although the rubbed drum resembles a struck drum, the method 
in which it is played associates it with other ceremonies. As the rub- 
bing action with its to-and-fro movement symbolizes cohabitation, 
the friction drum is the characteristic instrument at boys* and girls’ 
initiations in Africa. When the Ba-ila maidens in South Africa were 
initiated, the maternal aunt “had between her legs a large earthen- 
ware pot, covered with a piece of dressed skinj in one hand she was 
grasping loosely a reed standing upright on the skinj the other hand 
she dipped into water and drew up and down along the reed.” This 
initiation rite is a preparation for sexual life, and even teaches appro- 
priate movements j instruction mixed in with visible and audible 
symbols is typical of primitive mentality. 

The connection of friction drums with fertility and initiation rites 
is preserved in European traditions. Martinmas and the days be- 
tween Christmas and Epiphany — the festivals which the Christians 
substituted for the rites of winter solstice — are the season in which 
boys go from house to house to sing old verses and rub the rommel- 
fot y as the Dutch say, which often is artlessly made of a kitchen pot 
or a flowerpot and a bladder, (pi. II f ) 

The last descendant of the friction drum, the whirled friction 
drum y is merely a toy, and is found in Africa and Asia, in Europe 
and the United States. Suspended from a small rod by its friction 
cord, the drum is whirled, and the vibrations of the cord are com- 
municated to the pasteboard membrane. Its Dutch name, ronker y 
or ‘snorer,’ is descriptive of its sound j the German name, Wald- 
teufely or ‘forest devil,’ is probably reminiscent of ancient rites in 
which the friction drum may have produced a demon’s voice, like 
the bull-roarer, of which it may possibly be a descendant on account 
of its being whirled. 

BULL-ROARER is the usual name of this instrument, but not 
an accurate one. To the most primitive natives its sound is the voice 
of an ancestor j to us it rather suggests the wind in all its nuances 
from a light breeze to a gale. 

The instrument which is able to produce such an effect is simple 
enough. It is a thin board that the player holds by a cord tied to one 
end and whirls over his head. In whirling, the board also spins 
around its own axis, and by this twofold movement it produces a 




42 The History of Musical Instruments 

roaring or wailing sound. The smaller the board and the faster it 
whirls, the higher its pitch, (fig. 17) 

With this range the musical means of the bull-roarer are ex- 
hausted, and from a modern point of view one might call it poor. 
But this standard should not be applied. Early civilizations do not 
construct instruments to obtain a rich, attractive tone. Man whirls 
a board or blows into a hollow branch, or a shell, or a bone, and a 
voice answers. What voice? Whose voice? Not his own, not another 
man’s. Is it a spirit, a demon, an ancestor? A supernatural power, in- 
visible and impalpable, becomes audible j a magic manifestation is 
brought about by a man’s act. 

The basis of such a magic belief is the conception that man can 
act upon one part of the world by utilizing another part, which then 
in magic belief becomes interchangeable with the first one. 

The fish, for example, often represents the idea of fertility, ow- 
ing to its copious roe. Far from being a mere symbol, as it would be 
in modern civilization, it embodies the fertilizing power. Thus, a 
bull-roarer with its elliptic fish shape, serrated borders like fins and 
occasional scale design, signifies procreation. To intensify this mean- 
ing, the bull-roarer is often painted red, the color of blood being the 
color of life. 

However, the magic power of an instrument is not determined as 
much by the material of which it is made, or by its shape and color, 
as by its voice. Tone, invisible and intangible, is stronger than any 
other magic quality. 

Wherever we meet loud, harsh sounds like those produced by the 
bull-roarer, we can be sure that they belong to a form of civilization 
where man takes the more active part in magic rite. Woman is ex- 
cluded from the holy ceremonies j mulier taceat in ecclesia. Terrified, 
she waits apart when the night wind carries the wailing from the 
bush where the boys are initiated. She is forbidden even to see the 
sacred instruments j a woman who has looked at a bull-roarer must 
die, and so must the man who has shown it to her. 

This entirely mystic stage in the history of the bull-roarer was 
followed by a more realistic, though still magic, stage. The fish shape 
of the instrument connects it with water, its voice with the windj 
by forcing the bull-roarer upon nature, man is convinced that he can 
make her send rain. 

Finally, the bull-roarer descends to practical use. Destitute of 
mysticism and magic, it is used to frighten elephants and keep them 
off Malay plantations. We do not know of any musical instrument 




Early Instruments 43 

that has been developed primarily to serve practical aims; in all 
cases, the practical use is secondary and much more recent. 

Here and there the bull-roarer has become a child’s toy, and mod- 
ern schoolboys loop a string through the hole of a ruler and whirl 
the improvised instrument. Even after an instrument has lost its 
ritual task because religion and belief have changed, and after it can 
no longer serve practical purposes because better implements have 
been invented, it sometimes persists as a child’s toy. Many toys have 
had a magic origin. 

THE SCRAPER is a notched implement, a stick, a shell, a bone 
or a gourd, which the player scrapes with a rigid object. Sometimes 
it is held over a resonating box or a hole in the ground. Its sound is 
disagreeable and not musical; again the hunters of paleolithic type 
evidently did not make their instruments for musical purposes, but 
as life-giving charms. 

As bone had a phallic significance, bone scrapers were associated 
both with erotic rituals and funeral ceremonies, for funeral cere- 
monies were not an expression of mourning but a magic rite insur- 
ing life and rebirth. In ancient Mexico and Michoacan, for example, 
slaves scraped the bones of men and deer at the funeral of the king 
before they themselves were put to death, (figs. 18, 19) 

These lugubrious bone scrapers also arouse love. The Cheyenne 
Indians narrate: 

Once there was a very beautiful girl in the camp, and all the young 
men wanted to marry her, but she would have none of them. The Dog 
Soldiers and the Kit Fox Soldiers had a dance, and each young man 
tried to do his best, but the girl would look at none of them. Then it came 
the turn of the Himoweyuhkis, and they felt discouraged, because they 
thought they could do no better than the other societies had done. But a 
man who possessed spiritual power spoke to them, saying: “That girl will 
be here to see you dance, and she will fall in love with one of you, and 
he will get her. Now go and bring me the horn of an elk — a yearling — 
one that has no prongs on it, and the shank-bone of an antelope.” The 
young men brought him what he had asked for. He carved the elk-horn 
in the shape of a snake, and on it cut forty-five notches. Then he made 
from the shank-bone of the antelope an implement to rub over the horn ; 
and this device was used in the dance. The girl was there to see the 
dance, and fell in love with and married one of the young men. 

We now come to another instrument with which the associations 
of love and death are inextricably mixed. 




44 The History of Musical Instruments 

A FLUTE, like most other wind instruments, produces its tone 
by means of an air column within a tube, which is set in longitudinal 
vibration either by human breath or by artificial wind. The families 
of wind instruments differ in the special way in which the vibrations 
are brought about. This is particularly complicated in the flute. It 
would be going beyond the compass of this book to describe the 
acoustics of the flute in detail. We refer the reader to the most recent 
textbooks on musical acoustics and confine ourselves here to stating 
that the vibrations in a flute are due to little eddies formed at regular 
intervals when the player blows obliquely across the sharp edge of 
a mouth-hole. Thus, a sharp-edged mouth-hole is the characteristic 
quality of any flute. 

The mouth-hole of the vertical flute is formed by the upper 
opening of the pipe. In the cross flute , or transverse flute , the upper 
end is stopped and the mouth-hole is cut in the side. In the whistle 
flute there is also a hole in the side, but not to be blown into; the 
upper end is stopped except for a small and narrow channel, called 
the fluey into which the player blows, and which directs his breath 
to the sharp edge of the side hole. (fig. 20) 

The recorderlike whistle flute came before the simple vertical 
flute and also before the cross flute, though it was more complicated ; 
complication is no criterion of late invention. The earliest whistle 
flutes were probably made of birds’ bones. These produced a sharp, 
whistling sound, whereas the larger cane flutes made a softer, deeper 
sound. In all flutes the (fundamental) tone is almost pure; over- 
tones are few and weak. The earliest flutes produced only one note; 
fingerholes were introduced much later, (figs. 21, 22, pi. II c) 

Flutes, like bone scrapers, are phallic. Primitive man cannot over- 
look the resemblance between a pierced straight instrument and the 
penis; even in modern occidental slang the penis is designated by 
flute names. Early civilizations where the masculine irtipulse pre- 
dominates connect the ideas flutes — phallos — fertility — life — rebirth, 
and they associate flute playing with innumerable phallic ceremonies 
and with fertility in general. Some of these rites have been described 
in the author’s book Geist und W er den der Musikinstrumente. In 
the present book we will confine ourselves to an old, naive myth of 
the Sentani in northern New Guinea which shows how primitive man 
connects the flute with ideas of fertility and rebirth. This is the tale: 



One day a man went to the bush with his wife to gather fruit. The 
man climbed up a high tree and threw the fruit down, and the woman 




Early Instruments 45 

put it into her net. Suddenly a big piece of fruit fell onto a dry bamboo 
tree and cracked it open with a sharp sound. The frightened woman 
ran away, for she did not know what had made the noise. Out of the 
slit bamboo appeared a cassowary [the Melanesian counterpart of the 
phoenix, symbol of rebirth] making a buzzing sound. The man at 
once built a fence around the bird, ran into the village and told his friends 
what had happened. “Now we have a way of frightening the women,” 
they said. They began to cut pieces of bamboo and tried to draw a 
sound from them and finally discovered that by blowing across a stalk 
they could make a sound similar to that of the cassowary. This was the 
first flute. 

Thus the flute in Melanesia is clearly a charm for rebirth. 

Whatever object brings rebirth is used in funeral rites, either in 
the burying ceremony or as a gift to the dead. Aztec slaves played 
bone flutes before being sacrificed to their dead princes, and boys also 
played the flute as they climbed up the steps of the pyramid, at the 
top of which the priest cut out their hearts and offered them to the 
sun. Archaeologists often find a flute at the side of a mummy or 
skeleton when excavating ancient tombs, and mistakenly believe that 
they have uncovered the remains of a musician, whereas the flute was 
probably placed there because it was a life charm. Similarly, one of 
the southern East Indian tribes, the Toda, who never make or play 
flutes, have special flutes made by a neighboring people as amulets 
for their dead tribesmen, to guarantee a fortunate rebirth. 

The same life-giving power which connects the flute with death 
and rebirth connects it with love as well. Young Cheyenne men 
played the flute 

in order to help them in their courtship. Some flutes had a special power 
to influence girls. A young man might go to a medicine man and ask 
him to exercise his power on a flute, so that the girl he wanted would 
come out of the lodge when she heard it. The young man began to play 
the flute when he was at a distance from the lodge, but gradually ap- 
proached it, and when he had come near to the lodge he found the girl 
outside waiting for him. 

The same charm still exists in Europe. In A Farewell to Arms 
Ernest Hemingway quotes an example from the Abruzzi: “When 
the young men serenaded only the flute was forbidden. Why, I asked. 
Because it was bad for the girls to hear the flute at night.” 

We will speak in a later chapter of a virginity test connected with 
Greek pan-pipes. A similar ordeal exists with the Cuna Indians in 
Panama. At a girl’s initiation two cane flutes, are cut, tied together, 




4 6 The History of Musical Instruments 

wrapped into a leaf and given to a player. If they are still in their 
original position when he unpacks them, the girl is a virgin; if they 
have turned, she is not. 

Nose flutes , blown through the nostril instead of through the 
mouth, occur in all five continents and even in Bavaria. Form and 
type do not matter; there are tubular and globular nose flutes as well 
as cross and vertical nose flutes. 

It would be difficult to fix a date of origin ; but distribution goes far 
to prove that the nose flute was spread over the world by one of the 
last Malayo-Polynesian migrations. In terms of history this means 
about the end of the neolithic age and the beginning of the early 
metal age. 

It is more interesting, however, to know how than to know at 
what time it originated. Several stupid suggestions have been made 
to explain this strange, and rather incomprehensible, method of 
blowing. One of them attributes the “invention” of the nose flute 
to Hindu nose rings which by chance were loosely soldered and 
accidentally struck by the nose breath. Other authors have claimed 
that blowing through the nose prevented the mouth from touching 
a spot which a low-caste’s mouth might have defiled. These explana- 
tions are so foolish that they are not worth contradicting. 

The answer to the origin of the nose flute is found in the associa- 
tion of nose breath with magic and religious rites. 

In Melanesia and Polynesia, where the nose flute is chiefly found, 
the nose breath is supposed to contain the soul and has, therefore, 
more magic power than mouth breath. Native doctors pinch the nose 
of moribund patients to keep the soul from escaping, though the 
victim of this cure may die prematurely by suffocation. When occi- 
dental people pinch their nose before sneezing, this in itself mean- 
ingless gesture seems to be a remainder of that old idea; and the 
German Gesundheit ! called to a sneezer is founded on the same 
conception that such a violent explosion might force out the soul. 
The Dogon in the French Sudan have but one word for both the soul 
and the nose. 

The special power of nose breath gives it an importance in an old 
Brahmanic formula for setting the priest into a semihypnotic state. 
It prescribes: 



Aspire through the right nostril, 
Aum Am, red of color. 




47 



Early Instruments 

Expire through the left nostril, 

Aum Am, black of color. 

If the priest turns towards the sunrise, his aspiring right nostril faces 
the south, his expiring left nostril faces the north. So he receives air 
from the life-giving south and blows it to the sterile north. 

How persistent is the connection between right nostril, red, south, 
and in general between nose breath and magic power, can be seen 
when as late as the end of the middle ages European astrologers still 
grouped together the right nostril, the color red, blood, circum- 
cision, the cardinal point south and the planet Mars. 

Considering the belief in the magic power of nose breath from 
primitive times to the modern Occident, it seems more logical to 
think the nose flute originated on that account than because of some 
casual and imaginary coincidence. 

TRUMPET. We explained on page 44 that in any wind instru- 
ment the enclosed air column is set into vibration by some device 
which transforms the steady breath of the player into a pulsating 
current. While this transformation in the flute is caused by the 
sharp edge of the mouth-hole, in a trumpet it is effected by the lips 
of the player. The lips are held tense and the breath forces them 
to open as often as their elasticity closes them again, thus allowing 
the breath to escape in regular pulsations. 

The earliest so-called trumpets had no vibrating column of ain, no 
mouthpiece and no expanding end or bell. They were megaphones 
cut from a hollow branch or a large cane, into which the player spoke, 
sang or roared. Once more he did not strive for a musical sound j 
on the contrary, he wanted to distort his natural voice and to pro- 
duce a harsh sound in order to frighten evil spirits, (fig. 23) 

The evolution from a simple megaphone to an actual trumpet was 
slow, and it is not easy to say when the first real trumpets originated. 
Even these first trumpets blared only one or two notes. 

The terrifying sound of the early trumpets is associated with many 
magic rites. It is used at circumcisions, at funerals and at sunset rites, 
when the reappearance of the life-giving star is imperiled j and the 
Babwende of the Belgian Congo carve their funeral trumpets in the 
magic shape of a phallos. Even in Europe today trumpets are con- 
nected with the same rites. Long wooden trumpets are blown at 
Rumanian funerals. In some Catholic cantons of Switzerland the 
kindred alfhorn sounds at sunset at the same time that the evening 




48 The History of Musical Instruments 

prayer i$ sung into a megaphone: the early trumpet used as a mega- 
phone, and the later form of a real trumpet, are preserved in the 
same rite. (pis. II d, e) 

The trumpet is exclusively played by men. Among certain tribes 
of the Amazon a woman who has seen a trumpet is killed. Other 
Indians destroy it after use and hide the mouth part in a brook. This 
same custom is preserved in the south of Holland j wooden trum- 
pets, related to the alphorn, are blown at Advent and hidden in a 
well until the following year. 

The magic power of the trumpet has often been augmented by the 
red color of its painting or drapery $ even in European armies of the 
present time, trumpets and bugles are wrapped in red woollen ma- 
terial, and red remains the distinctive color of many military bands, 
an astonishing example of the tenacity of early traditions. 

A later, though still primitive, offshoot of the trumpet is the side- 
hlovm or transverse trumpet with a mouth-hole on the side. Trans- 
verse trumpets are common among the South American Indians 
(fig. 24) and the African Negroes, who make them either of antelope 
horn or the tusk of an elephant. They also existed far away in Ire- 
land during the bronze age and, as we know of prehistoric relations 
between northeastern Africa and Ireland, this otherwise incompre- 
hensible fact is not miraculous. 

Primitive men use large conch shells as well as their rough tubular 
trumpets. The spiral replaces the tube, and the natural opening the 
bell. An earlier type of shell trumpet is end-blown , the mouth-hole 
being cut in the center of the round end, or afex; in a later type, 
which dates from the end of pre-Christian times, the hole is cut in 
the side, thus creating a side-blown or transverse shell trumpet. In 
some countries, ancient Peru for instance, shell trumpets were re- 
placed by clay trumpets in shell form, (fig* 25) 

The oldest conch shells were not real trumpets any more than the 
earliest wooden or cane trumpets. Gunnar Landtman relates that in 
one of the most primitive tribes of New Guinea the king or chieftain 
always held “a trumpet shell before his mouth when speaking to his 
people, so his voice had a very hollow sound,” Once more a musical 
instrument was first used for the purpose of masking the voice. 

As an actual trumpet, the conch shell has a strong magic power. 
This can be increased if a sacred formula is recited into the natural 
mouth of the conch. 

The magic and nonmagic uses of the shell trumpet are more 
varied than those of the tubular trumpet. When the author collected 




G 



H 




A. slit-drum, W. Java (Ph. D. H. Meijer). B. Footed 
drum , Timorlaut. C . Prehistoric whistle flute, found 
under the Wartburg. D. Bucium, Rumania. E. Lithu- 
anian bark trumpet. F. Rommelpot (Pinx. Frans 
Hals). G. Jaws * harp, Palaung, Burma. H. Esthonian 
jaws * harp. 



PLATE II. 




Early Instruments 



49 




FIGURE 22. Notched 
flute, S. America. 
(After Izikowitz.) 





figure 24. 

Trumpet, 

Brazil. 




figure 25. Side-blown 
shell trumpet. 




FIGURE 26. Gopi FIGURE l’J. 

Yantra, Bengal. Braced gourd- 

bow, Kafir. 



figure 23. 

Trumpet, 

Brazil. 




50 The History of Musical Instruments 

material for his book on the musical instruments of Madagascar, he 
found that on this one island shell trumpets were blown on the fol- 
lowing occasions: boys’ circumcisions, funerals, ancestral rites, prac- 
tices in which magicians call the dead from their tombs, healing of 
the sick, sacrifices after a bad dream, bathing of the fetishes, royal 
ceremonies, wind charms, wrestling matches, convocation of the 
faithful, warning of danger and musical performances. Sailors and 
carters in Madagascar also use shell trumpets to give signals and, 
finally, a system of long and short blasts on shell trumpets can com- 
municate telegraphic messages over great distances. From other 
parts of the world we have to add rites at harvest and marriage, rain 
charms, meetings of secret societies and exhibitions of offerings. 

As a trumpet with an horrific sound, the conch shares the connota- 
tions of the ordinary trumpet. But the conch itself comes from a 
water animal. This fact gives it the power of acting on water, and 
consequently on the moon, which rules the tide and which affects 
the menstruation of women. Its association with water gave it the 
power in primitive belief to attract rain, or to stop it when there was 
too much} instances can be found in so advanced a region as Central 
Europe, where it is blown into the wind during thunderstorms up 
to this day. With similar associations the shell trumpet becomes an 
attribute of moon gods, of Vishnu in India and of Tlaloc in Mexico. 
Again, as a water and moon instrument, it is kept away from men in 
certain countries. The natives of New Ireland, for instance, exclude 
the shell trumpet from men’s dances, but it accompanies dances of 
the women and is even played by women, especially when a first 
pregnancy is celebrated. 

The connotations of all these instruments, in life and myth, are 
confusing at first sight. One recognizes, however, that in the cases 
mentioned certain associations are constant, or at least frequent. Four 
among our examples are almost exclusively played by women, eight 
by men, and of these eight instruments four are so strictly reserved 
for men that women who see them are killed. Three of our instru- 
ments are supposed to represent a penis, and four the vulva or the 
female abdomen, while the sticks or pestles which strike these latter 
are also conceived as virile organs. All instruments representing the 
penis are played by men only, and the chief occasion for playing 
them is at funerals} all instruments decorated with red color are 
reserved for men and must not be seen by women } vulva instruments 
are frequently connected with water and moon rites. 




Early Instruments 5 1 

The most obvious of these contrasts is the attribution to one of 
the two sexes: gourd rattles are generally played by women, bull- 
roarers by men} drums are often played by women with the bare 
hands, but never with a stick. Division of labor according to sex, 
well known even in modern occidental civilization, is the rule with 
primitive peoples. Hunting and boat carving are man’s work, bas- 
ketry and pottery, in general, woman’s. It may happen that men 
alter a women’s technique} they then keep the altered technique for 
themselves while the women, far from adopting the improvement, 
stick to their old method. Such is the case of pottery, for instance. 
Berthold Laufer, in his essay on “The Potter’s Wheel,” states that 
handmade pottery 

is as a rule woman’s work, the participation of men in this pursuit being 
always strictly localized and limited. The potter’s wheel, on the other 
hand, is the creation of man. It must therefore be regarded as an en- 
tirely distinct invention which entered the field of pottery from the out- 
side, as it were, and when it came, man came with it and took over the 
pot-making industry. This historic distinctness of the two methods of 
pottery making is reflected in the customs current in different countries. 
In India and China the division of ceramic labor sets apart the thrower 
or wheel potter and separates him from the molder. The potters of India 
who work on the wheel do not intermarry with those who do not. They 
form a caste by themselves. There is also a functional distinction between 
the two kinds of pots. And most important of all, wherever the potter’s 
wheel is in use, it is manipulated by men, never by women. 

The example of pottery makes clear why certain forms of drums 
are exclusively played by women, and other forms by men. 

The player’s sex and the form of his or her instrument, or at 
least its interpretation, depend on one another. As the magic task 
of more or less all primitive instruments is life, procreation, fertility, 
it is evident that the life-giving roles of either sex are seen or repro- 
duced in their shape or playing motion. A man’s instrument assumes 
the form of a man’s organ, a woman’s of a woman’s organ. And in 
the latter case the addition of a fertilizing object is not far off. 

Early mentality tends toward associating, as equal and inter- 
changeable factors, all kinds of objects and phenomena, provided 
they have some organic correlation, or at least one common quality. 
Woman and moon is such a correlation, as the rhythm of woman’s 
life is determined by, or at least synchronized with, the moon’s 
phases. The moon, however, is synchronized with the tides as well. 
Thus 




52 The History of Musical Instruments 

moon ~ woman 
moon ~ water 
womans water 

The woman conceals her seed in the womb j so does the earth, hiding 
it beneath its surface. Thus, woman is correlated to the ground and 
earth pits. Woman’s womb is round and hollow j thus, round cav- 
ities belong to woman. 

Tubular wind instruments, straight and elongated like a man’s 
organ, belong to man, and a mixture of symbols arises when a flute 
is globular instead of tubular, or when a trumpet is made out of a 
conch shell which is connected with water. A scraper, played by a 
man, may lie across an earth pit, and stamping tubes may be pounded 
by men. This kind of mixture of male and female connotations is 
sure to occur when an instrument is transferred into a foreign civiliza- 
tion with different social and mental conditions. 

Sound, also, is a factor as well as form in these connotations. Most 
of the instruments reserved for men have a harsh, aggressive, indeed 
ugly tone; most instruments preferred by women have a muffled 
timbre. But there are exceptions ; flutes of some width have a muffled 
tone, and the gourd rattle makes a harsh and frightening noise. 
Musical beauty is not a consideration. 

MELODIC IMPULSES 

The instruments considered hitherto have grown out of either a 
strong motor impulse which produced audible rhythm, or out of a 
man’s inclination to give magic interpretation to sound. The concep- 
tion of, and the need for, instrumental melody, even in the most 
rudimentary sense of the word, was at first entirely lacking j melody 
belonged to singing, not to instruments. 

In a second stage of evolution another elementary rhythmic im- 
pulse began to seize on instrument playing — repetition. It resulted 
first in the pairing of notes, then in the contrasting of their tones, 
and finally in their arrangement in a series. The same process is 
found in language as reduplication. The speech of children and prim- 
itives has a tendency towards combinations such as papa t mamma , 
tamtam. The two syllables of a pair become one strong, one weakj 
moreover, they often are differentiated by a vowel change: ding- 
dong , sing-song , tick-tock. This is exactly what happens when two 
stamping tubes of slightly different size are pounded by the same 




Early Instruments 53 

player in a rapid succession, and the beat of one of them is answered 
by a second, darker beat which contrasts with the clear sound of the 
first. 

The two tubes in the hand of a player were sometimes called “the 
father” and “the mother.” Such associations with the two sexes occur 
with pairs of bull-roarers, slit-drums, shell trumpets and skin drums. 
When the sexes are thus attributed to pairs of instruments, the prim- 
itives base their decision upon one of two qualities — the size or the 
sound. If size is the determining factor, the bigger instrument is the 
man and the smaller the woman j if the sound is considered, the 
smaller one, having a more active and energetic sound, is masculine, 
the larger one, having a hollower, duller sound, is female. Sound as 
the determining factor seems to be much more recent. 

The pairlike beating of two notes of contrasted accent and pitch 
is the first step towards an instrumental melody j this ancient prac- 
tice is preserved in the two kettledrums of the modern orchestra. 
Several thousands of years may have elapsed before instrumental 
music progressed to three-tone patterns. 

Though stamping tubes were united to form sets of three and 
even more, they did not reach the further stage of a strict scalelike 
accordatura. 

This was the destiny of the xylophone. 

THE XYLOPHONE, though still in use today, originated 
among primitive men. It is a set of wooden bars, each supported at 
two points (the nodes of vibration), and struck with sticks or clubs. 
As the modern name derived from Greek xylon , ‘wood,’ it can not 
accurately be applied to sets of metal bars. 

The simplest form of xylophone may be called a leg xylophone. 
The player sits on the ground, lays two or three rough slabs of wood 
across the legs and strikes them with two clubs. Sometimes a pit is 
dug between the legs. 

The players are generally women. Sitting on the ground with 
legs stretched out straight is a typical feminine attitude} in many 
countries, in the Pacific Islands for instance, women are not sup- 
posed to sit cross-legged. 

The most primitive leg xylophones, consisting of a few bars only, 
are played in a simple fashion, the bars being struck in turn. But 
there are also more elaborate types. In Madagascar, for instance, the 
bars are carefully tuned} one woman holds them on her legs beating 
the melody, while a second woman, sitting at right angles to the 




54 The History of Musical Instruments 

first, plays a drone or ostinato on two bars which are arranged apart, 
though also resting on the legs of the first woman. 

The first step in the evolution of the xylophone leads to the log 
xylophone y in which the bars are loosely laid on two parallel logs. 
Even in this stage there may be an earth pit under the instrument. 

Later, the bars of the xylophone were made fast, either to a stand 
like a table {table xylophone) ) or to a frame which hung at the 
player’s waist, suspended from his neck and held away from his body 
by a semicircular hoop {bail xylophone). 

The xylophones of the Bantu Negroes generally have a gourd 
resonator under each bar to increase and fill the sound {gourd xylo- 
phones). Each gourd is carefully chosen and cut according to the 
size of the barj the air inside is supposed to vibrate in unison with 
the wood. A hole is cut in the gourd and covered with the tough 
membrane taken from the protective covering of spiders’ eggsj 
vibrating sympathetically, this skin makes the timbre sharper. 

Though xylophone music is melodic, a strong motor impulse still 
shapes its melodic style. Obeying the hands rather than the mind, 
the player indulges in shakes, graces, rolls and flourishes, mostly in 
a giddy tempo j the music, improvisatory in early stages, has slowly 
grown to highly accomplished and often intricate structures, which 
call to mind European toccatas. 

But these refined toccatas and the complicated gourd xylophones, 
or marimbaSy on which they are played, have carried us far away 
from the primitive disconnected xylophone and its few indistinct 
notes on poorly differentiated bars. The advanced xylophone of 
African primitives, like many of their implements, was not developed 
by themselves but borrowed from the higher civilizations of the 
Malays, who had a strong influence on Bantu Africa. 

THE GROUND HARP, which exists exclusively in a small 
central section of Africa, recalls the springing snares of certain Afri- 
can hunters. A pit is covered with bark. Beside the pit a tall flexible 
rod is stuck into the earth and pulled way over by a string fastened 
from its end to the bark lid of the pit. The instrument is either 
struck or plucked, sometimes by several persons simultaneously. 

It is particularly interesting to watch the further evolution of 
the ground harp, which corresponds to that of many other instru- 
ments. First step: it is freed from the ground. The Annamese cai 
dan baOy for instance, an instrument played by women and blind 
people, is supported by the player, but is too heavy to be carried while 




Early Instruments 55 

played. The pit of the ground harp is replaced by a rectangular, 
wooden soundbox. A flexible rod stands upright near one end of the 
box, and a wire string is tied from the upper end of the rod to 
the other end of the box. The string is plucked. When the rod 
is bent slightly nearer to the box, easing the tension, the plucked 
string can produce lower notes. The resultant melodic style is char- 
acterized by wailing sounds and glissandi. 

Second step: the instrument is portable. Many varieties of this 
kind exist in India. One of them, the ananda lahari of Bengal, has 
not even a flexible rod, and merely consists of a gut string tied be- 
tween two small drums, which are held by the player so that the 
string can be tightened at will as it is plucked, (fig. 26) 

THE GROUND-ZITHER, in its Annamese form, has a pit 
dug in the ground and covered with a piece of bark as a soundboard. 
A string is stretched horizontally between two posts j another string, 
tied to the middle of the first and acting as a bridge, runs vertically 
to the bark lid, severing the string into two acoustical sections. When 
the horizontal string is struck with sticks, its vibrations are trans- 
mitted by the vertical string to the lid, which resounds over the pit. 
The string has the gigantic length of thirteen or fourteen feet, which 
is one reason for supposing that the Annamese ground-zither is the 
oldest one, because experience shows that the evolution of every 
primitive instrument begins with large sizes and ends with small 
ones. The string is not made of twisted fiber, nor of gut or horsehair 
or wire. It is a ribbon or rattan half an inch thick which, owing to 
its great length, is elastic enough to vibrate when struck with a stick. 
The rattan is replaced by twisted fiber only in later ground-zithers. 

The ground-zither is also interesting from the angle of musical 
evolution. Two different notes can be produced successively if the 
central cord severs the string into two vibrating sections of unequal 
length. On the island of Madura near Java, a very backward coun- 
try, the natives even make a double-zither with two pits and two 
bridges. These afford three different vibrating lengths in the same 
string: from the first peg to the first bridge, between the two bridges, 
and from the second bridge to the second peg in the earth. Thus, the 
Madurese play rudimentary melodies of three notes repeated over 
and over. 

A second type of ground-zither is still preserved among Javanese 
children and by the Bube on Fernando Poo in the African Atlantic. 
Several strings with a separate pit each are stretched side by side; 




56 The History of Musical Instruments 

this is once more the first principle of uniting instruments of the 
same kind, but of different length, to form sets. 

The only recorded ritual in which the ground-zither is used was 
found among the Makua in East Africa. There it is struck when, 
before initiation, girls are taught about sexual intercourse. 

The principle of the ground-zither, combined with other prin- 
ciples, is characteristic of the musical bow. 

THE MUSICAL BOW. The hunter’s bow is a familiar object; 
the two ends of a flexible and curved rod are connected by a string. 
Since the musical bow is identical in shape, many anthropologists 
believed it was derived from the hunter’s bow; hunters, they said, 
perceived the humming of the snapped string and began to use their 
bows as musical instruments. This is plausible but wrong, like many 
plausible explanations. Those forms of the musical bow which we 
have good reason to believe are the oldest have nothing to do with 
a hunter’s bow. They are ten feet long and therefore useless for 
shooting. Some of them are idiochordic; that is, the string is formed 
from a strip split from the same piece of cane of which the instru- 
ment is made, but still attached to it at either end. This natural string 
must be raised off the bow by bridges, and therefore cannot be used 
for shooting. Furthermore, all of these bows require a resonator; 
without a sound-amplifying contrivance the instrument is scarcely 
audible. 

Finally, musical bows were not associated with hunters’ beliefs 
and ceremonies. With the Cora in Mexico, the calabash bowl on 
which the bow rests is a sacred emblem of the goddess of the earth 
and moon; among many tribes only the women play it; in Rhodesia 
it is the instrument played at girls’ initiations; and the Washambala 
in eastern Africa believe that a man cannot get a wife if a string of 
the musical bow breaks while he is making it. In a tale of the East 
African Wahehe, a man goes on a journey with a girl, has her drink 
from a brook and breaks her neck when she is bent over the water. 
At once she is transformed into a musical bow; the back bone be- 
comes the wood, her head the resonator, and her limbs the strings. 
Similar stories are found in northern mythology. 

The musical bow is one of the first instruments used for intimacy 
and to induce meditation; the Akamba in eastern Africa, as well as 
the Maidu in middle California, consider it the most effective in- 
strument for getting in contact with spirits. The weak, muffled 




Early Instruments 57 

sound of the musical bow, suited to such a task, is mirrored in the 
dark vowels and nasal consonants of its native names, such as nkungu 
in Angolese, vuhudendung on Pentecost Island in Melanesia, wuru~ 
bumba in Kibunda. 

There are three main types of musical bows: bows with a separate 
resonator, bows with attached resonators, or gourd bows , and bows 
that depend upon the player’s mouth for resonance or mouth 
bows. 

The bow with a separate resonator is supported on a detached 
vessel. This may be a calabash bowl, a basket, a pot or a metal vase. 
The strangest of these bows is the gigantic instrument of some 
tribes of southern India: a bow, sometimes ten feet long, with jingles 
suspended from the wood, rests on a large clay pot and is rapidly 
beaten with two sticks, while a second man strikes the pot with his 
hands. 

Similar instruments, laid on gourds, occur with Mexican Indians. 
Most anthropologists have tried to attribute them to Negro importa- 
tion. But this is not likely. No African bow has so large a size, and 
none is struck in so archaic a way with two sticks. 

In the gourd bow the bow is attached to a gourd which acts as a 
resonator. The top of the gourd is cut off and the opening is pressed 
against the chest or abdomen of the player, increasing its resonance. 
The gourd can resonate only the open string of the bow to which it 
has been cut, and when any other tone is played the gourd must* be 
lifted away from the player’s body so that its resonance will not 
interfere with the tone. This shifting of the position of the gourd is 
not a means of altering the tone, as some observers have claimed. 

There are other means of altering the fundamental tone. With 
all kinds of musical bows the vibrating length of the string can be 
changed, either by bracing, or by stopping, or by both ways. In the 
braced bow the string is divided into two sections by a loop of thread 
tied round the bow and the string. The »wo sections produce two 
different fundamentals with their relative partials. Also, the player 
can touch the string, as do fiddlers, in order to shorten the vibrating 
length and raise the pitch, (fig. 27) 

In the mouth bow the player’s mouth serves as a resonator j either 
the wood is held against the teeth with the string outside, or else the 
string is allowed to vibrate in the oral cavity with the wood outside. 
Its musical rendering depends on the reinforcing of partials in the 
same way as in the jaws’ harp. 




58 The History of Musical Instruments 

THE JAWS’ HARP, better known under its common misnomer, 
jews ’ harp, is a quaint instrument, pleasing to the player because of 
its clear though tiny sound, almost inaudible to a listener. 

An elastic lamella is fixed at one end in a frame, while the other 
end is free. The player’s jaws grasp the frame so that the lamella, 
plucked with a finger or a cord, vibrates between the teeth. The oral 
cavity, according to its position, amplifies one of the harmonics, just 
as it does when producing the various vowels of our language. Thus, 
little melodies can be obtained. Some observers attribute the tone 
and its pitch to the afflation of the lamella by the player’s breath ; 
this, however, is incidental. 

All the same, breathing against the lamella may be connected with 
the origin of the jaws’ harp. In Hawaii and the Marquesas Islands 
a piece of bamboo is deeply notched at one endj a sliver of bamboo 
held over the notch vibrates when the singing voice is projected 
against it. Similar contrivances are used in Melanesia and in East 
Africa. Here is another instrument that starts as a voice mask. 

The details of the slow evolution of the jaws’ harp are too un- 
important for the scope of this bookj the author described them at 
large in an earlier publication. It will suffice to give a short summary. 
The size decreased gradually j the lamella was at first formed by a 
strip cut out from the same piece of bamboo as the frame and still 
attached to one end {idio glottic jaws* harp), and was later made 
from a separate piece of bamboo or metal and bound at one end to 
the frame {hetero glottic jaws ’ harp) j the oldest types had a thin 
cord at the end opposite the point of the tongue which set the lamella 
into vibration when it was pulled by jerks, while the most recent 
had a slender thorn instead. All these jaws’ harps apparently origi- 
nated in Southeast Asia; the most interesting transitional types are 
still preserved in the islands of Formosa and Engano. There we 
find intermediate stages between the ‘cut out’ and the modern 
‘forged’ jaws’ harp, which latter consists of a flat steel tongue sol- 
dered to the vertex of a bent piece of wire, sometimes the shape of 
a hairpin, sometimes more resembling a horseshoe. This iron jaws’ 
harp has been made in two forms j in an older form, known through- 
out Asia and used in the European middle ages, the broad end of 
the tongue projected behind the frame j in a more recent form it does 
not. The great elasticity of the steel tongue produces a louder tonej 
some oriental people therefore consider the iron jaws’ harp too loud 
to foster the meditative state of mind required of so intimate an 
instrument, (pis. II g, h) 




Early Instruments 59 

What a contrast between this tiny jaws’ harp and the huge slit- 
drum $ between the intimacy and meditation that it arouses and the 
terrifying sound of bull-roarers and trumpets ; between its clear notes 
and the dull noise of rattles and pounding feet! And all these con- 
trasting, indeed contradictory, impulses and principles have origi- 
nated in the early stages of human evolution which, antedating town 
life, the formation of states and the invention of writing, are called 
primitive. More than ever we feel the necessity of establishing a 
chronology to bring order into this confusion. 





Early Instruments 



C OMPARING the gourd or bamboo devices of early civiliza- 
tions with the involved mechanisms of modern pianos and 
organs, one might easily come to the conclusion that instru- 
ments have developed from simple to complicated patterns and that 
their origins can therefore be established by tracing the various types 
back to their simplest forms. Although this is true as a general state- 
ment, it is superficial and often misleading as a working hypothesis. 
What is simple? It is simple to cut down a bamboo stalk and to open 
it lengthwise in order to make a natural slit-drum. It is much less 
simple to fell a gigantic tree and to hollow it out by stone axes and 
fire. And yet we know that hollowed trees were used to make slit- 
drums long before smaller bamboos were used for the same purpose. 
Reduction and simplification as results of progressive development 
outside the instrumental area are well known, for instance, in lan- 
guage: Sanskrit has eight grammatical cases, and English only one 
or two. This settles the question as far as progress is concerned. But 
not all evolution is progressive j it is regressive in many cases. The 
simple pan-pipes of primitive tribes in the Pacific and South America 
are not prototypes of the refined pan-pipes of China, but imitations 
in degeneracy. We can compare instruments within a homogeneous 
group, for instance pan-pipes or slit-drums j but can we decide 
whether a flute is simpler than a stamping tube or a slit-drum? 

Unable to decide chronology on the basis of more complicated or 
simpler workmanship, one might attempt to arrange peoples and 

60 





The Chronology of Early Instruments 6 1 

tribes according to their lesser or higher degree of civilization and 
check their instruments. This, too, is scarcely feasible j a conscientious 
anthropologist would refrain from establishing such an order. There 
are, say, three peoples: one poor in material culture, but gifted as 
artists and socially well organized} the second, rich in material 
civilization, but poor in artistic imagination and social refinement} a 
third, well organized, but unskilled in handicraft. Which is the most 
primitive? And even if such an order could be established, would 
all peoples of the same cultural standard have the same instruments, 
notwithstanding their different mentality, social organization and 
the materials available in their countries? Peoples, like individuals, 
respond differently to emotion. One reacts as a musician, by singing 
or playing} another, in a different way. Musical response is weak 
with the Eskimos and strong with the Negroes, regardless of their 
cultural standard. But there is not only a difference in musical re- 
sponsiveness} a similar stimulus might act in one case on the singing 
throat, in another on the playing hand, again independently from 
the level of civilization. Ancient Greece sang but neglected her instru- 
ments} East Asia excels in playing. Again, the plenty and variety of 
instruments depends on the habitat of the people } musical culture in 
the tropics is abetted by the existence of large coconuts and calabashes, 
and those gigantic bamboos which provide pipes, zithers, xylophones, 
reeds and strings. 

In spite of all these difficulties a rough chronology of primitive 
civilizations can be made by comparing them with the stages of pre- 
historic evolution in Europe and other continents. In France or 
Spain a prehistorian excavates the dwellings and burial grounds of 
paleolithic hunters with their tools and weapons, and slowly recon- 
structs the material and even the spiritual culture of these men — an 
anthropologist will be able to show a similar culture among some 
aboriginal tribes in Australia or elsewhere. Again, the prehistorian 
discovers a later, neolithic civilization, in the Danube valley or in 
Italy, and the anthropologist finds a similar culture existing in some 
remote district of India, with the same shape of cabins, the same 
pottery, weapons, tools and instruments. Anthropology and history 
are drawing together, and by checking their results we can add an- 
other clue. 

Unfortunately, digging in prehistoric strata yields meager infor- 
mation, as only instruments made of imperishable materials have 
been preserved. Paleolithic tombs and dwelling places produce the 
shells of strung rattles, bone scrapers, bone bull-roarers and bone 




6 2 History of Musical Instruments 

flutes j neolithic excavations produce clay drums and end-blown shell 
trumpets. Whatever was made of wood or cane or bark has perished 
by decomposition. The picture of prehistoric music that we owe to 
the digging spade is not only poor but misleading, if it is not com- 
pleted by anthropological data. 

A second weak point in comparing prehistoric with primitive civili- 
zations still extant is that nearly all existing peoples, notwithstanding 
their cultural levels, must be supposed to have come in touch with 
higher civilizations and, though having withstood their influence in 
their general form of life, to have received instruments from abroad. 
The Chinese pan-pipe is an example, and this interference is again 
apparent in the case of the mouth organs sold all over the world by 
European trade. 

When the author, in his book Geist und Werden der Musik- 
instrumente y tried to arrive at a chronology of primitive and oriental 
instruments, he kept away from all criteria connected with supposed 
levels of culture and workmanship. Instead, he relied on what ap- 
peared to be the safest method — the geographical one. Erich M. von 
Hornbostel followed the same method when he published his paper 
on “The Ethnology of African Sound-Instruments” (19 33). The 
chief axioms of this method are: 

1) An object or idea found in scattered regions of a certain district 
is older than an object found everywhere in the same area. 

2) Objects preserved only in remote valleys and islands are older 
than those used in open plains. 

3) The more widely an object is spread over the world, the more 
primitive it is. 

How such a distribution originates may be illustrated by a physi- 
cal phenomenon. When a stone is thrown into a pond it will cause 
a series of circular waves, which grow larger and larger until they 
fade away or are stopped by the edge. In this series of concentric 
circles the first (that is the oldest) is the largest one, while the more 
recently originated circles have a smaller diameter. 

But here a vital question arises: is the world-wide distribution of 
musical instruments due to migrations from a few centers of inspira- 
tion, or rather to the fact that man, at a given stage of development, 
must invent the same tools and implements? This difficult problem 
belongs to anthropology rather than to musicology. The author, how- 
ever, is convinced that each of the oldest ideas and inventions came 
from one center. We may believe that a tool such as a hammer can 




The Chronology of Early Instruments 63 

be invented everywhere at a certain stage of human evolution j the 
progression from the use of the bare fist, through the use of a stone 
in the fist, to a stone on a wooden handle, is quite logical and natural. 
But a bull-roarer? Is it really acceptable that every human tribe 
must invent an oval board, held by a cord and whirled around the 
head, for certain magic purposes? Is it convincing that merely be- 
cause of natural evolution such a bull-roarer should have been almost 
universally connected with the fish, and that paleolithic hunters in 
France as well as modern Eskimos should both have the idea of 
dentating its rims? 

The geographic method, too, may prove fallacious. The com- 
mercial dissemination of European goods and, before that, the 
systematic spreading of Near Eastern instruments following the 
Islamic conquest, sensibly restrict its worth. 

Nevertheless, geographical criteria are safer than any other 
criteria because they are less exposed to subjective interpretation. It 
is best to follow them as closely as possible and to check the chro- 
nology they provide with prehistoric and historic data, and with the 
more interpretive answers to the questions of simplicity and cultural 
level. 

This method enables us to outline a chronology of the instruments 
discussed on the previous pages. Instead of my own twenty-three 
strata and HornbostePs eleven strata, three will suffice for the pur- 
pose of this book. 

The early stratum comprises those instruments which, prehistori- 
cally, occur in paleolithic excavations and, geographically, are scat- 
tered all over the world. These are: 

IDIOPHONES AEROPHONES MEMBRANOPHONES CHORDOPHONES 

rattles bull-roarer 

rubbed shell? ribbon reed 

scraper flute without 

stamped pit holes 

No drums and no stringed instruments appear in this early stratum. 

The middle stratum comprises those instruments which, pre- 
historically, occur in neolithic excavations, and, geographically, in 
several continents, though they are not universal. These are: 

slit-drum flute with holes drum ground-harp 

stamping tube trumpet ground-zither 

shell trumpet musical bow 




64 The History of Musical Instruments 

The late stratum comprises those instruments which, prehistoric 
cally, occur in more recent neolithic excavations, and, geographically, 
are confined to certain limited areas. These are: 

rubbed wood nose flute 

basketry ratde cross flute 

xylophone transverse trumpet 

jaws’ harp 

This rough chronology, though established on the objective data 
of distribution and prehistory, gives satisfaction also to the mind 
concerned with workmanship and cultural level. 



friction drum 
drum stick 





Sumerian lyres in the University Museum, Philadelphia . The 
wooden lyre ( above ) is greatly restored ; the silver lyre 
( below ) is entirely original . 



PLATE III. 






SECOND PART 



Antiquity 





Sumer and Babylonia 



T HE evolution from prehistoric and primitive civilizations 
to the higher civilizations involves a corresponding evolu- 
tion from folk and ritual instruments to instruments in- 
tended for entertainment and art. Division of labor and class dis- 
tinctions in an urban culture result in the formation of a professional 
class of singers and musicians. It is no more the ‘people’ that play 
and sing for magic, devotional and social purposes, but a distinct 
class, or even caste, of musicians. From this moment, instruments*can 
be divided into two kinds — popular instruments and instruments 
used by professional artists. The latter evolve in the direction of 
greater musical effectiveness and easier manipulation. 

The history of these higher civilizations begins in Mesopotamia, 
the once fertile plain between the rivers Tigris and Euphrates. Her 
first rulers were the Sumerians, a people of uncertain race who seem 
to have come from a neighboring country farther east in the fifth 
millennium B.C. Contemporaries of the Old Kingdom of Egypt, 
the Sumerian dynasties were replaced before 2000 B.C. by the 
Babylonians, a Semitic people who were contemporaneous with the 
Middle Kingdom in Egypt. At about 1750 B.C., the Kassites, a non- 
Semitic people, invaded from the east and reigned in Mesopotamia 
until about 1 100 B.C. In the last millennium B.C., Mesopotamia 
was ruled successively by Assyrians and Babylonians (the Dynasty of 
King Nebuchadrezzar and the Babylonian Exile of the Jews), by 
Medes and Persians, and finally by Greeks. The reader may compare 
the following synopsis. 



68 



The History of Musical Instruments 



MESOPOTAMIA 

Sumerians 

-2040 

Babylonians 

2040-1750 

Kassites 

1740-1160 

Assyrians 

1160-625 

Babylonians 

625-538 

Persians 

538-331 

Greeks 

from 331 



EGYPT 

Old Kingdom 
-2160 

Middle Kingdom 
2160-1580 
New Kingdom 
1580-1090 
Nubians 

1090-663 

Saites 

663-382 

Greeks 

from 332 



CRETE AND GREECE 

Early Crete 

-2100 

Middle Crete 
2100-1580 
Late Crete 

1580-1400 
Dorian migration 
nth century 

Classic Period 

6-4th century 
Alexander 

336-323 



The two chief languages used in Mesopotamia were Sumerian 
and Akkadian. Sumerian was a non-Semitic language j Akkadian, 
comprising Babylonian and Assyrian, was Semitic. As long as Su- 
merian was generally spoken, the Sumerian names of ritual objects 
passed from this language into Akkadian and were only slightly 
transformed according to its phonetic and grammatical rules. Later, 
when Sumerian was used only as a holy language in the temple, 
while Akkadian had become the current language, the Akkadian 
names of newly introduced objects were taken into the Sumerian 
language. In consequence, most Sumerian names had an Akkadian 
equivalent, no matter whether the Sumerian or the Akkadian form 
was the original. 

Very few musical instruments have been excavated in Mesopo- 
tamia, and most of them were found in the royal cemetery at Ur, 
Abraham’s native town. However, there are many reliefs and 
plaques, seals and mosaics, from a period extending over three thou- 
sand years, that depict players and musical scenes. Cuneiform written 
texts in Sumerian or Akkadian contain a quantity of names of musical 
instruments. 

The scholar’s task of compiling the actual instruments excavated 
from Mesopotamian soil, as well as the depicted instruments, and 
matching them to the few names given in contemporaneous texts is 
particularly difficult. A few ideograms can be traced back to pictures 
of things: an ear of corn, a bull’s head, a hand, a man, a door. In 
the advanced cuneiform script the original pictures are so schematized 




Sumer and Babylonia 6 9 

that they are unrecognizable, and it is impossible to deduce the form 
of an instrument from the particular arrangement of the wedges in 
the cuneiform ideogram of its name. If the ideograms had been 
recognizable even in their time, the Sumerians would not have 
helped the reader by occasional determinatives , that is, specifying 
prefixes to make up for the ambiguity of the phonetic symbols. With 
musical instruments, such determinatives indicate the material of 
which they are made: kus or su — ‘skin/ gi — ‘cane/ gis — ‘wood/ 
urudu — ‘metal.’ 

Even if a name can be identified, we face a second difficulty: dif- 
ferent names do not necessarily designate different instruments, and 
different instruments do not necessarily have different names. In 
ancient Egypt both sr and tbn mean a frame drum, and ma is given 
to flutes, oboes and clarinets. 

Thus research must be based on archeological rather than on 
philological clues. 

IDIOPHONIC INSTRUMENTS, vibrating without any spe- 
cial tension, have left few traces in Mesopotamia. It would be wrong, 
however, to conclude that they were not frequent in ancient Meso- 
potamia} as the scenes represented by Sumerian and Babylonian 
artists were in the main ceremonial, they mirror but one side of 
Mesopotamian life. Altogether we know six types of idiophones 
employed between the Two Rivers } namely, concussion clubs, clap- 
pers, sistra, bells, cymbals and rattles. 

Concussion clubs had the bent form of primitive boomerangs of 
the nontwisted type, such as Australian tribes use for hunting and 
also to accompany their songs. They are depicted on some of the 
oldest seals of Sumer, resembling exactly those drawn on prehistoric 
potteries of Egypt} dancers are holding one in each hand and hitting 
them together. 

On an archaic seal from Ur, which dates from about 2800 B.C. 
and is owned by the University Museum in Philadelphia, a small 
animal is playing a pair of short clappers of the kind that youths call 
bones in this country. Fourteen or fifteen centuries later similar 
clappers appear on Egyptian reliefs of the New Kingdom. 

More interesting than clubs and clappers are the sistra , which will 
be spoken of more fully in the Egyptian chapter. They had the U 
form of a spur (the point of the spur forming the handle) with a 
few loose crossbars, which jingled when the little implement was 
shaken. Thus, they were similar in shape to those sistra that have 




70 The History of Musical Instruments 

been found near Tiflis in Georgia and still exist in the Christian 
Church of Ethiopia, and also similar, surprisingly enough, to sistra 
found among the Yaqui in North America and among the Kadiuveo 
in South America. The clearest reproduction of a Sumerian sistrum 
is on a seal dating about 2500 B.C. in the Louvre, (fig. 28) 

The Sumerian spur sistrum differed from the usual Egyptian 
sistrum, which had the arch on top opposite the handle. Only one 
Egyptian specimen, of wood, is carved in the Sumerian shape j it 
came from a tomb of the Middle Kingdom, about 2000 B.C., and 




figure 28. Sistrum, 
Caucasus. 



probably was not common at that time. A relationship between the 
Mesopotamian and the Egyptian sistra cannot be doubted j we know 
that in prehistoric times the countries were connected by commercial 
trade. That the sistrum originated in Mesopotamia is not likely, as 
this country is on the periphery, rather than in the center, of the area 
of distribution. Also, the earlier spur sistrum was, and is, used on the 
periphery, except for that one obsolete specimen in Egypt j again, a 
later type was used in Egypt only. Thus, all the facts indicate that 
the sistrum came from Egypt rather than from Mesopotamia. 

We can trace the sistrum even further back than Egypt. Its an- 
cestors, huge and rough, as might be supposed, are preserved in a 
peculiar implement of Malayan and Melanesian fishermen. To en- 
tice the shark, these men bend a rattan rod, either in the shape of a 
two-pronged fork or in the shape of the frame of a tennis racket. 
With the fork shape they squeeze a crossbar between the prongs 
and string rattling coconut shells on it j with a tennis racket shape, 
they string the shells on the frame itself. This shark rattle antici- 
pates both forms of the sistrum, the Sumerian and early Egyptian 




Sumer and Babylonia 71 

spur sistrum, and also the horseshoe-shaped sistrum of classical 
Egypt to be described in the following chapter. 

Small bells were hung around the necks of animals in compara- 
tively recent times. A larger ceremonial bell, with the symbols of the 
gods Ea, Nergal and Ninurti and a clapper inside, is preserved in the 
V orderasiatische Abteilung of the Berlin Museum. It dates from 
the Assyrian epoch, about 6oq B.C. 

Cymbals appear as late as the seventh century in Assyria. Here 
they are used in two different forms. In one form they are held in a 
horizontal position and softly struck in a vertical movement j in the 
other form they are held in a vertical position and vigorously struck 
in a horizontal movement. In the former case they are funnel-shaped, 
the necks of the funnels serving as handles. 

Dr. Francis W. Galpin suggests the Akkadian word katral as the 
proper term for Assyrian cymbals, as it is reminiscent of the North 
Indian word kartal. He is certainly mistaken. The Indian term 
designates a clapper, not cymbals j but as its component tal is a 
native Indian word, the Akkadian term ought to be taken from it 
and transformed by metathesis. This, however, would scarcely fit 
in the chronology. Dr. Galpin’s second argument is that according 
to a legal code a katral of copper was worn by a mule or a horse, and 
this could have been cymbals. I doubt whether the ancient Mesopo- 
tamians would have designated the small twinkling disks of horses 
as cymbals (understanding that they existed) 5 moreover, the singu- 
lar form would not do. But there is a better explanation: in the 
closely related Hebrew language the verb katar means ‘encircle,’ 
keter is ‘crown,’ and koteret y or kotarot , an ornamental crownwork. 

Rattles in the form of clumsy clay animals, hollow, with pebbles 
inside, have been excavated from early layers. They obviously were 
toys. 

PIPES were depicted as rarely as other wind instruments y the 
Mesopotamian civilization preferred strings. Flutes seem to have 
been introduced into ritual music as late as about 2600 B.C., as we 
read on one of the Sumerian priest-king Gudea’s seal cylinders, “En- 
lulim, the shepherd of the lulim-kids, for the Lord Ningirsu, was 
given a share in his cult to cultivate diligently flute [playing] to fill 
the forecourt of Eninnu with joy.” On an archaic Sumerian seal in 
the Louvre a sitting shepherd plays the long vertical flute while his 
dog listens attentively j is it En-lulim? 

The Sumerian name of the vertical flute was ti-gi y the syllable gi 




72 The History of Musical Instruments 

meaning ‘cane’} the Akkadians transformed the word into txgu. A 
second name gi-gid, ‘long cane’ (Akkadian maltlu ), may refer to the 
same instrument. 

The mechanical arrangement of the whistle flute may have been 
used as well, but only in a globular clay flute. Such an instrument, 
coming from Babylonia, was preserved in the museum of the Royal 
Asiatic Society in London, but it unfortunately disappeared some 
years ago. 

Some of the pipes depicted in Mesopotamian musical scenes can 
be ascertained as pipes blown through a reed. Mouthpieces are not 
distinguishable, and the position of the pipes is misleading. Though 
the pipes are supposed to project nearly horizontally from the play- 
er’s mouth, molders of rough, clay figurines model the pipes in the 
downward position of a flute, close to the body, to avoid the diffi- 
culties of a projecting form. They have the typical gemination j all 
countries of the ancient Mediterranean world and Southwest Asia 
used two reed pipes blown together by the same player, while the 
flute was single. Such pipes could have been oboes, with a double 
reed, or clarinets, with a single reed} both types will be described in 
detail in the next chapter. Geminated clarinets always were closely 
tied together without forming an angle} geminated oboes were 
divergent. This is why we can say that, as far as we can see, Meso- 
potamian reed pipes belonged in the family of oboes. Actual reed 
pipes have been preserved} the University Museum in Philadelphia 
possesses two slender silver tubes with four fingerholes each, which 
without any doubt have formed a pair similar to the many double 
oboes found and depicted in ancient Egypt. As they were excavated 
from the royal cemetery at Ur, their approximate date is 2800 B.C.j 
that is, thirteen hundred years before oboes first appeared in Egypt. 

But it is not likely that they came to Egypt from Babylonia. From 
their distribution in antiquity, comprising the Mediterranean and the 
Near East, we conclude that oboes were created in the Semitic world, 
somewhere between Asia Minor and Arabia. This is confirmed by 
their Mesopotamian names. Instead of a Sumerian term adapted to 
Akkadian, the oboe had the Semitic name balballatu y equivalent to 
Hebrew haltl; written with Babylonian wedges, this word was read 
sem in Sumerian (which possibly has survived in semsal y the name 
given to the oboe by the Kurds, the nomadic heirs of Mesopotamia). 
Both the Akkadian and the Sumerian names were written with the 
metal determinative, indicating that cane had generally been sup- 
planted by some metal, as with the two silver pipes in the University 




Sumer and Babylonia 73 

Museum in Philadelphia. A second name, imbubu or ebubuy used in 
a text from Assur written about 800 B.C., is Semitic as well and cor- 
responds to Hebrew and Syriac abub. The names may have been 
synonyms, as Talmudian tractates asserted that abub and balil in 
Hebrew designated the same instrument. 

HORN AND TRUMPET. Several inscriptions of the Sumerian 
priest-king Gudea mention an instrument, si-im > alongside with the 
temple drums, a-lal and balag. As si (Akkadian qarnu) means ‘horn/ 
and im ‘wind,’ there is little doubt that this was a blowing horn. One 
of the Carchemish reliefs in the British Museum, dating from about 
1250 B.C., depicts a rather short and thick horn played together 
with a large frame drum which, as we shall see, corresponds either 
to the a-lal or to the balag. 

From Gudea’s time on, the si is occasionally mentioned} some 
texts add the metal determinative and some refer to horns made of 
gold. This does not necessarily mean solid gold } an inventory of the 
presents offered by King Tushratta to King Amenophis IV of Egypt, 
about 1400 B.C., contains a specified list of forty horns, all covered 
with gold and some studded with precious stones. Seventeen of them 
are expressly called ox horns} whether the rest were trumpets of the 
usual straight shape is uncertain but not probable, as straight trum- 
pets were more often made of gold than covered with it. 

Straight trumpets are depicted as late as the Assyrian epoch } sol- 
diers play them. 

No straight or curved tubular trumpets have been preserved, but 
an Assyrian shell, a triionium variegatum in the British Museum, 
has been identified by Dr. F. W. Galpin as an end-blown shell 
trumpet. 

DRUMS. Literary sources give at least twelve Sumerian words 
with their Akkadian equivalents which must be supposed to designate 
drums} some on account of the added determinative kus or su, ‘skin,’ 
as lilisy mesiy su gu galli and ub; some for other reasons, as a-lal y balag 
(formerly misinterpreted as a lyre), balag-du y balag-luly dub t ub-tur y 
ub-zabar and a-da-fa. 

Some of these names are more or less anonymous} ub equals 
lilts; the term dub shares its ideogram with balag and therefore 
seems to be another name of the same object} me ft equals a-da-fa. 
Thus the number of terms is reduced to nine. If we take out balag-di, 
balag-luly ub-tury ub-zabar as composite terms which probably mean 
nothing but varieties in shape or size, we arrive at five types. Finally, 




74 The History of Musical Instruments 

su gu galli y signifying ‘the great bull’s hide,’ is obviously a poetic 
circumlocution and can be disregarded. This leaves no more than 
four drums to be identified. 

Mesopotamian art works also show four, or perhaps five, types of 
drums. On an early vase from Bismya in the Istanbul Museum 
(c. 3000 B.C.), the third man in a procession, marching behind two 
harpists, seems to strike a rectangular frame drum squeezed under 
his left arm. But the object is not distinct enough to admit an authori- 
tative interpretation. Apart from this doubtful frame drum, Mesopo- 
tamian art works show: 1) shallow or frame drums of all sizes j 2) 
a small cylindrical drum held in a horizontal position } 3) a large 
footed drum; and 4) a small drum with one head, carried vertically 
on a belt and struck with both hands. 

Only one of them appears on Sumerian art works of the third 
millennium B.C. — a gigantic drum which, standing on its side on the 
ground, reached up to the player’s neck or his face j that is, the skin 
was from five to six feet wide. It was indeed su gu galli , ‘the great 
bull’s hide.’ Big nails projected round about the circular head and 
the skins were nailed, as they are today in the Far East. In one case, 
on a green steatite vase in the Louvre, a small figure is set on the 
top of the drum, a rather unusual detail, (pis. IV b, c) 

In all cases two men strike simultaneously j this does not often 
occur elsewhere. They each strike on both sides ; the drums must 
have had two skins. 

The ancient artists did not represent either the second skin or the 
solid body which held the two skins together, and one is at a loss to 
know whether these instruments were frame drums, barrel drums 
or what. This question, however, can be settled. A barrel is usually 
at least as high as it is wide, which in this case was six feet. No player 
would be able to strike both skins of such a giant at once. Besides, the 
sculptors and painters of Sumer and Egypt represented their objects 
from their most characteristic side, regardless of perspective: a man’s 
head in profile, his trunk in full face, his legs in profile. Thus, a 
barrel-shaped drum would show its barrel, as it does in archaic 
Chinese sculpture — not its circular head} a frame drum, on the 
contrary, would be drawn as a circular head since its profile is a 
meaningless strip. 

Still, frame drums six feet wide are unknown. Two skins as large 
as that, properly stretched and vigorously struck, would demand a 
resistance that a simple frame could not afford. 

There is a third possibility, besides the barrel and the frame drum. 




Sumer and Babylonia 75 

All features of this drum point to East Asia. The East is the only 
part of the world in which such gigantic sizes have been made; in 
some Confucian temples of China drums, apparently barrel-shaped, 
are six feet wide like the Sumerian drum, and the same is true of the 
Japanese barrel drum, da daiko . Again, nailed heads are specifically 
East Asiatic. A small figure, set on top of a drum, occurs exclusively 
in Japan. The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York displays 
in its musical gallery a beautiful cloisonne 0 daiko surmounted by a 
cock. Finally, combined efforts of two players on the same drum have 
parallels with the Korean kyo pang ko and mu ko } and with the an- 
cient Chinese war drum, kao. Such analogies are not mere coinci- 
dences. The Sumerians had come from the east, and the Japanese 
from the west j it is not surprising that they should have shared cer- 
tain cultural features. 

Thus, we feel entitled to conclude that the unknown profile of the 
Sumerian drum resembled that of the ancient Far Eastern drums. 
In Japan, which in general has preserved more archaic forms than 
China, barrel drums are practically nonexistent, while they are usual 
in China. Instead, the Japanese have an intermediate type between 
the barrel and the frame drum that we call a shallow drum. It has a 
broad frame bulging like a barrel and it is much shorter than it is 
wide. The oldest Sumerian drum may have been a shallow drum. 

What was the name of this drum? Contemporaneous Sumerian 
texts mention the terms a-lal f balag and balag-di. Which is the* right 
one? 

The literary sources do not describe the shape of any of these 
drums. To begin with the best-known name, balag , we learn that it 
came from a verb bal y ‘to beat,’ and that its Akkadian equivalent was 
balaggu. A second significance of balag is variously translated as 
‘gladness, joyful noise,’ or as ‘cry, howl.’ This drum was used in 
the temple of the god Ea, or En-Ki, who ruled water, exorcism and 
divination, and a special officer had to guard the sacred instrument, 
as is the custom in several East African tribes (cf. page 35). Its 
sound, compared with “a bull’s voice” in contemporaneous sources, 
accompanied ritual songs, summoned the sleeping god and was con- 
nected with divination, like the Lapponic drum. 

On one of Gudea’s statues we read: “The balag (called) nin-an- 
da-gal-ki he prepared, and in its great forecourt set it up.” An in- 
scription on one of Gudea’s cylinders relates that he “put in readiness 
... his beloved balag, ushumgal-kalam^ma ) an instrument making 
soothing music, (contributing) something to his counsels,” and an- 




76 The History of Musical Instruments 

other: “In the holy place was its balag which sounded (like) a bel- 
lowing bull.” Two individual balags are mentioned: nin-an-da-gal-ki 
and ushumgal-kalam-ma. Every balag had a proper name, and so 
important was the individual instrument that the Sumerians, who 
instead of counting the years named them by their chief event, called 
a certain year in Gudea’s time “the year in which the balag ushumgal- 
kalam-ma was erected.” 

A second drum, formerly interpreted as a cymbal, was the a-lal 
(Akkadian alu). The etymology of this name may be ‘hand-stretch.’ 
In some respects the a-lal was related with the balag j its place was 
likewise in the forecourt of the temple and in one text, dating about 
2200 B.C., one reads that ten measures of meal were allotted to it 
(the same supposed necessity for food that is connected with the 
rites of drum worship in East Africa). Gudea made it “roar like a 
storm” when it played with the flute j but it was also the companion 
of the horn. 

A drum accompanying a short horn is depicted on a relief from 
Carchemish (c. 1250) in the British Museum. Like the drums de- 
scribed above, it is represented as a circle with nails around it, and 
two men strike it with bare hands. But it is smaller, approximately a 
yard or a meter wide, and certainly lighter $ instead of standing on 
the ground, it is carried by a third man. No conclusion is admissible, 
as the Gudea texts in which the word a-lal is mentioned and the 
Carchemish relief are about twelve hundred years apart. 

Statuettes of women playing smaller frame drums with their bare 
hands are roughly dated 2000 B.C. by archaeologists. It is not 
hazardous to give the third term balag-di to these drums. Its Akka- 
dian equivalent, timbutu> or tibbu> has ‘ring’ as first significance. One 
Sumerian text related that a king’s granddaughter was appointed 
player of the drum balag-di in the temple of the Moon in Ur about 
2400 B.C. Women in the Near East used frame drums in rites con- 
nected with the worship of the moon. Moreover, the radicals of the 
Akkadian name occur again in the Tamil name of frame drums, 
tambattam. 

While the Sumerian drum obviously belonged in the East and 
Central Asiatic culture area, the small, probably double-headed, 
frame drum of the Babylonian era was of Semitic origin. This would 
be confirmed by the names. There was not a Sumerian word adapted 
to Semitic phonetics, as with balag and a-lal; it was, with a new 
instrument, a new Semitic name, for which the priests modeled a 
Sumerian equivalent after an older Sumerian word. (pi. IV e) 




Sumer and Babylonia 77 

A clay statuette in the British Museum, also dated about 2000 
B.C., represents the player of a small, elongated drum, horizontally 
suspended from the belt and struck with the bare hands on either 
side. The Assyrians had small cylindrical or thimble-shaped drums 
about a foot high, vertically suspended from the players’ belts, with 
single-nailed heads that the men struck with their bare hands. We 
dare not attribute Sumerian or Akkadian names to these drums. 

At last, after so much induction, not to say guesswork, we come 
to one drum that is labeled with its proper name. On a late Baby- 
lonian seal the term lilts, frequently mentioned in literary sources, 
is carved above the figure of a drum. The same type of drum is once 
more represented on an earlier Babylonian plaque dating about 
1 1 00 B.C. Standing on the ground, it reaches up to the belt of the 
player and may be a yard high. It has the shape of a stout goblet, 
with a flat foot, a short stem and a large cup. The wide opening is 
covered with a skin, the fastening of which is not distinctly depicted j 
the player apparently strikes it with the bare hands. Such foot drums 
are used in East Africa to this day; but unlike the wooden drums 
of Africa, the Sumerian drum was made of metal, as its metal de- 
terminative indicated. 

The instrument was used to raise lamentations of grief and weep- 
ing for the darkened moon, and it was worshiped, like the a-lal and 
the balag. One of its rituals is described in detail in an Akkadian text 
which has been translated into French by Francois Thureau-Dafngin. 
From this translation Dr. Galpin has made an English abstract: 

A bull without defect, black in color and untouched by stick or 
whip was selected; if spotted with seven groups of white spots in star- 
form, it was unsuitable. The animal was brought to the ‘House of 
Knowledge* (the temple) on a propitious day and offerings were made 
to the great Gods and especially to Lumha (Ea), God of Music and 
Wisdom. A reed mat was placed on the ground and covered with sand : 
on it the animal was held. More offerings were made and perfumes 
burnt. A torch was then lighted and the bull was singed. Twelve linen 
cloths were laid on the ground and twelve bronze images of the Gods 
of Heaven, Earth and the Underworld placed upon them. Sacrifices 
were made and the body or bowl of the drum was set in its place. The 
animal’s mouth was washed and, by means of a tube of aromatic reed, 
incantations were whispered into its ears explaining, in dialectical Sume- 
rian, the honor which was about to be done to the bull by its divine use. 
A hymn was next chanted to the accompaniment of the double reed-pipe. 
The bull was then slain, its heart burnt, and the body, after it had been 




y 8 The History of Musical Instruments 

skinned, wrapped in a red cloth. The skin was treated with fine flour, 
beer, wine, grease, Hittite alum and gall-nut. 

We must add that the twelve bronze images of gods were laid 
inside the drum before it was covered. 

All at once we are carried back to the sphere of the East African 
rites connected with drums, which are described in the first chapter 
of this book. When modern anthropologists weigh the possibility of 
the descent of the present East African monarchies from ancient 
Mesopotamia, they must not forget the drum rituals and the goblet 
shape of the lilis. 

To sum up, we hope that we are closer to truth than our prede- 
cessors in matching the Sumerian and Akkadian terms with the 
drums represented on art works. But we are by no means certain of 
all of these conclusions. Moreover, there is the likelihood of a varia- 
tion in the terms over a period of three thousand years. Perhaps we 
are in the position of a scholar five thousand years from today en- 
deavoring to find out the difference between the French terms tam- 
bour and caisse. 

LYRES. While most stringed instruments have a body and a 
neck, lyres have, instead of a neck, a yoke-shaped frame consisting of 
two arms and a crossbar that projects from the upper side of the 
body. The strings are stretched over the frontal soundboard and are 
fastened to the crossbar. 

Experience shows that in a primitive stage portable instruments 
are generally preceded by larger and heavier types. This is also true 
of the lyre. This instrument is first depicted on Sumerian art works 
about 3 cxx) B.C., as resting on the ground and standing higher than 
a seated man. The three precious lyres in the British Museum and 
the museums in Philadelphia and Baghdad, all of them excavated 
from the royal cemetery at Ur, measure a hundred and six, a hun- 
dred and sixteen and a hundred and twenty centimeters. As a conse- 
quence, Sumerian lyres preserved a strictly vertical position, even 
when they were carried in the players’ arms. (pis. Ill, IV a) 

All Sumerian lyres were asymmetrical, with the shorter arm of 
the yoke held next to the player and the longer arm away from the 
player. One has the feeling that the direction of the lyre is outwards, 
projecting away from the player, and this feeling is accentuated by 
the fact that frequently a carved bull’s head, or a stag, juts out from 
the outer end of the body. The outer arm of the yoke often looks out 
of place, as if it were added merely to keep the crossbar from collaps- 




Sumer and Babylonia 79 

iiig, instead of being an organic part of the structure. It sometimes 
even interferes with the carved figure. One of the lyres from Ur, in 
the University Museum in Philadelphia, could easily be an arched 
harp j neither the crossbar nor the second arm appear to be essential 
parts of the structure, (pi. Ill b) 

The strings, eight or eleven in number, were tightened in the 
same way in which modern Ethiopians secure their lyre strings; they 
were twisted round about the crossbar and knotted, and could be 
tightened by means of small pieces of wood wedged into the twisted 
strings. 

The strings were plucked with both hands, without a plectron, 
similar to the way in which a harp was played. 

This archaic lyre did not survive the Sumerian epoch. Later lyres 
in Mesopotamia, apparently coming from Syria, were smaller and 
light. The players carried them aslant, the upper end pointing away, 
and plucked the strings with a plectron, scratching over all strings at 
once while the fingers of the left hand plucked, or deadened, those 
which should not be heard in the manner that will be discussed in 
the Greek chapter. 

HARPS have the plane of the strings vertical, not parallel, to the 
soundboard. As to the outer form, there are two main types: the 
arched harf, in which the body is elongated at one end into a curved 
neck, together forming an arch; and an angular harf, in which the 
body and the neck form an angle. 

Mesopotamian harps are so many and so varied that it is difficult 
to classify them. We find arched and angular harps, with the strings 
either in vertical or in horizontal position, plucked either with or 
without a plectron. How can one put order in this multiformity? 

The horizontal harp always seems to have been plucked with 
a plectron, while the stretched fingers of the left hand deadened 
those strings which were not to sound. This manner of playing will 
be described in the Greek chapter. The vertical harp, on the con- 
trary, was plucked by the bare fingers of both hands. 

Do the horizontal and the vertical positions depend upon the 
manner of plucking? Drawing the plectron roughly over all strings 
is easier in a horizontal position with the strings above each other. 
This is the argument used by Dr. Marcelle Duchesne-Guillemin in 
trying to establish a classification and genealogy of the Mesopo- 
tamian harps on the basis of their playing style. Her article is an 
excellent piece of work, in spite of several weak points in her argu- 




Bo The History of Musical Instruments 

ment, and the author feels particularly indebted to her for having 
suggested a new working basis. 

The first fact to be noted is that Sumer had only arched harps, and 
that no arched harp has been found in Mesopotamia after the Su- 
merian epoch. It was superseded by the angular harp at about 
2000 B.C. 

Since there is no doubt that the arched harp had come from the 
musical bow, the vertical arched harp, which in shape and playing 
position most nearly resembles the musical bow, must necessarily be 
the earliest. The arch that it forms is rather shallow and evenly 
curved j the body can scarcely be distinguished from the stick that 
forms the neckj and the position in which it is held, vertical with 
the strings facing outward, is exactly the position in which a musical 
bow is held. Such harps are depicted on two remarkable pieces in 
American museums, a stone slab from Khafage (c. 3000 B.C.) in 
the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, and an archaic 
seal from Ur (c. 2800 B.C.) in the University Museum, Phila- 
delphia. 

Of the horizontal arched harp we know only four, provided that 
the beautifully inlaid harp from Ur in the British Museum belongs 
in this type. Unfortunately, its incorrect restoration does not allow 
visitors to see its proper form. So we are certain only of three — the 
two instruments figured on the noted vase from Bismya in South 
Babylonia (c. 3000 B.C.) in the Museum at Istanbul, and a third 
one on a clay plaque from Ashnunaq in the Louvre (c. 2000 B.C.). 
The Bismya harps differ greatly from the musical bow. The harp is 
more curved than any bow j the body is wide at the base and tapers 
to a point at the top, thus forming a triangle $ and the position in 
which it is held is entirely different from that of the musical bow, as 
the strings face the player and the arched stick is held away from 
him. 

We do not offer any explanation for the transformation that had 
taken place in the harp by the time of the Ashnunaq plaque. The 
sculptor depicts a late form of the old horizontal arched harp. Its 
general arrangement does not differ from the structure of the 
Bismya harp, except that its neck, instead of being curved, is nearly 
straight. A second clay plaque in the Louvre, from the same place 
and period, depicts a harp with an improved arrangement. The body 
is elongated, and at its end a vertical stick is erected at right angles 
so that there is space for a greater number of strings, and the body 
is more efficient. This is a true horizontal angular harf. A con- 




** < **<**£«* . 



# r*» 






m 



A . Lyre-flayer entertaining the guests . From a Sumerian mosaic in the University 

Museum , Philadelphia. 



'Mg? V 

. r'V' 






5 , C. Gigantic drum ; the arm with the stick ( right ) l). Horizontal angular 

is not original. Sumer. harp, c. 2000 B.C., Nip - 

pur. 

UNIVERSITY MUSEUM, PHILADELPHIA 









m 



E. Hettite drummer } Ber- 
lin Museum . 


F. Hettite lutanist ( no 
bagpipe ), from Eyuk. 


G. Lutanist, Mitanni , Berlin 
Museum. 




PLATE IV. 







8i 



Sumer and Babylonia 

temporaneous clay plaque from Nippur, in the University Museum 
in Philadelphia, indicates that this second harp was not a single 
instance, (pi. IV d) 

Although a conscientious observer would hesitate to assume the 
presence of a plectron similar to that used with a lyre on the vase 
depicting the two Bismya harps, there is scarcely any doubt, despite 
the rude work in terra cotta, that the three latter harps are being 
played this way. 

Thirteen or fourteen hundred years later, the slender long plec- 
tron and the deadening left hand are clearly pictured on Assyrian 
stone reliefs in the British Museum. The sculptor represents angular 
harps held in horizontal position with the same body that the earlier 
harps had, though in a greatly improved arrangement. The stick 
holding the strings, instead of being erected vertically at the end 
of the body of the harp, has been shifted inwards and stands a span 
away from the end. Thus, it has become a bridge that communicates 
its vibrations to the soundboard. 

This final stage persisted until the beginning of our era j an identi- 
cal specimen, in the Antiquarium of the Berlin Staatsmuseum, was 
excavated from a Sarmatian tomb in the Crimea. The Sarmates were 
Iranians, and this fact is worth mentioning for the following reason. 
Exactly the same instrument is depicted on an Assyrian relief in the 
British Museum that represents the Elamic, that is, the Iranian 
court orchestra welcoming the Assyrian conqueror in 650 B.C. Thus, 
this final stage was possibly reached in Iran rather than in Assyria. 

The vertical angular harp has no direct relation to this final stage 
of the horizontal angular harp, since its neck does not form a bridge. 
The body of the harp rises close to the player’s chest j the string- 
holder pierces the lower end of the body of the harp and sticks not 
quite at right angles from it, so that the strings face away from the 
player. 

Differently held, with the body of the harp at the bottom and the 
strings facing upwards, it would be an angular horizontal harp. 

The question is, then, whether the vertical angular harp came 
from the horizontal angular harp or vice versa. The following fact 
might help to answer it. On one of the Ashnunaq plaques the strings 
are concentrated near the body to a surprising degree, while half 
of the stick is empty and useless. This squandering would have been 
unexplainable unless the horizontal harp was an overturned vertical 
harp in which the normally distant strings had to be crowded to- 
gether in order to facilitate drawing the plectFon roughly over the 




82 The History of Musical Instruments 

strings. In consequence, it seems that, contrary to Dr. Duchesne- 
Guillemin’s opinion, the vertical angular harp was earlier than the 
horizontal harp. 

How were these harps tuned and how were they played? 

An important relief already mentioned, in the British Museum, 
represents the Elamic court orchestra welcoming the Assyrian con- 
queror in 650 B.C. Its seven harpists are identically depicted, except 
that they are plucking different strings. As the style is realistic, in- 
deed almost photographic, this cannot be accidental j the variety in 
that one point cannot be explained by any consideration for design. 
Each harpist plucks two strings, but the only strings plucked are the 
fifth, eighth, tenth, fifteenth and eighteenth of the set. If the instru- 
ments, as it is likely to suppose, were tuned to a pentatonic scale 
— say on C, without half-tones — the plucked notes were A e a 
e’ a ' <?", that is, a fifth chord orchestrated in the modern way, the 
two notes being distributed among the seven players in different 
combinations, as double octave, octave, unison and fifth: 



first 


harpist: A-e" 


second 


harpist: e-e f 


third 


harpist : J -d f 


fourth 


harpist: ef-e' 


fifth 


harpist: a f -e” 


sixth 


harpist: of-e” 


seventh 


harpist: ( a)-e‘ 



This interpretation seems to indicate three conclusions: that the 
pentatonic scale, which is the only one to give the picture such musi- 
cal sense, was used in tuning Iranian harps j that the various instru- 
ments of an orchestra played different parts j and that musicians 
knew the use of chords. These chords corresponded to the two kinds 
of accompaniment of a melody that Greek authors such as Longinus 
or Thrasyllus later on specified as symphona kat’antt -phonon or 
octave and double octave, and symphona kata pardphonon or fifth 
and fourth. 

LUTES, the ancestors of most modern stringed instruments, in- 
cluding our violin, first appear on Mesopotamian figurines, plaques 
and seals from about 2000 B.C. They had very small bodies, long 
necks with many frets, two strings attached without pegs and were 
played with a plectron. The Greeks called a similar lute pandura , 
and this word was almost surely derived from Sumerian pan-tur } 
‘bow-small/ thus indicating an origin in the musical bow which can 




Sumer and Babylonia 83 

be shown to be very probable. The honor of having invented the lute 
was awarded to the Assyrians by Pollux; but others attributed it to 
the Cappadocians, or even to the Egyptians. The hypothesis of an 
Egyptian origin can be eliminated; it is due to a temporary fashion 
in Greece of attributing all imaginable things, and music itself, to 
the romantic land of Pharaoh. Assyria and Cappadocia do not ex- 
clude each other; about 2000 B.C., Cappadocia was influenced and 
controlled by Assyria. It seems likely that the Assyrians adopted the 
lute from the Cappadocians, because the lute is entirely lacking in 
Assyrian temple ceremonies and was, therefore, probably a popular 
instrument j it is depicted several times with a shepherd. If the lute 
came to Cappadocia from Assyria, then the Greeks probably took 
the name fandura rather from Cappadocia or some neighboring 
country than from the Sumerian language, which was already ex- 
tinct. The old Sumerian name of the lute still exists in Georgian as 
panturi; in other words, this term, like so many Sumerian words, 
was exported at a time when Sumerian was still spoken, and the 
Greeks did not obtain it directly from the Sumerians, but from some 
people in or near the Caucasus, (pi. IV f, g) 

KING NEBUCHADREZZAR’S ORCHESTRA. The music 
of the last Babylonian empire is referred to in a single sentence in 
the Bible, and a very unusual one. The sentence occurs four times, 
in the verses five, seven, ten and fifteen of the third chapter of .the 
Book of Daniel. This book is not written in Hebrew, but in Aramaic, 
and was certainly penned four hundred years later than the events it 
records; Daniel and the Babylonian King Nebuchadrezzar lived in 
the first half of the sixth century B.C., and the Aramaic text dates 
from about 165 B.C. As this was an epoch of Hellenistic culture, 
some terms are influenced by Greek words. The sentence reads: 

“As soon as you hear the sound of the qarna y the masroqita y the 
qatroSy the sabka y the fsantrin y the sumfoniah y and all kinds of z mara y 
you shall prostrate yourselves. . . 

It is not difficult to interpret the first five terms: qarna y the em- 
phatic form of qeren, means a trumpet or a horn ; tnasroqita y from 
a verb sriqa y ‘whistling,’ designates any form of pipe, probably a 
double oboe; qatros corresponds to Greek kithara ; and psantrin to 
Greek psalterion y the name of the vertical angular harp. 

Sabka is the Greek sambyke y Latin sambuca. Both terms have an 
identical second significance; they designate a machine of siege used 




84 The History of Musical Instruments 

in war, which was said to share its form with the musical instrument 
of the same name. This machine is described as a boat with an up- 
right ladder. The only instrument which perfectly corresponds to 
this form is the horizontal angular harp that has been described in 
the present chapter. It has the narrow, boat-shaped body in a hori- 
zontal position, and an upright stringholder upon it, the lateral 
knobs of which give it a ladderlike appearance. As this instrument 
is genuinely Mesopotamian or Iranian, it can very probably be iden- 
tified with the sabka. 

Finally, there is the term sumponiah. Though there is no doubt 
that it is derived from Greek symphoneia, its meaning has been much 
contested. It is not worth while repeating once more all the errone- 
ous and arbitrary translations given to this word in nearly two thou- 
sand years. The most stubborn of them, ‘bagpipe/ was particularly 
inadequate since no bagpipe existed in those times. 

The question is difficult because the Greek word never designated 
an instrument at all j it signified ‘simultaneous sound/ ‘playing to- 
gether/ ‘orchestra/ ‘band/ The Authorized Version, therefore, is 
correct when, in the parable of the lost son, fifteenth chapter of Luke, 
verse twenty-five, it renders the word by musick: “Now his elder 
son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he 
heard musick and dancing.” Even the four passages in the Deipno- 
sophistae , in which the Greek Athenaeus quotes the historian Polyb- 
ius (c. 2io— c. 127 B.C.) on the life of King Antiochus Epiphanes 
of Syria, are inconclusive and do not prove that symphonia was an 
instrument. 

About 600 A.D. a learned Spaniard, St. Isidore of Seville, con- 
nected it for the first time with a special instrument. In his Originum 
seu etymologiarum libri XX, he defined symphonia as a hollow 
wood covered at either end with a stretched skin, which musicians 
struck on both sides with sticks. And a sweet sound is brought forth 
by the concord of a low and a high note : Symphonia vulgo appellatur 
lignum cavum ex utraque parte pelle extenta quam virgulis hinc et 
inde musici feriunt. Fitque in ea ex concordia gravis et acuti suavis- 
simus cantus. 

Thus, the sumponiah might be interpreted as a drum with two 
skins of different diameter and pitch, if one insisted that the Aramaic 
word meant a single instrument. But it would be hazardous to follow 
a single source written about seven hundred and fifty years later in 
a foreign country, and to neglect the other sources of earlier, con- 




Sumer and Babylonia 85 

temporaneous and later times, which agree in calling symphonia a 
band, not an instrument. 

It was a real progress when a commentator on Daniel, Dr. E. B. 
Pusey, doubted whether the word referred to an instrument at all, 
and Dr. Francis W. Galpin, coming to the same conclusion, explained 
it as an ensemble, a “full consort.” The passage in Daniel then would 
mean: “As soon as you hear the sound of the horn, the pipes, the 
lyre, the horizontal and the vertical harp, the full consort and all 
kinds of instruments . . .” 

But it would be unusual to enumerate separately the instruments 
of an orchestra and then add the orchestra itself j we would not 
describe a military band, for example, as flutes, saxophones, trom- 
bones, tubas, drums and their ensemble. 

Though meaningless from an occidental point of view, such a 
description is significant when we know the practice of oriental 
music. If we accept the Aramaic text word for word, the king’s 
subjects heard the various instruments first singly and then all to- 
gether. And this is exactly the manner of orchestra playing in the 
Near East. A flourish on a horn or trumpet may attract attention. 
Then the performance begins. Several leading instruments out of 
the band display, in an improvised solo performance called taqsim 
in Arabic, the maqam or melodic pattern of the piece, each one accord- 
ing to the nature and technique of his instrument. After them the 
full ensemble joins in with either a short ritornello or a longer sym- 
phony. In addition to the melodic solo instruments which are ad- 
mitted to a taqsim } this ensemble comprises drums and other instru- 
ments of a merely rhythmical character. It would be appropriate to 
call them “all kinds of zmara ” or instruments, in the words of the 
Book of Daniel. 

Thus, a literal translation of the Aramaic text suggests the picture 
of a horn signal, followed by solos of oboe, lyre and harp, and a full 
ensemble of these and some rhythmical instruments. It does not 
describe an orchestra, but an orchestral performance in the ancient 
Near East. 




4 - E syp‘ 



FROM PREHISTORY TO THE END 
OF THE MIDDLE KINGDOM 

R ECENT excavations from Sumerian cemeteries and temples 
have disclosed so many objects similar to those found in 
Egypt that the hypothesis that there was a prehistoric con- 
tact between the two great civilizations is unavoidable. Their rela- 
tion is particularly noticeable in music j the so-called Old Kingdom 
(2900-2475 B.C.) had not one instrument that did not exist in 
Sumer simultaneously, or even earlier. 

The contact between the two nations must, however, have come 
to an end before 2700 B.C., as the lyre had an outstanding role in 
Sumerian ceremonies about that time, although it was still unknown 
in Egypt. Nearly eight hundred years elapsed before an Egyptian 
painter depicted a passage of Semitic nomads coming down to Egypt 
with their families and belongings, and among them a man playing 
the lyre — the first lyre recorded in the vicinity of the Nile. (pi. VI b) 
We do not know whether this was a single importation. Presently 
the curtain fell over the Egyptian, as well as over the Babylonian, 
stage. There was a violent invasion of peoples from Central Asia, 
probably caused by a sudden change of climate j the Kassites con- 
quered Mesopotamia and put an end to the Babylonian empire j 
Abraham, the patriarch of Israel, migrated from Ur in Babylonia 
to Canaan j the nomadic Hyksos entered Egypt and destroyed the 
civilization of the Middle Kingdom. During this long intermission 
we lose sight of the great monarchies j literary and pictorial evidences 
are scarce. When the curtain rises again, it unveils a vigorous inva- 




Egypt 87 

sion of the Egyptian armies eastward which renews the contact be- 
tween Egypt and Mesopotamia. One would expect, as a consequence, 
an Egyptian influence on Asia; but the contrary is true. Once more 
the Asiatic civilization proved to have the dominant character, and 
Egypt underwent a strong influence from the east. 

The influence, as far as music is concerned, is evident from the 
sudden appearance of many Asiatic instruments: vertical angular 
harps, lyres, lutes, oboes and trumpets, while the Egyptian flute 
and double clarinet disappear. Instruments rarely migrate without 
their players, and this fact is nowhere more clearly illustrated than 
in ancient Egypt. When Southwest Asia had been conquered by 
the pharaohs of the eighteenth dynasty (about 1500 B.C.), the sub- 
jugated kings sent singing- and dancing-girls with their instruments 
as a part of their tribute; in one painting we can see them busy 
practicing in a special harem in King Amenophis the IV’s residence 
at Tell El-Amarna that the painter has left unroofed like a doll’s 
house. 

During the last fifteen hundred years B.C., the migration of in- 
struments from western Asia to Egypt persisted. New types of 
harps and lyres enriched the musical stock of Egypt, and finally, in 
the Greek epoch, cymbals and castanets were introduced there. In 
those centuries the Near East came under the domination succes- 
sively of the Persians, the Greeks and the Romans. As a consequence 
of the change of rulers and the cultural unification in various em- 
pires, the ancient world underwent a cosmopolitanism that destroyed 
the exclusively national character of musical instruments. 

Research in Egyptian musical instruments is facilitated by two 
factors : the extreme aridity of the desert soil and the Egyptian belief 
in the magic power of painting and sculpture. Aridity has preserved 
hundreds of instruments from decomposition, and many musical 
scenes are depicted on tomb walls because Egyptians believed that 
pictorial reproductions of domestic life, of cooking, baking, harvest- 
ing, storing, eating, dancing, singing and playing, secured a similarly 
prosperous and pleasurable existence in the other life. 

The philological sources are as rich as the archaeological ones. 
Egyptian art works are explained by short, naive texts written be- 
tween the human figures wherever an empty spot is left. “He is 
playing the harp,” they read, or, “He is playing the flute.” Thus, 
we know the authentic names of practically all Egyptian instru- 
ments. 




88 



The History of Musical Instruments 

CLAPPERS AND CONCUSSION-STICKS. The clapper is the 
first instrument that Egyptian sources record. Prehistoric vases made 
before 3000 B.C. figure female dancers playing or accompanied by 
clappers, both held in one hand ( one-handed duffers). The instru- 
ment is carefully drawn j it consists of two sticks, bent like boomer- 
angs, both held in one hand and clapped against one another. Sticks 
similar in shape are well known to anthropologists as missiles used 
in hunting. The Egyptian missile must have had the same form, 
since its hieroglyphic ideogram corresponded exactly to that of the 
prehistoric dance clapper. It is easy to find the link between themj 
Egyptian hunters approached the papyrus thickets on the Nile banks, 
clapped their missiles together to scare up the water birds and then 
hurled them after the soaring game. 

This is one of the rare cases in which an implement with a prac- 




figure 29. Harvesters with concussion sticks, Egypt, 

5 th dynasty. 

tical use is transformed into a musical instrument. We know a 
similar instance among the Cagaba in the Sierra Nevada of Colom- 
bia, who use the same sticks, made to chase birds from the crops, to 
accompany a magic dance against these birds. The author saw modern 
Egyptian farmers in 1930 chasing locusts from the fields in the 
same way. 

Another magic dance insuring a good harvest is represented in 
an ancient Egyptian tomb of about 2700 B.C.: a file of rural work- 
men clap together short sticks held in both hands as they advance 
in those long, easy strides typical of fertility rites, (fig. 29) 

A practical use for the rhythm made by percussion sticks is shown 
on reliefs made soon after 3000 B.C. : while the vintagers press the 
grapes with their feet, two other men are clapping the rhythm with 
their sticks, one held in each hand, to facilitate the tiring labor. This 
is an archaic example of work rhythm as a source of musical activity, 




Egypt 89 

the musical importance of which the sociologist Karl Bucher has so 
much exaggerated in his well-known book, Arbeit und Rhythmus. 

Two-handed clappers were only depicted in these two instances. 
One-handed clappers y on the contrary, appeared constantly. They 
were made of wood, bone or ivory, and their heads were carved in 
the shape of human hands or heads of animals or men. Many are 
decorated with the head of Hathor, goddess of heaven, joy and 
death, and on a painting of about 1500 B.C. two women playing 
these clappers are described as “Glorifyers of the goddess Hathor, 
mistress of Dendera.” The clapper seems to have been an instru- 
ment frequently used in the worship of Hathor, and probably every 
woman had her clapper to worship the goddess, as today every 
Catholic woman owns a rosary. 

SISTRUM is the term generally adopted to designate a certain 
shaken instrument of Egypt } the Greek word seistron means ‘thing 
shaken.’ The sistrum consisted of a handle and a frame with jingling 
crossbars. The sistrata turba , ‘the sistrum-shaking crowd’ of women, 
shook it when they worshiped the bovine goddess Hathor. Hathor 
later on metamorphosed into the maternal goddess Isis, the wife of 
Osiris, and as the peoples of the Roman Empire gradually lost their 
faith in the old gods, the joyful cult of Isis became popular in all 
parts of the Empire} thus, sistra were found as far away as France. 

The sistrum was made in two different forms. One of them, called 
seseset, was confined to Egypt} no specimen was found abroad. It 
is known to Egyptologists as naos sistrum , sistrum in the shape of a 
small temple or naos. The upper end is carved in the form of 
Hathor’s head and supports the heavy frame, which looks like the 
front view of a small temple with a door. Holes on either side of the 
frame have jingling cross wires strung through them. Originally 
this implement did not have these wires and was a mute emblem } 
only later on was the jingling contrivance taken over from the other 
type of sistrum that the Egyptians called iba or sehem. ( fig. 30) 

This sistrum, generally made of metal, also had a handle, but 
instead of the massive naos a horseshoe-shaped frame with the closed 
end at the top. Through opposite holes in the sides of the horseshoe 
frame, two, three or four wires slipped back and forth in the loose 
holes and jingled when their bent ends touched the frame. During 
the Old and Middle Kingdoms small jingling disks were strung 
upon the wires to increase the noise} they were given up in the New 
Kingdom. Finer specimens had a rich, symbolic decoration which 




90 The History of Musical Instruments 

alluded to the ritual purposes of the instruments. The cross rods 
were given the head and the tail of a sacred snake j Isis with the 
horn of plenty and her son Horos might stand within the frame j 



figure 30. 




Naos sistrum, Egypt. 



a suckling cat with the moon disk on its head could be carved at the 
top j or a figure of Bes, the healing god, would serve as a handle. 

VERTICAL FLUTES are first recorded on a prehistoric slate 
from Hieraconpolis (fourth millennium B.C.) on which a disguised 
hunter plays a flute to allure the game. 

The Egyptian flute was a so-called vertical flute ( not a transverse 
flute) j the player held it slanting obliquely downwards and blew 
across the open upper end against the opposite, sharp edge. It shared 
the name mart or rm't with both clarinets and oboes, the ending t 
indicating the feminine gender. Any other names given by previous 
writers to the Egyptian flute are erroneous. 

Egyptian flutes are smaller than many primitive ceremonial flutes. 
Cut from a simple cane generally a yard long and half an inch wide, 
the Egyptian flute had from two to six fingerholes near the lower 
end j one excavated specimen was even provided with a thumb hole 
in the back. 

This simple cane flute without a whistle head might be supposed 
to be older than whistle flutes, but it is not. Its comparatively small 
size enables the player to blow it without the aid of a mouthpiece. 
In primitive civilizations we find much larger flutes, whose size 
necessitates the use of a whistle head because the breath of the player 
is too weak to blow across so wide an opening. 

Vertical flutes, such as the Egyptian flutes, had greater musical 
possibilities than the whistle flutes. Being able to vary the angle of 
blowing against the edge, the player could give more expression to 
the tonej no instrument had a more incorporeal sound, a sweeter 
sostenutOy a more heartfelt vibrato. 

The flute, with its characteristic quality, still exists today all over 
the Islamic world. It is best known under its Persian name nay t 




Egypt 91 

which has replaced the arabic name qa$aba or qu^aba } except in the 
western part of North Africa. 

DOUBLE CLARINETS. Clarinets are tubes closed at the upper 
end. Near this end there is a small lateral opening or breath hole, 
which is covered by a tongue. When the breath sets this tongue in 
vibration, it opens and closes the passage in a rapid alternation and 
divides the air current into pulsations. The tongue is so devised that 
it overlaps the opening and thus never passes through the opening 
when it vibrates. Acoustically, this style of tongue is known as a 
single beating reed. 

Primitive Egyptian clarinets were made of cane. The breath hole 
was made by a three-sided slit cut into the cane forming a rectangular 
tongue, the fourth uncut side allowing the tongue to vibrate because 
of the elasticity of the material. Thus the simple device of slitting 
the cane formed both the mouth-hole and the tongue, which in later 
clarinets were much more elaborately devised. Since the slit is cut 
obliquely, instead of squarely, through the side of the cane, the sharp 
edge of the tongue overlaps the opening. 

The upper end with the vibrating reed is held entirely within the 
player’s mouth. As in glass blowing, breathing is exclusively through 
the nose, while the mouth emits a constant blast of air. Modification 
of timbre and force is not possible with this kind of blowing j the 
sound is emitted with unaltering strength and shrillness. Players of 
the modern Sardinian triple clarinet, launedda , train their pupils in 
this difficult technique by means of a straw and a vessel filled with 
water j dipping the straw and blowing, the boy has to keep blowing 
while he is breathing in and outj if the water stops gurgling, the 
teacher gives him a box on the ear. The author was told at Cairo that 
Egyptian oboe players are trained in the same way. 

The origin of the clarinet is unknown. It has been found in prim- 
itive civilizations, but only in recent layers, and the question of 
whether it migrated from lower to higher civilizations, or from 
higher to lower ones, is not yet decided. When the clarinet first ap- 
peared in the higher civilizations, it was in the form of the double 
clarinet. 

More complicated than the vertical flute, the double clarinet is an 
even more exciting proof of the incredible perseverance of musical 
instruments. All over the Islamic Orient, from Egypt to the Celebes, 
low-caste musicians play a double clarinet made of two canes a foot 
long, glued and tied alongside one another and provided with 




92 The History of Musical Instruments 

equidistant, and symmetrically arranged, fingerholes, either four 
or five or six in each canej in the upper ends smaller canes are in- 
serted, out of which the beating tongue is cut by a three-sided slit 
described above. These double clarinets are best known under their 
Arabic name zummara. The player stops the corresponding holes 
of both tubes simultaneously with one finger, and as the holes, 
roughly cut into an uneven cane, produce slightly different pitches, 
the effect is a pulsating sound such as in the modern occidental organ 
stop, unda maris. 

Double clarinets of exactly the same shape have been excavated 
from Egyptian tombs of the first century B.C. Moreover, the author 
recognized this instrument on a relief known to be as early as 2700 
B.C. in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. Above the sitting player 
the sculptor has carved the text, “Is playing the ma t,” and added 
the unmistakable design of a double clarinet as a hieroglyphic deter- 
minative. This indicates that the instrument has existed for five 
thousand years without the slightest change. 

THE ARCHED HARP was not quite as long-lived. The more 
highly an instrument is developed the more apt it is to be even more 
improved. The harp, depicted on many reliefs for a period of three 
thousand years and preserved in some excavated specimens, was in- 
deed the most highly prized instrument of Egypt (in this resembling 
the Indian vina and the Chinese chfin). 

It was closely related to the Sumerian harp. But the question of 
whether it came from Sumer to Egypt, or from Egypt to Sumer, is 
not conclusively settled. The most reliable criterion in such a case is 
supplied by a geographical rule: if one meets identical phenomena 
on the outskirts of a country, or of a continent, but different phenom- 
ena in the center, the phenomena of the border are usually earlier. 
Now the area of distribution of the arched harp comprises the coun- 
tries between Africa and Java, Sumer being in the center of that 
district. The harps on the border are differentiated from those in 
the center by an important characteristic. While in the central dis- 
trict, from Sumer to India, the strings are wound around the neck 
without any special fastening device, they were secured by knobs 
glued into the back of the stick in Egypt and Java. Strings fastened 
by knobs must be earlier than plain strings j therefore, the Egyptian 
harp probably came from Sumer, rather than the Sumerian harp 
from Egypt. 




Egypt 93 

This seems hard to believe. We are far too accustomed to sup- 
posing that evolution goes from simple to complicated contrivances. 
Yet, the omission of knobs in the later harps can easily be explained. 
A string fastened around the wood without a knob is adjustable be- 
cause the string can be pushed to a tighter or a looser position with- 
out being untied, whereas if the string is fastened to a stationary 
knob it has to be untied and retied in order to change the tension. 
With knobs, tuning is difficult ; without knobs, it is simple. A harp 
with unturnable knobs is musically inferior to knobless harps. 

Other features also of the earliest Egyptian harp were archaic. 
During the Old Kingdom the stick comprised the entire length of 
the instrument, as in the harp’s ancestor, the musical bowj it even 
penetrated the body. This latter was circular and very small, resem- 
bling the gourd-resonator attached to the musical bowj the sound- 
board was a piece of skin. 

Harps were Vertical’ in Egypt j the strings faced outward and 
the stick was next to the player. They generally stood on the ground 
and were played by a kneeling man. When in the New Kingdom 
they had grown higher and were provided with as many as nineteen 
strings, the player stood erect. The harp had long before left the 
primitive stage in which instruments generally developed from big 
sizes to smaller forms, and had entered a more civilized stage in 
which the need for augmenting its musical means involved a reverse 
process of development from small to large. The highest develop- 
ment of this instrument is exemplified by two gigantic harps which 
are depicted in the tomb of Rameses III (about 1200 B.C.). They 
are about two meters or nearly seven feet high and decorated with 
paintings and mosaics in many colors. It was these impressive harps 
that first gave musicologists an idea of the outstanding role of music 
in Egypt. An English traveler of the eighteenth century, James 
Bruce, saw them and had a drawing made of them, which he later 
handed over to historians of music. Eventually a copy of his picture 
was used to illustrate Johann Nicolaus Forkel’s Geschichte der 
Musik , first volume, Leipzig, 1788. The eighteenth century drafts- 
man transformed the large crowned head of a sphinx upon the reso- 
nance box into the small statue of an entire sphinx j he gave the neck 
the S shape of modern harps and decorated it with scrolls in a late 
rococo style j he omitted the pegs and misrepresented the construc- 
tion as a whole. Such an experience should put scholars on their guard 
against illustrations in prephotographic publications, (pi. VI c) 




94 The History of Musical Instruments 

As well as the large erect harp, the Egyptians o£ the New King- 
dom had a smaller footed harf that rested partly on a slanting leg, 
partly on the knees of the seated harpist. A crossbar connecting the 
leg with the body of the harp frequently was carved in the shape of 
a symbol of Isis or Osiris. 

A third form, found in the Middle and the New Kingdoms, was 
the small shoulder hary in the shape of a shallow arch ; it had from 
three to five strings only and was borne on the left shoulder and 
played with the arms gracefully lifted. As its neck projected, not 
from the front, but from the back of the body, it may have been 




figure 3 1 . Egyptian shoulder harp, section. 



related to the strange bow-lute of West African Negroes, in which 
each string was stretched by a separate flexible rod projecting from 
the back of the body. (pi. V a, fig. 31) 

The harp was exclusively played by men during the Old King- 
dom ; later on women were harpists as well, but they played most 
the footed harp and the shoulder harp, and rarely the traditional, 
older harp that stood on the ground. 

The Egyptian name of the harp was bin't y the letter / being the 
feminine ending. Probably an i } which, as a short vowel, was not 
written, followed the n in pronunciation; for Flavius Josephus calls 
the Egyptian harp by the name to bum. A mistake has caused later 
writers to attach the Greek article to to the noun; this was the origin 
of the erroneous term tebuni given to the Egyptian harp by so many 
music historians of the nineteenth century. In an earlier book the 
author has shown that the Egyptian name bin't was probably iden- 
tical with the well-known name bin in Hindustani, and vipd in 
Sanscrit, given to several stringed instruments of India. 

We showed in another publication that out of seventeen harpists 
represented on Egyptian art works with sufficient realism and dis- 
tinctness to be reliable records, seven are striking a fourth chord, 
five a fifth chord, and five an octave chord; that is, taking for granted 
that the accordatura was pentatonic without semitones, because the 
assumption of a heptatonic tuning does not make any sense. 




Egypt 95 

Both the pentatonic accordatura and the frequent use of simulta- 
neous consonances are indicated by similar evidences in Iran and 
Assyria. 

Moreover, the pentatonic tuning is corroborated by the passage 
from Flavius Josephus quoted above. There, the Egyptian harp is 
called a an enharmonic triangular instrument,” organon trtgonon 
enarmonion , used by “temple musicians,” hieropsaltai. The Greek 
term ‘enharmonic’ had two different, indeed opposite, meanings. 
The so-called later enharmony consisted in dividing the fourth or 
tetrachord into a major third and two quarter-tones ; this strange 
scale is out of the question in tuning a harp. But another, earlier 
scale, also called enharmonic and attributed to the piper Olympus 
(about 700 B.C.), was made by omitting the notes F and C in the 
Dorian and Phrygian modes. It was a pentatonic scale without half- 
tones. 

THE ANGULAR HARP. A vertical angular harp of Assyrian 
type is accompanied by the harp name bint in an Egyptian inscrip- 
tion of the Greek epoch. Thus, it is certain that this name was given 
to the angular harp as well. 

The angular harp in Egypt came from Asia; it first appears on 
art works representing Asiatic musicians. Three nearly identical 
specimens from a more recent epoch have been preserved. One is 
displayed in the Egyptian department of the Metropolitan Musetim 
of Art in New York j a second one can be seen in the Louvre, though 
displayed upside down; a third one was bought in Cairo by the 
author of this book for the Museum of Musical Instruments in 
Berlin. A famous relief in the museum in Alexandria, made in 
Heliopolis about 500 B.C., shows a similar harp in use and affords 
the only possibility of dating the three preserved specimens. 

All of them have an upright, narrow body in one piece, with the 
front open. It is slightly deeper at the upper than at the lower end. 
This body is entirely sewn into a piece of leather, and the part of the 
leather which covers the open front serves as a soundboard. Just 
under the soundboard, forming its axis, there is a thin bar of wood 
held in position by crosspieces and used as a stringholder. The outer 
ends of the strings are fastened to a round stick, projecting at an 
acute angle from the lower end of the body. This stick, piercing the 
body, rests on the lap of the seated player while the body is held up 
against his chest, the strings facing outwards. Sometimes the player 
stands, supporting the stick between her legs. The strings, number- 




9 6 The History of Musical Instruments 

ing twenty-one, twenty-two or twenty-three, are tied to cords, which 
in turn are tied around the stick and kept in position by unturnable 
knobs of alternately clear and dark color. The strings end in orna- 
mental tassels hanging down from the stick. 

DRUMS. One of the most surprising facts in the history of 
Egyptian music is the complete absence of drums until about 2000 
B.C. Drums might have existed before then without being depicted 
on art works. But even if we admit this vague possibility, the lack 
of any archaeological reference in a country so rich in realistic art 
documents would seem to prove that they did not exist. One can 
only suppose that Egyptian music was inspired by melodic impulses 
rather than by rhythm, just as it is nowadays. 

Yet, there is one exception to prove the rule. A fragment from 
Ne-user-re’s temple of the Sun (about 2700 B.C.) near Abusir, now 
in the Munich museum, shows the top of a large drum like the big 
temple drum mentioned in the Sumerian chapter and supposed to be 
identical with the instrument a-lal . As this instrument is unique in 
the Old Kingdom of Egypt, we suppose its existence is due to an 
importation from Sumer. 

Nearly two thousand years later another drum scene appears on 
a relief from Osorkon IPs festival hall in the great Bubastis temple j 
a frame drum, three or four feet in diameter, is carried on the shoul- 
ders of a porter and beaten by the bare hands of a second man. From 
the position of the player’s right arm and the disappearance of his 
right hand behind the drum, one infers that the drum had two skins. 

Cylindrical and barrel drums occur during the Middle and New 
Kingdoms. The Cairo museum owns a cylindrical drum which prob- 
ably was made during the twelfth dynasty, 2000-1788 B.C.j it is 
sixty-five centimeters long and twenty-nine centimeters wide, and 
has a network of thongs with a tightening tourniquet to stretch the 
leather skins. A similar drum is still in use on the Congo. 

Two later drums, in the Egyptian departments of the Metro- 
politan Museum of Art in New York and of the Louvre, are a foot 
long, stout and barrel-shaped. They are braced by a system of thongs 
looped through the skins, running parallel and very close together, 
and caught through two thongs which run around the body of the 
drum near each end. So many thongs were not necessary merely to 
tighten the skins, and probably served to protect the body of the 
drum as well. The necessity for protection seems to indicate that the 
drums originally were made of earthenware. Another circumstance 





A 




C 

Egyptian stringed instruments , New Kingdom , in the Berlin Museum. 
A. Shoulder harp. B. Lyre. C. Lute. 



PLATE V. 




Egypt 97 

which indicates that they were earthenware is that more recent 
Hindu drums, khol and madala t with similar thongs, are also made 
of earthenware. The drum in New York is composed of wooden 
staves cemented together, and this form may have been derived 
from an original clay drum strengthened by staves. 

The New Kingdom also had barrel-shaped drums, but they were 
more elongated. All representations of barrel drums agree in two 
points: they were carried horizontally and struck on both skins with 
the bare hands. 

Once more we are reminded of Indian drums by a relief of the 
late epoch, about 500 B.C., that depicts a woman playing a barrel 
drum of a double-conical shape tapering from a ridge in the middle 
to the smaller ends. This is the characteristic form of ancient Hindu 
drums, khol> 4 holaka ) mrdanga and pakhavaja. A trade route con- 
nected Egypt and India from early times. 

The name, or one name, of the drum is ascertained by an inscrip- 
tion in the Great Temple at Karnak, in which the picture of a barrel 
drum is inscribed with the name tbn (vowels were not written in 
Egyptian). But this inscription belongs in the Greek epoch, and the 
word tbn is so closely related to Greek typanon that the Karnak 
version is probably a hieroglyphic transcription of the Greek word 
rather than a genuine Egyptian name. 

Small frame drums were more usual in the New Kingdom than 
either large frame drums or barrel drums. Most of them were cir- 
cular, but some had four concave sides. Only women played them, 
but sometimes the god Bes is represented with the frame drum. This 
divinity was strongly associated with feminine activities in spite of 
his male sexj he was even supposed to attend at childbirth. 

Some specimens of circular frame drums can be seen in more than 
one museum ; the only known specimen of a rectangular frame drum 
has recently been excavated at Thebes by an expedition of the Metro- 
politan Museum headed by Mr. Ambrose Lansing, and preserved 
in the Cairo museum. 

The frame drum, too, was given the Greek name tbn y while earlier 
inscriptions designated the frame drum as sr. 

Harps and drums have already led us into the second epoch of 
Egyptian history, beginning with the New Kingdom and lasting 
until the Hellenistic Age. 




98 



The History of Musical Instruments 



FROM THE NEW KINGDOM TO THE 
GREEK EPOCH 

In the fifteenth century B.C. the bellicose Pharaohs, Thutmosis 
and Amenophis, conquered the highly civilized Southwest of Asia. 
Manners and ideas were influenced, and music underwent a decisive 
change. Nearly all of the ancient instruments were discarded. The 
standing harp became larger and abounded in strings j several new 
types of harps were introduced j shrill oboes replaced the softer 
flutes j lyres, lutes and crackling drums were introduced from Asia. 
A new kind of noisy, stimulating music seems to have taken posses- 
sion of the Egyptians, while the ancient music, nearly always com- 
posed of flutes and harps without drums and clappers, must have 
had a rather quiet character. 

The completeness of this change is obvious when, in a museum 
of Egyptian art, one passes to the section of the New Kingdom. A 
relief, such as the funeral dance from Sakkara in the Cairo museum, 
with its crowd of whirling, straining women who strike their drums 
and crack the clappers in a frantic orgy, shows what music could be 
in the eighteenth dynasty. Even in chamber music, singers and play- 
ers betray the tension which emphatic music induces in its perform- 
ers. And the performers have greatly changed as well. Except for 
some blind harpists and playing priests who carry on the old tra- 
dition, they have lost the reserve and dignity which had been in- 
dicated in the reliefs and paintings between 3000 and 1500 B.C. 
Men are superseded by professional women, and one supposes that 
they have been professional prostitutes as well. 

The most stirring among their new instruments was the oboe. 

THE OBOE ( ma't ) has a double reed to interrupt the player’s 
breath. A double reed is made of two blades of cane, or tough grass, 
laid one on top of another. The lower ends bound together form a 
tube which is inserted into the upper end of the oboe. The upper ends 
are not bound together and, when looked at from the top, form a 
narrow oval opening. When the player takes the double reed into 
his mouth and blows, the opening is alternately closed and opened. 

Oboes in Egypt were cut from a slender cane about two feet long 
and less than half an inch in diameter. They always were used in 
pairs, two of them being loosely held together in the mouth and 
blown simultaneously. The left one sounded a lower drone accom- 
panying the melody produced by the right one. This drone playing 




Egypt 99 

can be inferred from three facts: the peculiar arrangement of the 
players’ fingers on Egyptian art works $ the present practice in other 
countries, India for example j the excavation of a pipe with all except 
one fingerhole stopped with wax. 

The fingerholes of the Egyptian oboes, frequently four on the 
right and three on the left pipe, were the subject of some important 
research. Several scholars, Frangois-Joseph Fetis, T. L. Southgate, 
Victor Loret, Victor-Charles Mahillon, tried to find out what kind 
of scale the Egyptians had by playing these oboes, or reproductions 
made of them. Their attempts were complete failures because they 
did not take into account some essential considerations. Pipes made 
of such delicate material, having been laid in the ground for thou- 
sands of years, and then stored in museums of a different climate, 
could not avoid shrinking. Even microscopic changes suffice to alter 
pitch and intervals. Moreover, all players sharp or flatten the notes 
unconsciously in order to correct the scale according to their own 
musical habit, and corrections of this kind are particularly easy with 
an instrument so roughly made that it sometimes allows a latitude 
of more than a half-tone for each hole. Further, we do not know 
whether, and to what extent, the ancient players used half-stopping 
and cross-fingering. Finally, these experiments were made with 
modern mouthpieces, though it is well known that the nature, shape 
and size of the mouthpiece affect, indeed determine, the scale. The 
reader may imagine how unreliable the conclusions were, and ’one 
will not blame Giuseppe Verdi for having written to Count Arrive- 
bene about the attempts of Fetis to play on an Egyptian pipe: 

Do not think that I abhor this charlatan because he has run me down, 
but because one day he rushed me head over heels to the Egyptian Mu- 
seum in Florence, to inspect a pipe on which he pretends to have dis- 
covered the system of the ancient Egyptian music, as he asserts in his 
History of Music . . . . The arch-rogue!!!. Thus history is falsified, 
and fools grow without watering! 

The author, in his book Die Musikinstrumente des alten Ae gyp- 
tens and a paper Die Tonkunst der alten Aegypter , tried to replace 
this kind of experiment by using the measurements between the 
fingerholes as a basis for determining the scale, which is the function 
of the geometrical progression of the fingerholes. 

In the meantime, the American Charles Kasson Wead had shown 
that, in general, at any time and in any country the disposition of 
the fingerholes was not based on musical principles until, as late as 




ioo The History of Musical Instruments 

1832, the flutist Theobald Boehm made his reform in flute con- 
struction. In search of a nonmusical standard, both Victor Loret and 
the author of this book tried to identify the distances between the 
holes of Egyptian oboes, clarinets and flutes with Egyptian measures 
of length. This means of solving the problem was pursued by the 
late Dr. Erich M. von Hornbostel. His general results, however, 
will not be presented until the eighth chapter of this book, since 
their appropriate place is in a discussion of Chinese music. 

TRUMPETS in Egypt were made of a yellow metal and had a 
conical form with a distinct mouthpiece and a rather wide bell. As it 
was only about two feet long, this trumpet must have been tuned 
more or less to the upper octave of our modern cornet j the ground- 
tone may have been approximately <?> and it is not likely that it 
could produce more than this note, its higher octave and its twelfth. 
Such small instruments have not an agreeable sound, and we can 
appreciate the Greek historian Plutarch’s disdainful remark that the 
blare of an Egyptian trumpet was like an ass’s bray. 

The instrument is pictured for the first time about 1415 B.C. as 
used by soldiers. But it did not serve military purposes only. It was 
used as a sacred instrument in the worship of Osiris, and its invention 
was attributed to the god himself. 

Homer’s commentator, Eustathios, who relates this myth, says 
the name of the trumpet was chnoue , but no word of the kind can 
be found in Egyptian dictionaries. Hieroglyphic inscriptions call the 
trumpet snb. 

This contradiction might possibly be explained in the following 
way. Let us suppose that the vocalized form of snb was snobe. A 
Greek, transcribing this word into his alphabet, would have been 
forced to replace s (English sh) by the letter chi , which was pro- 
nounced like German ch in ich. This would give chnobe. Moreover, 
Greeks were inclined to transform a foreign b combined with a vowel 
into a diphthong, as they did, for example, when they changed the 
Phoenician name of the angular harp, nabla y into naula. This would 
give chnoue. Thus, Eustathios’s word might have been a transcrip- 
tion of the Egyptian term snb or snobe. 

The word may have been derived from the same root as German 
schnauben, in Middle High German snuben , ‘to blow.’ 

THE LYRE of the New Kingdom had a shallow, square sound- 
box, two divergent and asymmetric arms, and an oblique crossbar. 
The strings were fastened to a holder on the front of the boxj the 




IOI 



Egypt 

upper ends o£ the strings were wound around the crossbar and could 
be shifted until the strings had the desired pitch. From the classic 
Greek and the modern Nubian and Abyssinian lyres, we can con- 
clude that the tuning was pentatonic, even when the number of 
strings was greater than five. In this case, the additional strings 
probably continued the pentatonic scale up and downwards. Higher 
numbers, such as ten and fourteen, are to be understood as dupli- 




cating the individual strings, as for instance in the modern Abyssinian 
lyre. The manner of playing, too, corresponded to the Greek and 
Nubian fashion. The right hand scratched with a plectron over all 
strings at once, while the fingers of the left hand, stretched against 
the strings, deadened those which were not wanted. Therefore, the 
lyre was held in the most convenient position for this kind of play- 
ing, that is, with the strings inclined away from the player. One 
example only of a lyre held upright is known from the New King- 
dom, and in this case both hands are plucking the strings without a 
plectron in the same manner as the psile kitharisis described in the 
Greek chapter, (pis. V b, VI a, fig. 32) 

After 1000 B.C., a new type of lyre came from Asia. It was small 
and symmetrically rectangular with parallel arms and a crossbar 
running at right angles to themj the player held the instrument 
upright in his arm. 



102 The History of Musical Instruments 

The lyre was never common in Egypt. The Egyptian language 
had no proper name for it, but called it by its Semitic name knirr , 
a word which appears on a papyrus of about 1300 B.C. As stated 
before, the hieroglyphic script omitted the vowels and wrote only 
the skeleton of a word in consonants. In this case, we assume that 
the first vowel was i; not only the Semitic forms of the word had 
it, as kinnor in Hebrew and kinnara in Arabic, but also the late 
Egyptian or Coptic form, ginera. 

THE LUTE came to Egypt along with the lyre and the small 
frame drum j it seems to have been played by women exclusively. 
The body was wooden and usually oval; a covering skin acted as 
soundboard. A long handle pierced the body lengthways (like a 
piece of meat pierced by a spit). But while in most non-Egyptian 




figure 33. Egyptian lute, 18th dynasty. 



lutes the handle protruded slightly at the lower end, in Egyptian 
lutes the handle ended within the body. Lacking the support it would 
have had if it protruded, it was held in place by wooden crosspieces 
inside the bodyj sometimes, to make it even firmer, it was stuck in 
and out through the skin once or twice. A round or triangular open- 
ing was cut into the skin to let through the strings fastened to the 
lower end of the handle. The opposite ends of the strings were 
wound around the top of the handle and held in place by thongs end- 
ing in tassels. Their average number was two j in rare instances there 
were three or even four. The right hand plucked them with a plec- 
tron, while the left hand stopped them by pressing them onto one 
of the many frets tied around the stick, (pi. V c, fig. 33) 

The Egyptian lute, with the handle ending inside the body, has 
survived in the Northwest of Africa. It first degenerated to a clumsy 
Negro instrument, used in Morocco and Senegambia and called 
gunbri in Sudanese. When the Arabs conquered Morocco in the 




Egypt 103 

latter part of the seventh century, they reduced the size of the in- 
strument and adapted the name correspondingly} a smaller, pear- 
shaped or ovoid or hemispherical body replaced the heavy, oblong, 
troughlike body, and the strings were attached to lateral pegs. The 
Negro instrument has preserved the name gunbri; the Arabian in- 
strument evolved from it is designated by the diminutive form 
gunibri. 

CASTANETS AND CYMBALS. The term castanets is here 
used in the narrower sense of clappers, the striking faces of which 
are hollowed out to give a fuller resonance. Egyptian castanets 
existed in two forms. The first one was shaped something like a very 
small wooden boot, cut in half lengthwise and grooved in the leg 
part, while the tapering foot part served as a handle. The second 
form was nearly the shape of modern Spanish castanuelas ; but it was 
less flat and looked like the chestnut, castana y for which it was named. 

Neither form was properly Egyptian. No art work figures them, 
and the specimens preserved came from Christian tombs. The best 
castanets were Greek} many Hellenic vases depict them in the hands 
of Dyonisian dancers. The chestnut castanet may have been Phoe- 
nician, since it was, and still is, used by dancers of Andalusia, the 
Balearic Islands and southern Italy, all of which were formerly 
Phoenician colonies. 

Cymbals must also have been imported from Greece, as the Coptic 
translation of the Bible had no native word to designate them and 
was forced to adopt the Greek word kymbala. 

Egyptian cymbals had a wide, flat brim and a large, flat boss in 
the middle which served as a resonance-chamber. They were prob- 
ably held upright and struck violently together by a horizontal 
movement of the player’s hands. So they may have corresponded to 
the Hebrew $el$le trua ( . 

The specimens preserved in museums, in the Metropolitan Mu- 
seum of Art in New York for instance, are of two different sizes: a 
larger one, from five to seven inches in diameter, and a smaller one, 
from two to three inches in diameter. The small cymbals may have 
been played like those antique cymbal-castanets which dancers play, 
castanetlike, between thumb and middlefinger up to this day. 

But it is also possible that they are remnants of cymbals on clappers. 
These strange implements, which are depicted on art works and 
several specimens of which have been preserved, are a combination 
of cymbals and a bamboo clapper. In Burma simple clappers still 




104 The History of Musical Instruments 

exist along with the improved cymbals on clappers. A piece of bam- 
boo is slit down the middle except for a short section serving as a 
handle j when shaken, the two halves slap against each other with 
a sharp click. The click is replaced by a tinkle, if a small cymbal is 
fastened inside of each half. The Egyptian instruments of the late 
Coptic epoch were identical with these Burmese cymbals on clappers. 

This picture of the instrumental development in one country dur- 
ing three thousand years is typical enough. A native origin can be 
attributed at most to two instruments out of twenty-six— the sistrum 
and the clarinet. And of these two the sistrum can be traced back to 
primitive prototypes. The rest have been adopted as the result of 
various Asiatic influences. About the year 1000 B.C. not one of the 
instruments of the Old and Middle Kingdoms has survived in the 
scenes of musical life that painters and sculptors depict. Again the 
established tradition has been lost in the press of foreign influences, 
the same tradition whose inspiration two thousand years before had 
come from foreign importation. The Greek and Roman, Indian and 
Chinese chapters will reveal the same process j the majority of the 
instruments have been borrowed from abroad. It is a feature of a 
high civilization that it is receptiye to foreign ideas and implements 
of all kinds, and vital enough to assimilate them. 




j . Israel 



THE NOMADIC EPOCH 
(ABOUT 2000-1000 B.C.) 

T HE Pentateuch makes little mention of music. This, how- 
ever, does not mean that music was unusual or that it was 
disdained. On the contrary, musical expression was uni- 
versal and consequently taken for granted. But, unlike Babylonia 
and Egypt, Israel did not know professional musicians or profes- 
sional dancers. Everyone practiced music; singing, playing and 
dancing were common achievements. After the exodus from Egypt 
and the crossing of the Red Sea, Moses himself struck up the holy 
tune to glorify the Lord, all his people joined the Leader’s voice, 
and Miriam, his sister, led the women in response. When Saul and 
David returned from the victorious battle against the Philistines, 
the women welcomed them with singing, dancing and playing. They 
still expressed joy and sorrow impulsively with all the means at the 
body’s command; their music still exulted and wailed ; coming from 
inspired hearts, it inspired the hearts of others. Music chased the 
demons from Saul’s soul when David played for him, and musical 
ecstasy took possession of the seers so that the spirit of God came 
upon them and made them prophesy. 

Artistic representations gave us a basis for investigating Meso- 
potamian and Egyptian instruments; assistance from philological 
sources was secondary. Our position is reversed when we study He- 
brew instruments. As the Bible was opposed to depicting men and 
objects of any kind, we have no reliefs or paintings to consult con- 
cerning the nature of the few instruments named in the Holy Script. 





io 6 The History of Musical Instruments 

Some lyres and oboes, represented on coins from the time of Bar 
Kokba’s revolt against Emperor Hadrian (i 32-1 35 A.D.), are too 
late to give any information about Biblical instruments. Etymology, 
and the few epithets given to the names of instruments in the Bible 
and the Talmud, are almost our only sources. 

THE UGAB is one of the two first instruments mentioned in the 
Bible. Jubal, Lamech’s son, so says Genesis 4: 21, was “the father of 
all such as handle the harp and organ.” The Hebrew text has the 
words kinnor and ‘ugab. This latter term is extremely rare; it occurs 
in two other books only, Job 2 1 : 12 and 30 : 3 1 , and the 1 50th Psalm. 
These belong in the most recent sections of the Old Testament, 
while the first one is among the earliest. 

In all these passages the word refers to an instrument contrasting 
with stringed instruments, but no detailed information is given. 
Etymology is not helpful either j at best, f ugdb may be related to 
*agdb y ‘was in love.’ If this is true, the interpretation ‘flute’ is in- 
dicated, as among wind instruments flutes were the most closely 
connected with love charm. 

Several translators have interpreted f ugdb as pan-pipes. This is 
certainly incorrect j the first evidences of pan-pipes in the Near East 
are almost two thousand years later than the epoch described in the 
Genesis. A further reason is linguistic. The Hebrew language had 
a more suitable word to express the clear sound of so small an in- 
strument — the verb mqd y ‘he whistled.’ The dark color of the word 
‘ ugab more probably reflects the hollow, oo-like timbre of a long, 
wide, vertical flute. This instrument, usually played by shepherds, 
must be supposed to have existed in Palestine, as it existed in Meso- 
potamia, Egypt and ancient Arabia. If originally *ugdb was a verti- 
cal flute, the term might have become a general one later on, just 
as the term ma't in Egyptian signified a vertical flute at first, and 
later all pipes, including oboes and clarinets. 

THE KINNOR was the other instrument connected with Jubal. 
The word had two plural forms: one masculine, kinnorim , and one 
feminine, kinnorot. Its etymology is unknown. 

The kinnor was the famous instrument on which, later on, King 
David excelled, and which for a thousand years has erroneously 
been called “King David’s harp.” The first translators were more 
careful. The word was interpreted as kithara on twenty out of forty- 
two references in the Septuaginta t the oldest Greek translation of 
the Bible, which was made by seventy-two scholars in Alexandria 




Israel 



107 

from the third to the first centuries B.C. j in seventeen more refer- 
ences it was interpreted by the kindred word kinyra. The Vulgate , 
St Jerome’s Latin version of about 400 A.D., has cither a in all 
thirty-seven cases. Thus, we conclude that the kinnor was a lyre of 
the kind that the Greeks called kithara. The last doubt is silenced 
by the fact that knnr designated the same lyre in Egypt. 

The Bible gives few details. It indicates that the material was 
wood, probably the ordinary cypress, though in the time of the kings 
exotic woods and precious metals were used as well as decorations of 
electron — that is, either a composition of gold and silver, or yellow 
amber. As to the shape, a quantity of coins, struck in Palestine be- 
tween 132 and 135 A.D., shows various forms of kitharas with 
curved outlines and horizontal crossbars j but, considering that they 
were made two thousand years after the times of the Genesis and 
twelve to thirteen hundred years after King David, we must be- 
ware of so late a source. A second reference, Abraham ben Meir ibn 
Ezra’s commentary on the Book of Daniel, is even more recent 
(twelfth century A.D.). Yet, his assertion that the kinnor had the 
shape of a candelabrum sounds particularly reliable. The old Jewish 
candelabrum, with its parallel branches arranged in a semicircle, 
can easily be compared with Cretan, Mycenian, Cyprian, Phoeni- 
cian and early Greek kitharas — that is, those lyres which chrono- 
logically and geographically come near to the Hebrew lyre. No 
doubt this small, rounded lyre was held in a slanting position, the 
upper end away from the player as all Syrian lyres of that time. 

The strings, minnim, singular men , were made of sheep gutj 
more exactly, they were made, according to a passage in the Tal- 
mudian tractate Qinnim , of the “sons” of sheep gut. The expres- 
sion hne f ‘sons,’ is used as a diminutive. It probably refers to those 
parts of the small intestine directly under the stomach, called chit- 
terlings, which are particularly thin in sheep. 

Broken strings on lyres used in the Temple were not supposed 
to be knotted in the sanctuary j when possible, they had to be 
loosened and shifted so that the longer end could be reattached 
either to the yoke or to the stringholder. According to Flavius 
Josephus, the Jewish historian and a general in the Roman Army 
(born in 37 A.D. at Jerusalem), they were plucked with a plectron, 
and their number was ten, as with the Ethiopian lyre baganna 
which will be discussed in the Greek chapter. They probably were 
tuned pentatonically without semitones through two octaves, like 
the strings of this instrument. 




108 The History of Musical Instruments 

The plectron indicates that the kinnor was an accompanying in- 
strument. This will be explained in detail in the next chapter. The 
fact is confirmed by I Chronicles 16: 42, where kinnor and nevel 
as kle sir, or ‘tools of singing,’ are contrasted to trumpets and cym- 
bals. This could also mean ‘melody instruments’ j but as II Chroni- 
cles 9:11, and I Kings 12 call the kinnor and the nevel instruments 
Isarim , ‘belonging to the singers,’ the significance, ‘instruments of 
accompaniment,’ cannot be doubted. 

Is it a contradiction when I Samuel 16:23 relates that young 
David reached for his kinnor to play before Saul “and played with 
his hand” ( wniggen vyado ) ? Mentioning the playing hand would 
be superfluous unless the fact had to be emphasized as something 
unusual, contrasting with the normal manner. The interpretation 
‘without a plectron’ is corroborated because, according to the pas- 
sage quoted, David did not sing. Such cases of harplike plucking 
without a plectron occurred in Egypt as well as in Greece, where 
this practice was called fsile kithdrisis , as opposed to the kitharodia , 
or plectron playing to accompany a song. 

The melodies that the kinnor played or accompanied were gay, 
and unsuited to sorrow j the Jews refused to play that instru- 
ment during the Babylonian Exile. They suspended their kin- 
norim on the willows j how should they “sing the Lord’s song 
in a strange land”? The kinnor was gay, and when the prophets 
admonished the people they threatened that the kinnor, symbol of 
joy and happiness, would be silenced unless the people desisted 
from sin. Instruments still were bound to well-defined occasions 
and moods. 

THE TOF. In Genesis 31 : 27, the Aramaean Laban reproaches 
his son-in-law, Jacob, for his flight with Rachel and Leahj had he 
known his intention to leave, he would have escorted him “away 
with mirth, and with songs,” with tufim and kinnorot. The form 
tutftm is the plural of a Hebrew word tof that corresponds to 
Arabic duff, and to Greek tyfanon. All these names belong to the 
old Semitic frame drum that we found in ancient Mesopotamia 
and Egypt, and that we shall find again in Greece and Rome. This 
drum was made of a wooden hoop and very probably two skins, 
without any jingling contrivance or sticks. In Palestine the heads 
were taken from the hides of horned animals, either rams or wild 
goats, according to a passage in the Talmudian tractate Qinnim III 
6. The frame drum was almost exclusively played by women, among 




Israel 



109 

the Jews as well as in the other countries where it was found. “And 
Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her 
hand; and all the women went out after her, with timbrels and with 
dances”; Jephthah’s unfortunate daughter “came out to meet him 
with timbrels and with dances,” and the Jewesses welcomed the 
conquerors after the victory over the Philistines “with tabrets.” 
Though drums were not mentioned by the Bible in wedding cere- 
monies, we can be sure that they were used at Jewish weddings, as 
they are today all over the Orient. “Publish the marriage and beat 
the drum,” Muhammad has said. It seems that a passage in the 
Talmud refers to such a use of the drum when it calls it, not toj f 
but erus (from ards, ‘to betroth’). If the lexicographers are right in 
identifying erus with tof, the drum referred to must have been 
rather large, as the women sometimes sat upon it when wailing. 

The same Talmudian tractate that speaks of the erus also men- 
tions an object called riiqatmon. This term has likewise been con- 
sidered a musical instrument, although it was not translated by any 
of the Talmudian translators. Its etymology is dnqifmin , a word 
which designates an artificial arm or leg. If this term does mean an 
instrument, it might refer to those typical Egyptian clappers of 
wood or ivory which were carved to form a human arm with the 
hand and which were exclusively played by women} or to the boot- 
shaped clappers of the Greeks. But this is nothing more than a 
suggestion. 

THE PA‘AMON was either a small bell or a jingle. The etymon 
obviously was the verb -pd* am , ‘struck.’ When God prescribed the 
garments which the high priest should wear, he ordered: 

And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of 
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and 
bells of gold between them round about: A golden bell and a pome- 
granate, upon the hem of the robe round about. And it shall be upon 
Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the 
holy place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that he die not. 

The meaning is obvious. Here, as everywhere, the bell is used 
as a defense against evil spirits. The demons like to frequent sanctu- 
aries and thresholds. Therefore, the high priest does not have to 
be protected when he is in the holy place, but when he goeth in 
and cometh out. 

Bells and jingles upon the hem were not found only in Israel. 
South American Indians, as well as Siberian shamans, wear them; 




no The History of Musical Instruments 

in the middle ages they adorned the fop; in Wolfram von Eschen- 
bach’s Parzivaly Segramors decked himself out with jingles, and in 
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries they were an almost indis- 
pensable accessory for elegant people. Finally, they are sewn on the 
fool’s motley at carnivals and in the morris dance. 

THE SHOFAR or keren } ‘horn,’ is a plain goat’s or ram’s horn 
without a mouthpiece. It is steamed until soft and then flattened 
and sharply bent (though neither the Bible nor the Talmud men- 
tion these details) and produces only two harmonics (the second 
and the third). It is the only ancient instrument preserved in the 
Jewish cult today. In orthodox communities it is blown at New 
Moon services, and in eastern Europe even in exorcising cere- 
monies, as many spectators have seen in Anski’s famous play 
Dyhbuk; and in all synagogues, liberal and orthodox, New Year’s 
and the Day of Atonement end with the violent, awe-inspiring 
blasts of the traditional shofar. 

There are four blasts: 

tqia (‘blast’), an apoggiatura on the tonic prefixed to a long blow 
on the fifth ; 

svarim (‘breaks’), a rapid alternation between tonic and fifth; 

trua (‘din’), a quavering blow on the tonic, ending on the fifth; 

tqta gdold (‘great blast’), with a longer sostenuto on the fifth, always 
played at the end. 

As for the relative metric lengths of these fanfares, the Tal- 
mudian tractate Rosh-hashana IV: 9 prescribes this proportion: 

I tqta — 3 trua = 9 svarim 

This rule, formulated at the latest in the Talmudian epoch — that is, 
in the first or second century B.C., but probably much earlier — has 
a striking resemblance to the so-called modus ferfectus of medieval 
musical theory, which arranged metric values in threes: 

I (notd) maxima — 3 longae — 9 breves 

In consequence, the scholastic theory interpreting this trisection as 
a Christian symbol of Trinity is incorrect. 

The same tractate, Rosh-hashana III: 2—6, gives a detailed de- 
scription of the shofar: 

All shofars are valid save that of a cow. . . . 

The shofar [blown in the Temple] at the New Year was [made 
from the horn] of the wild goat, straight, with its mouthpiece overlaid 




Israel 



in 



with gold. And at the sides [of them that blew the shofar] were two 
[that blew upon] trumpets. The shofar blew a long note and the trum- 
pets a short note since the duty of the day fell on the shofar. [The 
shofars] on days of fasting were rams* horns, rounded with their mouth- 
piece overlaid with silver. And between them were two [that blew upon] 
trumpets. The shofar blew a short note and the trumpets a long note, 
since the duty of the day fell on the trumpets. The Year of Jubilee is 
like to the New Year in the blowing of the shofar and in the Benedictions. 
Rabbi Judah says: “At the New Year they use rams* horns and at the 
Years of Jubilee wild goats’ horns.” A shofar that has been split and 
stuck together again is not valid. If the broken pieces of a shofar have been 
stuck together again it is not valid. If a hole had been made in it and it 
was stopped up again, if it hinders the blowing it is not valid, but if it 
does not, it is valid. 

The old ritual distinguished between two kinds of shofarim, one 
being made from the horn of the ibex, or wild goat, for New Moon 
ceremonies, and one from the horn of the ram for Fastdays, which 
never coincided with New Moon days. It was certainly more than 
a coincidence that the ibex horn was used for New Moon rites j 
zoologists describe it as “crescent-shaped.” It is interesting in this 
connection to cite a Burmese people, the Karen, who attribute 
eclipses of the moon to “the facts that wild goats are eating the 
luminary.” 

Thus, we find the shofar involved in magic beliefs and tasks. The 
origin of the ideas connected with this horn is very old. One of 
these ideas is its secret character $ in the synagogues the shofar is 
covered and must not be seen by the worshipers. No satisfactory 
reason for this has been given by liturgistsj they do not know that 
this is a remnant of the old taboo forbidding the sight of sacred 
implements, preserved among many primitive peoples. The Co- 
lombian Tuyuca, for example, hide the mouth parts of their ritual 
wooden trumpets in a brook, and Dutch peasants conceal the bark 
trumpets they use at winter solstice in a well from Christmas until 
the following Advent. A religious law in Israel says that, while 
men are obliged to listen to the voice of the shofar, women and 
children are exempted from this duty. Whoever is familiar with the 
rites connected with primitive trumpets cannot refrain from seeing 
in this indulgence a last remnant of the old taboo forbidding women 
and children all contact with the holy instruments. 

One single magic deed of the shofar is referred to in the Bible, 
and a very strong one. When Joshua, the Judge, besieged Jericho, 




1 12 The History of Musical Instruments 

seven priests with shofarim strode round the town for six days, 
followed by the Ark of the Covenant j on the seventh day they did 
so seven times, and as they blew and all the people joined in with 
shouts, “the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the 
city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.” Here, 
Hebrew legend meets with Greek mythology. Amphion, Niobe’s 
husband, son of Zeus and Antiope, reached for his lyre when he 
was about to found Thebes, and as he played the scattered stones 
gathered and built the wall by themselves. This is a fundamental 
idea behind all primitive and oriental music: sound governs matter. 

In connection with the shofar, the Talmudian tractate Rosh- 
hashana discusses the orthodoxy of blowing the trumpet in a pit, 
cistern or barrel. Even the nearly contemporary Talmudian com- 
ment Gmara was no longer able to understand this passage) the 
players, it supposed, stood in a pit or cistern. What the Talmud ac- 
tually means cannot be understood without a knowledge of primi- 
tive rituals. Negroes of Loango, for example, dip their trumpets 
into a barrel, New Hebridians into a hollow tree trunk or half a 
coconut shell filled with water, and Northwest Brazilians, as well as 
Singhalese, into pots. One idea may be to obtain the unnatural, 
terrifying sound which is an important requirement in magic rituals. 
But this is not all. As the Singhalese compare the pot in question to 
the earth, the hollow objects blown into must be regarded as magic 
cavities, such as were discussed in our first chapter. The trumpet 
dipped into a cavity is the combination of the male and the female 
principle) it is a forgotten fertilization charm. 

THE HASOSRA. “And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, 
Make thee two trumpets of silver) of a whole piece shalt thou 
make themj that thou mayest use them for the calling of the as- 
sembly, and for the journeying of the camps. . . . And if ye go 
to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye 
shall blow an alarm with the trumpets) and ye shall be remem- 
bered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your 
enemies. Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, 
and in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the 
trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of peace 
offerings) that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: 
I am the Lord your God” (Numbers io: 1-2, 9-10). 

This idea of drawing God’s attention towards his worshipers by 
a strong sound is primitive, and not in keeping with the uplifted 




Israel 



113 

Judaism of the Prophets as Elijah preached it. When on Mount 
Carmel the heathen priests cried to Baal, Elijah scoffed and shouted 
to them: “Cry aloud: for he is a godj either he is talking, or he is 
pursuing, or he is in a journey, or per adventure he sleepeth, and 
must be awaked” (I Kings 18: 27). 

Yet, popular thought clung to this naive conception. As late as 
the middle as the second century B.C., when Judas Maccabaeus 
revolted against the Syrian kings, the Israelites prayed to the Lord: 
“How shall we be able to stand against them, except thou, O God, 
be our help? Then sounded they with trumpets, and cried with a 
loud voice.” And again, after the first victory, they came to Jeru- 
salem, and finding the Temple deserted, they “fell down flat to 
the ground upon their faces, and blew an alarm with the trumpets, 
and cried towards heaven.” 

This strange habit had a striking parallel in Egyptian rites. On 
a painted coffin from the last Roman epoch of Egyptian antiquity, 
a worshiper is depicted blowing a trumpet before, one rather 
should say up to, Osiris, and this is done with the same purpose. 

The outer shape of the Hebrew trumpet also corresponded to 
the Egyptian trumpet. Flavius Josephus has described the hasosra 
as a straight tube, “a little less than a cubit long” and ending in a 
bell. And when, in 70 A.D., the Romans erected an arch for Em- 
peror Titus after his conquest of Jerusalem, they depicted on it his 
triumphal return to Rome with the holy objects robbed from the 
Temple, and among them a trumpet which corresponded exactly 
to the description of Josephus and also to the many trumpets on 
Egyptian reliefs and paintings. 

The gemination of the Jewish trumpets, on the other hand, was 
probably non-Egyptian. God’s commandment was: “Make thee 
two trumpets.” Though non-Egyptian, this duality was by no means 
confined to Palestine. Curved, metal trumpets of the Nordic bronze 
ages, the so-called lurer y were almost always found in pairs j twin 
metal trumpets in ancient Afghanistan were played simultaneously, 
as they are still in modern India and Tibet j and the same is true 
with the wooden trumpets of Lithuania, Rumania and Chile. Musi- 
cological dilettanti dream that the two Nordic lurer played two 
parts. This is nonsense j twin trumpets are deeply rooted in old 
ideas of symmetry and pair formation. The two trumpets must have 
been played either simultaneously or alternately, and, in this latter 
case, either on the same or on a different note. Both these customs 
are preserved in modern India. 




1 14 The History of Musical Instruments 

THE TIME OF THE KINGS 
(first MILLENNIUM B.C.) 

The critical years for the cultural life of Israel came in the 
eleventh century B.C., when the old patriarchal system was re- 
placed by a kingdom after the model of the surrounding countries. 
Israel wanted the monarchical government of her neighbors, and 
when she was established as a kingdom with a court she was even 
more open to their influences. The influx of foreign ideas came to 
its peak under Solomon who “loved many strange women, together 
with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, 
Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites.” 

The musical scene was completely altered. Israel developed a 
musical organization and professional musicians. Both David and 
Solomon supported court musicians, and David, a musician himself, 
founded the first official body of musicians for the temple that he 
was to build. The head of the Levites was bidden to send musicians 
to sing and play before the Ark of the Covenant when it was car- 
ried up to Jerusalem, and he chose Asaph, Heman and Ethan as 
cymbalists, eight other Levites to play the nevel, and six the lyre; 
seven priests were to trumpet before the altar. The head himself, 
Chenaniah, trained them in singing, as playing and singing always 
accompanied each other. 

The great days of ritual music came when David had surrendered 
the royal dignity to his son Solomon. No less than four thousand 
out of thirty-eight thousand Levites were selected students of an 
actual academy of religious music. They were divided into twenty- 
four groups, each group being taught by twelve masters. On the 
day of consecration 

the singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons 
and their brethren, being arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and 
psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them a 
hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets: It came even to pass, 
as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard 
in praising the Lord ; and when they lifted up their voice with the trum- 
pets, and cymbals, and instruments of musick, and praised the Lord, say- 
ing: For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house 
was filled with a cloud, even the house of the Lord; So that the priests 
could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the 
Lord had filled the house of God” (II Chronicles 5 : 12—14). 




Israel 



US 

Nevel and cymbals, mentioned in the description of the Temple, 
were entirely new; like some other instruments, they had not been 
mentioned in the holy books before the days of the kings, and may 
belong to those “pagan” objects imported when the first kings es- 
tablished their courts. To what a large measure music was exposed 
to influences from abroad appears in a passage from the Talmudian 
tractate Shabbat 56 b, which says that the Pharaoh’s daughter, whom 
King Solomon took for wife, carried with her elej mine y ‘a thousand 
kinds,’ of Egyptian musical instruments. 

After the Egyptian, the Phoenician civilization probably con- 
tributed more than any other. For, when the First Temple was to 
be built, King Solomon made a contract with the king of Tyre in 
Phoenicia for Phoenician woodworking craftsmen, and he sent for 
a noted master in that town, Hiram, to make all the metal work 
for the sanctuary. Two instruments at least were probably imported 
from there: the double oboes, which later on were called ‘Phoeni- 
cian pipes’ by the Romans, and the nevel , which certainly was iden- 
tical with the instrument that the Greeks called the “Phoenician” 
nabla. 

THE NEVEL, plural nvaltm, was a stringed instrument; but 
of what kind? A harp, a zither, a lyre, a lute? The lute, two- or 
three-stringed in all the ancient civilizations, must be excluded. For 
the historian Flavius Josephus (born 37 A.D. in Jerusalem) relates 
that it had twelve strings plucked with the bare fingers. That it was 
plucked is confirmed by the prophet Amos (6:5) who, with nevel y 
uses the verb fdrd ( y ‘to pluck fruit.’ Thus, the possible alternatives 
are a zither, a lyre and a harp. 

Etymology does not help much ; nevel designates an inflated and 
somewhat shapeless object such as a leather bag, and is related to 
English nebulous. 

We then consult the Septuaginta to see how the seventy-two 
Greek interpreters have expounded the enigmatic word. Instead of 
one Greek equivalent the Septuaginta present three different terms 
in the various passages in which nevel occurs: fourteen times nabla y 
eight times fsalterion y once kithara. The Vulgate, on the other hand, 
has fsalterium seventeen times. The word nabla does not tell us 
anything as it is a Greek form of nevel y or its Phoenician equivalent 
(for, according to Athenaeus, the nabla had come from Phoenicia) ; 
therefore, the terms fsalterion and fsalterium are in the majority, 




n6 The History of Musical Instruments 

and they point to the harp. Moreover, the identity of the terms is 
confirmed by two later authorities. The Byzantine Suidas stated in 
the ninth century A.D. that fsalterion and nabla were one and the 
same instrument, and the Jew Saadia said in his commentary on the 
Book of Daniel, in the twelfth century A.D., that the Aramaean 
fsantrin was a nevel. 

Both the Greek word 'psalterion and its Latin equivalent designate 
the vertical angular harp (cf. page 81), and the Church Fathers, 
among them St. Jerome who is responsible for the Vulgate and 
consequently for the translation 'psalterium, define the instrument 
called by this name as having “the body above”: fsalterium lignum 
illud concavum unde sonus redditur su'perius habet — that is, the 
instrument was held so that the body was above the horizontal stick. 
This is indeed the specific feature of a vertical angular harp. This 
body, rising above the stringholder, is rounded and completely 
covered with a skin. So it is reminiscent of an oriental skin bottle like 
the one called nevel in Hebrew. And Rabbi Joseph was right when 
he associated the name of the harp with the shape of the skin bottle. 

A further detail can be drawn from a passage in the Talmudian 
tractate Qinnim III: 6 . The strings of the nevel, so it reads, were 
made of the [thicker] intestines of a sheep, while the kinnor was 
provided by the chitterlings. Moreover, the tractate Arachin II: 6 
says that the nevel was louder than the kinnor. Thus, it must have 
been larger and lower in pitch. 

If so, then a strange passage in I Chronicles 15 : 20 f. has certainly 
been misunderstood. It runs: 

And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel and Unni, 
and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries on alamoth; And 
Mattithiah, and Eliphaleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel, and 
Azzaziah, with harps on the sheminith to excel. 

In this passage ‘psalteries* should have been translated as ‘harps/ 
and ‘harps* as ‘lyres/ the original Hebrew words having been 
nvaltm ‘al-alamot and kinnorim ‘ al-hasminit . The usual interpreta- 
tion is guided by the verbal meaning of the two epithets, ‘alma being 
‘maiden/ and hasminit ‘the eighth.* The maidenlike nevel has been 
interpreted as a treble instrument, and the ‘eighth* kinnor as a lyre 
that was pitched eight notes or an octave lower than the nevel. This 
translation is arbitrary and erroneous. The two epithets do not be- 
long in the same category and cannot be interpreted as comparing 
the pitch of the two instruments. If the higher octave was expressed 




Israel 



117 

by the idea 'maidens/ one should expect, for the lower octave, 'men* 
or 'youths’ in the same way that the Greeks distinguished between 
auloi farthenikoiy faidikot and andreiot. If the word i almd is really 
concerned, it would be wiser to think of the significance that the 
same word, in the form ( alma y has in Arabic: an educated, singing- 
and playing-girl. 

The second epithet implies that the ancient Jews had the concep- 
tion of octaves, and particularly of octaves consisting of eight dia- 
tonic notes. But this is by no means proved, and quite improbable. 
Finally, if the nevel was a harp and had longer strings than the lyre 
kinnor, the pitch relation between them ought to have been the 
reverse, with the kinnor higher and the nevel lower. 

On the other hand, both epithets, without being connected with 
the name of an instrument, occur, one at a time, in the headlines of 
the Psalms, which will be discussed in a special section of this chapter. 

Dr. Erich Werner suggested, in a letter to the author, the As- 
syrian fyalimUy 'wooden/ as a possible etymology of < alamot i and re- 
ferred to the Greek name of a small pipe elymos , which is phoneti- 
cally related. The epithet hasmiriit remains a mystery. 

ASOR. The word means ten j no translator, from the earliest to 
the most recent times, has doubted that in the three Psalms 33 : 2, 
92 : 3, 144: 9, it designates some instrument with ten strings. A more 
detailed interpretation is rendered difficult by the uncertain position 
and connection of the word in the three passages. In the first and 
the third it follows the term nevel without any conjunction: “Sing 
unto him with the nevel asor.” Most translators consequently have 
taken asor for an adjective accompanying nevel and read the two 
words as 'ten-stringed nevel.’ But this interpretation is contradicted 
by the second passage, in the 92nd Psalm, which runs i ale-asor 
wa^le-nevel. This is unmistakably 'on the asor and on the nevel.’ 
Thus asor and nevel were different instruments, and the Authorized 
Version is correct in interpolating an and in the 33rd and 144th 
Psalms: “Sing unto him with the psaltery and an instrument of ten 
strings.” 

The asor was a separate instrument and probably neither a lyre 
nor a harp, as its name is mentioned with the nevel in the 33rd and 
144th Psalms, and with both nevel and kinnor, in the 92nd Psalm. 
There is but one possible family of stringed instrument left that 
could be furnished with ten strings: zithers. 

Zithers did not exist either in Egypt or in Assyria, the two great 




1 1 8 The History of Musical Instruments 

monarchies of the Near East. But Israel’s most civilized neighbors, 
the Phoenicians, used a strange type of zither. Two specimens of 
this instrument are carved on a beautiful ivory pyxis of the eighth 
century B.C. in the British Museum, no. 118179, which came from 
the Southeast Palace at Nimrud in Assyria, and was taken for As- 
syrian until recently when its Phoenician origin was recognized. On 
this relief the backs of the two zithers cannot be seen, and it is im- 
possible to determine whether they are flat or bulgy. The front, on 
the contrary, is distinct j it consists of a small rectangular frame 
with strings across and running parallel to the smaller sides. The 
position is upright in the player’s hand, and the female musicians 




figure 34. Psalterium decacordum. (After 
Jerome’s letter to Dardanus, reprod. 15 1 1 by 
Virdung.) 

play with the bare fingers. The main point is the number of strings: 
probably ten on one zither, and clearly ten on the other one. 

The asor might have been such a Phoenician zither. 

This interpretation is confirmed by the strange, illustrated letter, 
attributed to St. Jerome and addressed to Dardanus. Under the 
title 'psalterium decachordum ) the artist depicts a rectangular zither, 
exactly the shape of the Phoenician zither, and the writer explains: 
“It has ten strings, as it is written: I shall praise you on the ten- 
stringed psaltery,” and he adds: “ forma quadrata ” expounding, in 
the kind of symbolism so dear to the Church Fathers, that the ten 
strings meant the ten commandments, and the four sides the Gos- 
pels. (fig. 34) 

HALIL AND ABUB. Though the Bible does not mention these 
names before the time of the kings, a rabbinic tradition traces them 
back to Moses (about 1250 B.C.). The story reads: 

There was a pipe of cane in the Temple, well made and polished, and 
it came from the days of Moses. The king ordered it to be covered with 




Israel 



119 

gold, but it lost its soft timbre. The cover then was removed, and the 
sound was soft again. 

Covering or lining with metal foil was not unusual in antiquity. 
The Talmudian tractate Kelim XI: 6 mentions hdlilim both of solid 
metal and covered with metal. Such pipes existed in other civiliza- 
tions as well. About twenty years ago the author was given a very 
old and rare Peruvian flute by the collector, Dr. Gaffron; it was 
made of cane and had a silver lining. 

Other passages in the Talmud confirm the preference given to 
pipes of cane. The tractate Arachin says expressly that one did not 
play on metal pipes; cane pipes were favored because their sound 
was more pleasant ( < arev ). And the Gmara adds: “the pipe is called 
balil because its sound is sweet (frdla)” 

This supposed etymology was incorrect; fyaltl came from a verb 
baldly ‘pierced/ and is identical with Akkadian halilu. The Tal- 
mudian tractates use hdltl as well as a second term which never 
occurs in the Bible, abub or m?abuba y and Rabbi Papa emphasizes 
in the Gmara of Arachin that both names mean exactly the same 
instrument. The term abub y likewise derived from a verb ‘pierced/ 
that is bored, and related to Akkadian imbubu } was a Syriac word 
which later on was latinized ; the ambubaiae y mentioned by Horace 
and Suetonius, were Syrian girls of ill fame who resided in the base- 
ment of the Roman circus and earned their living by pipe playing 
and a less honorable trade. Thus, it is more than probable that the 
Jews got their pipes from Syria. 

These pipes are called ‘flutes’ by the modern translators of the 
Bible. But in 1000 B.C. no artist, whether Babylonian, Assyrian, 
Iranian, Phoenician, Hittite, Egyptian, Greek or Etruscan, ever de- 
picted a flute. All over the ancient world pipers used the double 
oboe. Jewish pipes must also have been oboes, particularly as hdlil 
is translated by the Septuaginta exclusively as aul 6 s y and by the 
Vulgate as tibia (terms associated with the oboe). 

Their use, too, corresponded to that of double oboes in other 
countries of the ancient world. They were played at joyous festivi- 
ties as well as mourning ceremonies. When Christ entered Jairus’s 
home to restore to life his apparently dead daughter, he found the 
funeral pipers in action, and the Talmudian tractate Ktubot IV : 4 
asserts that in Israel even the poorest men hired at least two kdliltm 
for the funerals of their wives. 

No pipes were used in the First Temple, which was destroyed in 




120 The History of Musical Instruments 

586 B.C. The Second Temple, on the contrary, which was estab- 
lished after the Babylonian Exile at the end of the sixth century 
B.C., used no less than two and no more than twelve of them. They 
were heard twelve times a year: at the first and second Passover 
sacrifice, on the first Passover day, at Shvuot and in the eight days 
of the Tabernacles. The Talmudian tractate Arachin II: 3 adds that 
the final cadence came from one pipe only, “to make it more agreea- 
ble.” This passage definitely proves that the instrument was a double 
oboe, as it speaks clearly of “the pipe” played before the altar, while 
the cadence was blown by “one pipe only” — that is, by one cane of 
a double oboe. It is difficult to decide for which of several reasons 
the two canes played together were less agreeable. Perhaps they 
were played unisono y thus causing unpleasant pulsations when not 
tuned or blown with perfect exactness \ or they might have played 
separate parts, possibly and even probably in the manner of a drone, 
as was customary in ancient civilizations. 

The description of Jewish pipe blowing would not be complete 
without mentioning its power to induce a state of trance. The apoc- 
ryphal acts of the apostles relate that one day a Jewess played the 
pipes behind St. Thomas for an hour before he got into an ecstasy, 
and none could understand the words he then spoke except the piper. 

In these later times, the cylindrical, cane form of the oboe, which 
we have to picture as resembling the oboes of Mesopotamia and 
Egypt, must have been replaced by a conical model. Among the 
Jewish coins stamped during Bar Kokba’s revolt against Emperor 
Hadrian (132-135 A.D.), some show pairs of wind instruments. 
Numismaticians call them trumpets, or even trombones j but this is 
incorrect. The stout shape, the reedlike top, the disk that supports 
the lips, and the bell are all features of the modern Arabian oboe 
zamr and its relatives. Consequently, this oboe existed in Jewish 
Palestine at the beginning of the second century A.D. This state- 
ment is confirmed by an Arabian book of the seventh century A.D., 
the Kitab alganl y which refers to the mizmdr or zamr and the duff 
as the martial instruments of the Jewish tribes of Al-Hijaz. 

The tractate Kelim XI : 6 mentions an instrument simfunid in the 
same sentence as kalil. Some of the translators interpret it as a 
double flute, and some as a bagpipe. Nothing is certain about the 
name except its origin from Greek symfhoneia. This etymology, 
however, does not advance our knowledge. For the Greek word 
did not mean an instrument, as we explained on page 84. The 
Talmudian simfunid is characterized as eventually having knafayim. 




Israel 



121 



The term kdndf means a wing or a similar appendage, as a leg or an 
arm; the ending indicates duality. This is an obscure epithet, and 
we have to postpone its discussion for the time being. 

As to the interpretation as bagpipes , such an instrument never 
existed in Israel. The term simpunid or sumponid in the tractate 
Kelim XI : 6 owes this translation to a commentator on the Book 
of Daniel, Saadia, who lived in the twelfth century A.D. and there- 
fore cannot be quoted as a reliable authority. If sumponid was a 
bagpipe, why does the same tractate mention the same instrument 
under a different name a few chapters later? For, the term hemat 
fydlilim in Kelim XX: 2 is likewise interpreted as bagpipe, and even 
with a better reason, as the two words mean ‘bag of pipes.’ Yet, it 
is hard to believe that the author of this tractate, which lists all 
kinds of objects as being either pure or impure, would have listed 
the bagpipe or, rather, one sort of bagpipe, not with other musical 
instruments, but with mortars and troughs. Moreover, should not a 
bagpipe rather have been called halil hemet , that is ‘bagpipe,’ not 
‘pipebag’? If baltl means a musical pipe in that passage, it would be 
more correct to think of a bag to keep and carry the pipes in, such as 
is often depicted on Greek vases. 

THE MNAANIM are mentioned in one passage only; the 
Second Book of Samuel describes how the Ark of the Covenant was 
carried up to Jerusalem, and David, with all the house of Israel, 
played before it on stringed instruments, drums, cymbals and mna e - 
an'im. Since this term came from the verb nua'y ‘shook,’ the name 
might have applied to a rattling vessel. Such a rattle, dating from 
about IOOO B.C., was excavated at Tell bet-Mirsun near Hebron, 
and later rattles of clay were found in various places of Palestine. 
But these rattles were children’s toys rather than ceremonial im- 
plements. 

Some scholars have interpreted mna'an'im as ‘sistra,’ since this 
word likewise means a ‘shaken’ instrument. The author disagreed 
with them in an earlier publication, alleging that the sistrum was 
too closely related with the worship of Hathor and Isis to find a 
place in the Jewish ritual. This objection can no longer be main- 
tained. In the last years excavations from Sumerian cemeteries have 
proved that sistra existed entirely unconnected with cults of Isis. 
Thus, the mna‘an‘im might have been sistra. 

SELSLIM AND MSILTAYIM. The interpretation of the two 
terms mfiltdyim and felfltm (Talmudian fldfdl) is not difficult. 




122 The History of Musical Instruments 

Both go back to a verb salal , ‘clash’; the dual ending of one of them, 
-ayim, hints of a two-parted object; kindred terms in other oriental 
languages, as zil in Arabic and Turkish, salafil in Arabic and sil-sil 
in Tibetan, signify ‘cymbals’; finally, the seventy-two Septuaginta 
translated both Hebrew terms by the Greek kymbala. Thus the 
interpretation ‘cymbals’ can be considered correct. 

The Bible mentions two different kinds of felflim: $el$le sama ‘ 
and $el{le trua* (the Hebrew plural ending -im changing into e 
when the word is followed by an attribute). The adjective sama ‘ 
means ‘clear,’ and as with the shofar, ‘harsh,’ ‘noisy.’ The 

distinction indicated by these attributes is by no means restricted to 
Jewish cymbals. The Tibetans, for example, use two kinds of cym- 
bals; one kind, broad-rimmed with small central bosses, are held in 
a horizontal position and softly struck in a vertical movement to 
worship the divinities of heaven; the other kind, narrow-rimmed 
with large bosses, are held in a vertical position and vigorously struck 
in a horizontal movement to worship the divinities of earth. This 
distinction seems general throughout Asia in both past and present 
times. The reliefs on the Hindu- Javanese temple at Borobudur in 
Java, carved about 800 A.D., make a clear difference between the 
same two forms of cymbals and manners of playing. Both types are 
found even in medieval Europe. The vigorously struck vertical 
cymbals are represented in a Spanish apocalypse from 1085 A.D. 
in the Biblioteca Nacional in Madrid and in a Mantuan manuscript 
of the eleventh century, while the Florentine sculptor, Luca della 
Robbia (about 1430), figured a whole group of angels with hori- 
zontal, softly played cymbals on the singers’ estrade of the cathedral 
in Florence. Was it accidental that he gave the cymbals of ‘heaven’ 
to angels? 

The Bible furnishes no further details on cymbals. They are re- 
ferred to in the Talmudian tractate Arachin: “In the Temple there 
was a cymbal of metal having a soft sound. As it was damaged, the 
sages sent for craftsmen in Alexandria; but after the repair the soft 
timbre had gone. They restored the previous state, and the sound 
was soft again.” 

To conclude from this passage that the Jews had got their cym- 
bals from Egypt would be erroneous; while cymbals were used in 
Israel as early as about 1100 B.C., the first evidence of cymbals in 
Egypt dates only from the beginning of our era — that is, more than 
a thousand years later. 

The name mfiltayim probably does not mean two-handed cymbals. 




Israel 



123 

As has been described in the foregoing chapter, small cymbals in 
one hand occurred in two forms: either attached to the thumb and 
middlefinger of dancers and played in the manner of castanets, or 
fastened inside the prongs of a flexible split cane, as cymbals on 
clampers. The tiny castanet-cymbals, known as $anug in modern 
Egypt, can easily be eliminated because msiltayim are nowhere 
mentioned as an instrument of dancers, but always connected with 
ritual. To be sure, the Arabic version of the Bible has the word 
fanugy but not as a translation of msiltayim. In spite of its Arabic 
meaning, it stands for felsettm — that is, for cymbals which, accord- 
ing to the historian Flavius Josephus, were megala , ‘wide.’ 

The interpretation ‘cymbals on clappers,’ on the contrary, is backed 
by the fact that the word msiltayim appears in the dual form while 
felfltm is written in the simple plural form. It would be logical, 
then, to suppose a stronger gemination of the two parts in the 
msiltaytm ■. 

Nevertheless, as the two terms are etymologically similar and 
never occur together in the same text, it is possible that they desig- 
nate the very same instrument. 

SHALISHIM are mentioned in only one verse of the Bible, 
I Samuel 18:6, when the women of Israel welcome King Saul after 
the glorious battle against the Philistines. This word has been the 
most disputed musical term of the Hebrew language j as salistm is 
clearly connected with Hosa f ‘three,’ and salos t ‘thrice,’ translators 
of the Bible suggested now triangles, now triangular harps, three- 
stringed lutes and even fiddles. None of these translations can be 
accepted. 

The verse reads: “And it came to pass as they came, when David 
was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women 
came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king 
Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of musick [uvsa- 
listm ] The reader will realize that the Holy Script separates the 
precarious word from the one musical instrument mentioned in the 
same verse, vtupim , “with tabrets.” Poets and chroniclers never 
separate coherent notions j so the term cannot mean an instrument. 
Also the Talmud does not mention it. 

Possibly the word indicates some form of dance, as dance names 
composed with ‘three’ are not unusual, such as the Roman tri-pudium 
of the priests of Mars, the old German Treialtrei and the Austrian 
Dreysteyrer. 




124 77 f<? History of Musical Instruments 

MAGREPHA was the Hebrew name given to the Greco-Egyp- 
tian water organ, hydraulos. This earliest organ will be discussed in 
full in the Greek chapter j the Hebrew chapter is only concerned 
with its problematical existence in Israel. 

Using adaptations of the Greek term hardults y or ardablis y the 
Talmudian tractates Arachin and Tamid describe it as having ten 
holes (probably what we call grooves), each producing ten (accord- 
ing to the tractate Sukka> one hundred) notes so that the organ was 
capable of producing one hundred or, according to Sukka } one thou- 
sand notes. Its height and its width were an amma each, that is, an ell 
of twenty inches. The tractates say nothing about the pipes, the slider 
action or the hydraulic pressure. 

Modern writers have doubted this description and even the ex- 
istence of the organ itself in Israel. The theologian, Johann Weiss, 
for example, calls the number of notes “ridiculous” and says, this 
information is a “Talmudian childishness.” Still, other organs of 
antiquity had as many as eighteen keys or sliders and tot acies tibi- 
arum y ‘as many rows of pipes’ belonging to each, as the Church 
Father Tertullianus says in De anima y chapter 14; the medieval 
author called Bern Anonymus, who drew his statements from an- 
tique sources, replaced tot by aut V aut X y ‘either five or ten’j and 
again, Wolstan in his Vita S. Swithuni indicated ten rows or stops. 

The only question is whether the Temple had an organ or not. 
The old comment on the Talmud relates: Rabbi Shimon ben Gam- 
liel said that no hir dolts was in the Temple j on the contrary, Rabbi 
Rabba ben Shila said, in the names of Rabbi Mathna and Rabbi 
Shmuel, there was a magrefha in the Temple. Who was right? 
Rabbi Shimon lived in the second century A.D., while Rabbi Rabba 
was two centuries later, though this authority, Rabbi Shmuel, had 
lived about the year 200 A.D. Rabbi Shimon, as the oldest of them, 
is perhaps the most reliable. On the other hand his information is 
meager, and it may be that the foreign term confused him. Thus, 
it would be risky to make a decision. Besides, the question has but 
little importance, as so recent an instrument as the organ cannot 
have been used except for the last period of the Third Temple at 
the end of Israel’s national existence. 

THE HEADINGS OF THE PSALMS. We have purposely 
omitted several terms which frequently have been claimed to be 
names of musical instruments, such as nginot, git tit , sosanim. These 
terms, among others, occur in the headings of a great number of 




Israel 



125 

Psalms. A frequent example of such a heading is lamnaseafr binginot 
mizmor Idawid. 

There can be no doubt of the meaning of mizmor Idazvtd; the 
latter word means ‘belonging to David/ while mizmor is a kind of 
poem. The word lamnaseah> used in as many as fifty-four Psalm 
headings, has often been translated “to the chief musician” or “to 
the conductor”} the correct meaning is ‘to be performed.’ It is more 
difficult to understand those words which explain the manner of 
performing. To begin with, ngtna was, and is, generally conceived 
as a ‘stringed instrument’} so, lamna$eab binginot would mean ‘to 
be performed on stringed instruments,’ and binginot al-hasminit J 
‘on the eight-stringed instruments.’ Consequently, some scholars 
took the headings of the Psalms for indications concerning the 
instruments on which the various Psalms were to be accompanied. 
Even as late as 1921, an English author, Dr. Langdon, emphasized 
that the Hebrews “classified their psalms and liturgical services 
chiefly by the names of the instruments employed in accompani- 
ments.” 

This is an error. Certainly, allotting well-determined tasks to 
musical instruments is very frequent in oriental civilizations. But it 
would be unparalleled to assign different instruments to the various 
poems of a homogeneous collection of religious poetry. Besides, 
were the Psalms accompanied at all, or at least intended to be ac- 
companied? If so, why not by a kinnor or a nevel, a fialil or a tof? 
Though some of these instruments are referred to in the text of the 
psalms, not one is mentioned in a heading} the so-called “classifica- 
tion by the names of the instruments employed” actually omits all 
known names of instruments! 

In their place, the headings name a series of the strangest terms: 
nginot (Psalms 4, 54, 55, 61, 67, 7 6), nhilot (5), nginot ha-sminit 
(6, 12), gitttt (8, 81, 84), mut-leben (9), sosanim (45, 69), i alamot 
(46), ayelit-hasafrar (22), idutun (39, 62, 77), mahalat (53, 88), 
yonat illem rfraqim (56), sosan-edut (60, 80). 

Except for the term nginot } which will be discussed afterwards, 
these words mean: heritages, eighth, wine press or from the town 
Gat, die-white, lilies, maidens, hind of the dawn, confessors, diseases, 
mute dove far off, lily-testimony. This series is unintelligible at first 
sight} but at any rate it is not a “classification by instruments.” 

Is not even ngina a ‘stringed instrument’? The word belongs to 
the verb naga ( , ‘strike.’ An intermediate verb, nagan } a form used in 
connection with strings, reminds us of the old German expression 




126 The History of Musical Instruments 

die haute ( Harfe, Zither) schlagen , ‘to strike the lute (harp, 
zither).’ It is the connection with strings that caused philologists to 
translate ngind by ‘stringed instrument.’ Yet, this was not correct, 
as no passage in which the word occurs supports this interpretation. 
In some passages, Psalm 69: 13, Job 39: 9, Lamentations 3: 14, the 
word is apparently used as meaning a satirical song, and some dic- 
tionaries have gone to the trouble of discovering that by the process 
of “synecdotic specialization” this meaning could be a derivation of 
the original meaning ‘stringed instrument’! 

It would be more sensible to compare the Hebrew group of words 
with a corresponding group in Greek. There, krud means ‘strike’ 
and especially ‘strike strings,’ just as ndga ‘ and nagan in Hebrew j 
however, its noun, kruma, does not signify any instrument, but a 
certain melody — that is, ‘a thing struck.’ And this is exactly the sig- 
nificance of the post-Biblical noun related to naga*, the well-known 
nigun or ‘melodic pattern.’ N gind may be the older form of nigun. 

Oriental music has always been, and still is, composed in well- 
defined designs or melodic patterns. These melodic patterns might 
be compared to the three Greek orders or styles in architecture, the 
composition of which had detailed rules with which the artist was 
compelled to comply, and only within these specifications could he 
follow his personal interpretation. In music, melodies using the 
same scale, and related to each other by their general mood, belong 
to one melodic pattern. Such patterns are familiar in Arabian and 
in Hindu music, where in later times they were called maqamat and 
ragas. 

The list of Arabian maqamat has a striking resemblance to the 
Hebrew headings in the Psalms printed above. If gittit is a ngind 
described by the geographical epithet ‘from Gat,’ the Arabs also 
have geographical maqamat, such as isfahan, nahawand , rehaw, 
which are the names of places. Ordinal numbers, like ‘the eighth’ 
of the Hebrew series, occur in the Arabian maqamat as well: siga, 
‘the third,’ f asiran, ‘the tenth.’ For general terms, such as the He- 
brew ‘heritages,’ or ‘wine press,’ the maqamat have titles such as 
mahur, ‘jumping,’ or < usaq, ‘passion’ j and for the ‘hind of the dawn,’ 
they have ‘the chaste love of the doe.’ Curious, and apparently mean- 
ingless, combinations, such as ‘die-white,’ are matched by similar 
hyphenations in Arabic, as higdz-kar, bayat-suri, rast-sanbar, which 
signify a combination of two maqamat. 

Since maqamat and ragas belong to certain moods, we can test 
our interpretation by seeing if those Psalms which have similar 




Israel 



127 

headings have the same mood as well. The material is rather limited 
for such an investigation, but encouraging as far as it goes. If we 
confine ourselves to examining those groups which consist of at 
least three Psalms, we find that the eight nginot Psalms are prayers 
for escape, based on confidence in God and his power and magnifi- 
cence: “Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness” . . . 
“O Jehovah, rebuke me not in thine anger” . . . “Help, Jehovah” 
. . . “Save me, O God” . . . “Give ear to my prayer” . . . “Hear 
my cry” . . . “God be merciful unto us” ... The three gittit 
Psalms, on the contrary, are gay and filled with thankful joy: “O 
Jehovah, our Lord, How excellent is thy name in all the earth” 
. . . “Sing aloud unto God our strength” . . . “How amiable are 
thy tabernacles” . . . Two of the three idutun Psalms are in a 
mood of resignation: “I said, I will take heed to my ways” . . . 
“My soul waiteth in silence for God only” . . . 

The problem of the words ‘to be performed . . .’ seems to be 
solved except for the term nginot. If ngind is the Hebrew name 
for maqama or any similar idea, not for one particular maqama, then 
the expression ‘to be performed in nginot* needs some further ex- 
planation that we are not able to give. It is mere guesswork to sug- 
gest that the word in question might have meant both ‘maqama’ 
in general as well as a certain kind of maqama. 




6 . Greece , Rome 
and Etruria 



A RCHITECTURE and sculpture were native arts of the 
/\ Greeks. To be sure, early Greek artists borrowed technique, 
X JL style and ideas from the older Mediterranean nations. But 
out of this heritage they made the classical canon which determined 
the destiny of occidental art for more than two thousand years, and 
which even influenced the art of the Buddhist Orient. 

In sharp contrast to the fine arts, Greek music was almost entirely 
imported. The Phrygian and Lydian tonalities were reminiscent of 
Asia Minor j Olympus, the patriarch of Greek music, was said to 
have been a son of the Phrygian Marsyas j and his disciple, Thaletas, 
was a Cretan. No instrument originated in Greece. The geographer 
Strabo writes: “One writer says ‘striking the Asiatic cithara’ j an- 
other calls auloi ‘Berecyntian’ and ‘Phrygian’ j and some of the in- 
struments have been called by barbarian names, nablas, sambyke, 
barbitos, magadis, and several others.” 

Most instruments were surprisingly simple, indeed primitive, and 
it is not easy to connect them with the maturity of contemporaneous 
architecture and sculpture. Down to the Hellenistic period pipes 
remained in a rough state without any contrivance to improve or 
facilitate playing j even the kithara of the virtuosi had its strings 
distastefully glued on with thongs of greasy napeskinj additional 
strings were forbidden j the importation of better instruments from 
abroad was severely criticized. All these facts testify that instrumen- 
tal music in Greece did not become a self-sufficient art. The terms 

128 




B. Lyra. 



Greek lyre-flayers , Classical Epoch. 



PLATE VII. 



Greece y Rome and Etruria 129 

kitharisis and aulesis, expressing two types of independent instru- 
mental music, occur much less frequently in Greek texts than the 
words ‘kitharody’ and ‘aulody,’ which mean the accompaniment, on 
a kithara or an aulos, of song ( ode ). And how extremely seldom do 
pictures show soloists on the kithara using both hands in plucking, 
instead of employing the plectron to contribute a few accompanying 
notes! Plato went to the length of condemning purely instrumental 
music. 

Our poets [he says in the second book of the Laws §669] divorce 
melody and rhythm from words, by their employment of kithara and 
aulos without vocal accompaniment, though it is the hardest of tasks to 
discover what such wordless rhythm and tune signify. . . . Nay, we are 
driven to the conclusion that all this so popular employment of kithara and 
aulos, not subordinated to the control of dance or song for the display of 
speed and virtuosity, and the reproduction of the cries of animals, is in the 
worst of bad taste. 

Plato may have represented the most conservative point of view, 
but he clearly delineates a general Greek view; music, in Hellas, was 
so closely connected with poetry that its creative impulse came from 
the spoken word. This meant subordination of instrumental music 
to singing. 

Still, the Greeks, as other peoples, were indebted to instruments 
for having given them a well-organized musical system with scales 
and notation. All their musical terminology was reminiscent of the 
instrumental origin of their notations. A ‘note’ was called chorde y 
after the string; a certain note, lichanosy or forefinger, took its name 
from the string plucked or deadened by this finger; krouma or ‘per- 
cussion’ (with the plectron) signified melody; even the system itself 
was called lyra by the theorists. 

LYRES were indeed the chief, the divine instrument. When 
“the blest gods the genial day prolong, Apollon tun’d the lyre,” and 
in the famous contest between Apollon and Marsyas, the national 
divinity opposed the kithara to the aulos of the foreign silenus. 
Being Apollon’s attribute, the lyre expressed the so-called Apol- 
lonian side of Greek soul and life, wise moderation, harmonious 
control and mental equilibrium, while the pipes stood for the Di- 
onysian side, for inebriation and ecstasy. 

Lyres are mentioned in the lliad y that is, in the ninth century 
B.C. “The youthful dancers in a circle bound” moved to its tunes, 
the professional epic singers accompanied themselves on the lyre, 




130 The History of Musical Instruments 

and so did the heroes. When the Greek kings went to reconcile 
Achilles, “amus’d at ease, the godlike man they found, Pleas’d with 
the solemn harp’s [i. e., lyre’s] harmonious sound.” The adjectives 
to characterize this sound are not very enlightening j like French 
hauty they signify both ‘loud’ and ‘high.’ 

Homer calls the lyre now phorrmnx y now kitharis. Most writers 
interpret these names as equivalent to the later word lyra y which 
meant, as we shall see at once, a loosely connected, light and simple 
lyre. This is certainly erroneous. There is little evidence of such a 
lyre in the ninth century. Homer, on the contrary, mentions the 
bulging form of his lyre (glaphyros) and emphasizes its costly 
decoration. Kalos y ‘beautiful,’ daidaleos , ‘skillful,’ perikalleos, ‘mar- 
vellous,’ are the epithets he gives it. “The well-wrought harp [i. e., 
lyre] from conquer’d Thebae came, Of polish’d silver was its costly 
frame.” Homer’s lyre was unmistakably a kithara, such as depicted 
on several so-called geometric vases: small, rounded and held in a 
slanting position. It was a Syrian lyre, familiar on Aramaean, Hit- 
tite and Phoenician reliefs. 

In the following centuries, the names phorminx and kitharis were 
replaced by new terms, kithara and lyra y which corresponded to new 
types of lyres. 

T he kithara had a heavy, solidly joined body, a wooden sound- 
board and strong arms. In most cases the strings were wound around 
the crossbar and held fast by greasy rolls of oxskin. By turning or 
shifting the sticky rolls on the crossbar, the player was able to tune 
his instrument. Only in a more recent epoch the kithara adopted 
elaborate contrivances that seem to have supplanted the old nape- 
skin rolls. Among them was an ingeniously made, and artistically 
carved, lever which lifted the crossbar, thus tightening all the strings 
at once. This invention had a forerunner, however $ as early as the 
fifteenth century B.C., Egyptian lyres had movable arms which, 
piercing the body, could be pushed upward at will by the player’s 
knee or chest, (pi. VII b, fig. 32) 

The kithara was held vertical, or even leaning towards the 
player. It would have been too heavy to be inclined forward. 

The kithara was used by the early bards to accompany their epic 
songs inspired by the deeds of gods and heroes. It was still the in- 
strument of professional musicians a thousand years later when they 
had degenerated into capricious and intriguing virtuosi who, at 
exorbitant fees, performed in public theaters where adoring ladies 
would snatch away their plectra as highly prized souvenirs. 




Greece , Rome and Etruria 13 1 

T he lyra belonged to beginners and amateurs. It was more primi- 
tive than the kithara, although more recent. It was doubtless a 
retrogressive form of the rounded Syrian lyre, though the Greeks 
attributed it to the Thracians. 

Lyras were loosely constructed. The body was either a tortoise 
shell or a shallow wooden bowl placed on edge and covered by a 
piece of skin as a soundboard. Two horns of an animal, or wooden 
arms, projected from the bowl and supported the horizontal cross- 
bar. The strings, fastened pn the underside of the bowl and held 
away from the soundboard by a bridge, were attached in the same 
way as those of the kithara. In playing, the lyra was held aslant, or 
even horizontal, away from the player, (pi. VII a) 

There seems to have been no difference in the strings of the lyra 
and the kithara. The earliest strings were probably made of hemp. 
An old Greek legend relates that Apollon killed the singer Linos 
for having replaced the “usual” hemp strings by gut strings. But 
this legend is not convincing j the Greek word for hemp being Itnon 
(English linen ) , it would be more logical to credit Linos with the 
introduction of hemp strings than with having done away with them. 

The number of strings varied from three to twelve, four and 
seven being the most usual. Lyres with three and four strings were 
described and depicted from the ninth century B.C. onj with five 
strings from the eighth century, with six and seven from the seventh 
century, with eight from the sixth century, and with nine, ten, eleven 
and twelve strings from the fifth century. 

The author, in a previous paper, was able to prove that the cus- 
tomary tuning was pentatonic without half-tones in E G A B D 
(but not necessarily in this order). Additional strings duplicated 
these notes in the higher or lower octave instead of filling in the 
missing diatonic notes, F and C. It seems, however, that the E and B 
strings were tuned to F and C when certain tonalities required them. 

This throws light upon the strange story of Timotheus, the Mile- 
sian, who lived from about 450 to about 360 B.C. This famous 
revolutionary poet, composer and player, with the proud motto “I 
do not sing tradition,” is said to have been condemned by a Spartan 
court for having added some strings to his kithara, and the ephors 
decided that they had to be cut off. It was probably not the increased 
number for which he was reproached, but for having added special 
strings which altered the pentatonic character of the instrument and 
facilitated the modulation from one tonality into another. 

Transcribing the Greek accordatura as E G A B D conforms to 




132 The History of Musical Instruments 

our conventional transcription of Greek notes, which translates ar- 
bitrarily by our white key notes, A-at, the two standard octaves that 
the Greek called the sy sterna teleion y or ‘perfect system.’ But, as the 
systema was supposed to coincide with the natural range of un- 
trained men’s voices, tenors and basses, it would probably be more 
correct to transpose the conventional notes by a major or minor 
third lower. 

The two diatonic notes, F and C, which were lacking in the lyre 
as well as the semitones and quarter-tones, were produced, in the 
rare cases in which they might have been needed, by pressing and 
thus tightening the next lower string with one of the fingers. One 
used the forefinger when the next note lower could be produced on 
the open string, b-c for example. One used the middlefinger when 
the next note lower had already occupied the shortening forefinger, 
c-c% for example, or when the next note lower was two semitones 
distant, b-c% for instance. This explains the three positions of most 
signs in Greek notation: erect, flattened and reversed j the normal, 
erect sign indicated ‘open string,’ the flattened position ‘forefinger,’ 
and the reversed position ‘middlefinger.’ 

In postclassical times the touching fingers were frequently re- 
placed by complicated devices to tighten the strings, similar to the 
double action of a modern harp. One sees them more or less dis- 
tinctly on many reliefs and vases of the later centuries. A passage 
in Ptolemaeus indicates how complicated they must have been j for 
the kithara he enumerates six tone systems, which differ in the width 
of their whole tones and semitones. Examining the pitches required, 
we find that the player needed four artificial notes from the B string 
and three from the E string. These demanded not a double action, 
as our harp, but a quadruple action. The lyra, on the contrary, had 
only two tuning systems, and not more than one artificial note was 
required of any string. 

The manner of plucking was almost similar with the lyra and 
the kithara. Three sources of information have contributed to our 
knowledge: detailed representations on art works j a few poetic 
descriptions j actual practice, preserved in Nubia and watched by 
the author himself. In Nubia the right hand scratches all strings 
at once with a big plectron, while the stretched fingers of the left 
hand, opened like a fan, deaden those strings which must not sound. 
The technical and musical possibilities are rather limited j the Nu- 
bians continually repeat a small ostinato motif of five notes through- 
out the song. Doubtless, most art works depicting lyre players in 




Greece , Rome and Etruria 133 

Greece, Etruria and Rome represent a technique similar to the Nu- 
bian manner of playing: the right hand is scratching over the strings 
in a violent dash, and the fingers of the left hand are stretched along 
the strings. 

This, however, was certainly not the only way to play. On some 
vases we see the left fingers plucking, not deadening, and this is 
confirmed by Pseudo-Asconius, who says that while the right hand 
uses the plectron the fingers of the left hand pluck the strings 
( chordas car punt). We can form an idea of this technique from the 
playing of the Japanese long zither, koto: “In the right hand a small 
slip of ox-horn, or other hard material, is held, with which all the six 
strings are scratched rapidly, from the first to the sixth, close to the 
long bridge at the right of the instrument. The strings are then at 
once damped with the left hand, and a little melody accompanying 
the voice is tinkled out with the left little finger, the ‘scratch’ com- 
ing to mark the pauses in the rhythm” (Piggott). Essential features 
of this description recur in the poetical record of the statue of a 
musician, written by Lucius Apuleius in the second century A.D.; 
the player’s left hand, he says, “moves ( molitur ) the strings with 
fingers held apart, while the right hand is getting the plectron 
ready to play just as the singing pauses ( pulsabulum admovet ceu 
parata per cuter e cum vox in cantico inter quiescerit). Both Piggott 
for Japan and Apuleius for classical antiquity mention a singing 
voice, the left hand plucking the strings, and a plectron in the right 
hand marking the pauses in the rhythm. Both describe the same 
technique. So it is possible, indeed probable, that they share a fifth 
point that only the Japanese description adds: dampening the strings 
after having scratched them with the plectron. This seems obliga- 
tory, if the strings are scratched with normal force. 

With the help of the Japanese parallel the usual attitude of play- 
ers on Greek art works is sufficiently explained ; the right hand has 
just scratched, being drawn beyond the last string, while the left 
hand is busy dampening in preparation for plucking. The Greek 
sculptor and painter prefers the final to a transitory movement in a 
gesture. 

It would be unnecessary, then, to mention the Nubian technique, 
except that such a technique must have come to Africa with the 
instrument and, if so, it must have existed either in old West Asia 
or in Greece, or perhaps in both places. Possibly the Greeks were 
familiar with both manners of playing. 

While the Nubian technique suggests a Nubian — that is, an osti- 




134 The History of Musical Instruments 

nato accompaniment of the voice — the Japanese technique points 
to a more elaborate form of accompaniment. Plato gives an idea of 
the complication of the latter form of accompaniment when, in the 
Laws 7: 812, he warns teacher and pupil to “make their tones accord 
with those of the voice. As for diversification and complication of 
the instrumental part — the strings giving out one tone and the com- 
poser of the melody another — and, in fact, for correspondence of 
lesser interval with greater, quicker note with longer, lower tones 
with higher, and equally for all sorts of complication of the rhythm 
by instrumental accompaniment, no such devices are to be employed 
with pupils.” 

Besides the one or two forms of playing with a plectron, the 
Greeks used, under the name fsile (‘empty’) kithdnsis } a solo play- 
ing without singing, both in natural notes and in octave harmonics j 
either hand plucked with the bare fingers. Similar methods were 
mentioned in the Sumerian, Egyptian and Hebrew chapters. It 
seems that in Greece this technique was almost exclusively confined 
to the kithara. 

This restriction, however, does not suffice to explain why, accord- 
ing to ancient writers, it was more difficult to play the kithara than 
the lyra. It would be more likely to suppose a different disposition 
of the strings on the two instruments. Indeed, modern Ethiopia, the 
only country with two lyres besides ancient Greece, tunes them in 
a different arrangement, though to the same pentatonic scale: 

Kerar d" g' a' V e" 

Baganna d f V e" d” gf </ e' g a b. 

Although a relationship drawn over two thousand years and two 
thousand miles is rather farfetched, it may be of more value than 
none at all. Let us then go a step farther and suppose, as a working 
hypothesis, that the Ethiopian lyre kerar has preserved the ancient 
Greek, or even Mediterranean, accordatura. The author feels easier 
in using this hypothesis because he saw exactly the same arrange- 
ment with the Nubian lyre in Upper Egypt. 

If we assume that the Greek lyres, which were tuned to the same 
notes as the kerar, also had the same peculiar arrangement with a 
high string close to the lowest one of an ascending scale (like the 
modern banjo), this accordatura would read in Greek terminology: 

faranete (d f ) first string 

lichanos (g) second string 




135 



Greece } Rome and Etruria 

mese (a) third string 

faramese (b) fourth string 

nete (e'j fifth string 

This is particularly significant. The mese or ‘middle’ (note and 
string) holds the center. The nete or ‘low’ string surprisingly desig- 
nates the highest note in Greek music, not because it is the lowest 
when the lyre is held in its normal, inclined position, but because 
the Semitic Orient calls high sounds low, and low sounds high. 
Paramese and faranete are clear, as pard y in Greek, means both 
‘opposite’ and ‘beside.’ There is only one name left — Uchanos. 
When, in the usual way, the player deadens the five strings with the 
five fingers of the left hand, the thumb touches the first, the middle- 
finger the third, the fourth finger the fourth, and the fifth finger the 
fifth string j the string (and note) Uchanos is left to the forefinger. 
And the Greek word for ‘forefinger’ is Uchanos ! 

This seems so conclusive that our hypothesis, taking the Ethiopian 
and Nubian lyre accordatura as the key to the ancient Greek tuning, 
is apparently more than a mere supposition. 

Among the four terms for strings and notes, derived from their 
position in space, Uchan 6 s } as the name of a finger, is surprising and 
very probably more recent than the others. The four remaining 
notes, d' a b <?', must, therefore, be supposed to represent the tun- 
ing of the earlier four-stringed kithara; Otto Johannes Gomljosi, 
in his latest book on Greek tonalities, comes to the same conclusion 
from a different approach. 

In conclusion, we are still unable to see the musical difference 
between lyras and kitharas. The puzzle becomes more intricate 
when we learn that the Greeks had a third kind of lyre, barbiton or 
bdrbitos. From all the passages dealing with this instrument we ob- 
tain no further information than that it was played with a plectron 
and tuned to the lower octave of the fekttSy which, however, was a 
harp, not a lyre. There was a kindred word, barbat> in Persian j but 
the relation is not helpful, as we know only that it designated a 
stringed instrument used about 600 A.D. by Byzantine singing-girls. 

THE HARP was angular and ‘vertical’ j arched harps occur only 
in an archaic statuette from the Cyclades in the Athens National 
Museum, and, much later, in a painting from Herculaneum (first 
century A.D.) in the National Museum at Naples. 

In continental Hellas no harp is represented earlier than about 
450 B.C., although it was probably known before that. 




136 The History of Musical Instruments 

The harp was always considered an alien instrument in Greece 
and Rome, coming from the Orient. Plato condemned it because 
its greater number of strings and notes facilitated modulation, in- 
stability and, therewith, hedone — that is, sensory pleasure. Being an 
instrument of intimacy and dreamy absorption, its players were al- 
most exclusively women, hetaerae as well as ladies of correct society. 

Among the terms for ‘harp’ in Greek literature, the most im- 
portant were -psalterion , magadis and pektis. The magadis was called 
“ancient” and of Lydian origin. The Spartan poet Alkman, a Lydian 
himself, was the first to mention it, in the seventh century B.C. It 
was played with the bare fingers without a plectron and had twenty 
strings, that is, ten double strings tuned in octaves. 

A hundred years after Alkman, Anacreon in one of his love 
lyrics sang: 

O Leucastis, I play 
Upon a Lydian harp, 

A magade of twenty strings, 

And thou art in thy youthful prime ! 

The pektis, too, was immortalized by Anacreon: 

I have eaten the mid-day meal of honey-cakes broken fine ; 

And now on the graceful harp I daintily thrum the strings, 

Making merry with song for thee, 

O dainty maiden mine ! 

The epithet eroessa that the poet gives this harp can be literally 
translated by ‘lovely.’ 

The pektis was sometimes said to be identical with the magadis j 
but in some passages the two names are mentioned beside each other. 

Later on, says Euphorios, the magadis was altered and was called 
sambyke> while Apollodoros relates the magadis to the more recent 
psalterion. On the other hand, the sambyke had very short strings 
and, consequently, according to Aristides Quintilianus (c. 100 A.D.), 
an effeminate timbre. The reader may compare what has been said 
on the sambyke on pages 83-84. 

The trigdnony or ‘triangle,’ called either a Phrygian, or a Syrian, 
or even an Egyptian instrument, may have been a variation of the 
psalterion. 

THE LUTE of the Greeks and the Romans corresponded ex- 
actly to that existing in western Asia and Egypt, so that the ancient 
authors could call it alternately an Assyrian, a Cappadocian and an 




Greece y Rome and Etruria 137 

Egyptian instrument. It had a long neck without pegs, a small body, 
frets and three strings. The Hellenes, therefore, called it by the 
Greek name trichordon y ‘three-stringed,’ as well as by its foreign 
name, pandura y which seems to have been derived from Sumerian 
pan-tur y ‘bow-small.’ If this etymology is correct, the term is a 
strong evidence that the pierced lute was derived from the musical 
bow. 

Lutes, however, were extremely rare both in Greece and in Rome. 

ZITHERS. Had the Greeks zithers? A few passages in Aristotle, 
Julius Pollux and Juba (d. 24 A.D.), possibly suggest the existence 
of such an instrument. These authors speak of a simikion with thirty- 
five, and an epigoneion with forty strings, as old and foreign instru- 
ments. So great a number of strings excludes both a lute and a lyre. 
The harp was a real polychord j but even the largest antique harps 
had no more than twenty-three strings at most. There is no possibil- 
ity left, then, except the board-zither. The Chinese she y which be- 
longs in this category, had fifty strings in antiquity. A board-zither 
can be placed either on the ground, or on a table or on the player’s 
knees j the choice depends upon the customary position of rest. The 
Greeks did not squat on the floor and they were not accustomed to 
tables j but they had seats. Thus, the normal playing position of a 
Greek zither would have been that of lying across the knees of a 
sitting musician. The literal translation of the name epigoneion is 
indeed ‘a thing on the knees,’ as epi means ‘upon’ and gony ‘knee.’ 
This etymology is far more convincing than the ancient anecdote 
that a certain Epigonos had brought the instrument from Alex- 
andria or Ambracia in Epirus. Etymologies dependent upon an in- 
ventor’s name are apt to be false. Julius Pollux’s information that 
the simikion was invented by a man named Sim os must be rejected 
as well. A connection with the Persian word sim, which means 
‘string,’ would be more likely. 

Neither an epigoneion nor a simikion has been depicted by sculp- 
tors or painters. There is, however, another strange stringed instru- 
ment depicted on three later Roman sarcophagi, two in the Louvre 
and a third one in the cathedral at Agrigenti. The outer appearance 
resembles a lute; one distinguishes a small, round, bulging body 
and an unusually wide neck. The strings are numerous, eight to ten, 
and they are open and played like zither strings. Vertically held with 
the left hand, the instrument is leaned against the left shoulder. 
One of the three specimens, on a sarcophagus in the Louvre, is 




1 38 The History of Musical Instruments 

particularly fascinating, as the strings do not reach the top of the 
neck but end near the middle at different heights, their ends thus 
forming a diagonal line that descends towards the treble side, 
(pi. VIII b) 

Looking for parallels, we find in a Persian manuscript written in 
1345 A.D. an instrument called mugni. It is described as “a combina- 
tion of the rubaby a qanun, and a nuzha, ” that is, of a lute and two 
zithers j an accompanying drawing shows a remarkable resemblance 
to the Roman instrument. The mugni is composed of a small, circu- 
lar body and a long, wide neck without frets. Nine strings are indi- 
cated by their lateral tuning pegs, and their upper ends form a 
diagonal line across the neck. The similarity is so striking that some 
connection must be supposed. Besides, the mugni was said to have 
been invented in Magnesia in Asia Minor, a town formerly belong- 
ing to the Roman Empire. 

PIPE would be the best translation of the Greek term aulos 
(plural auloty in modern pronunciation avlt) and its Latin equiva- 
lent tibia, exactly as we have used the word “pipe” to translate Ak- 
kadian fralilu, Egyptian ma-t and Hebrew halU. The usual render- 
ing of aulos as ‘flute’ is wrong and misleading. The author cannot 
forget his old teacher in Greek, who was a victim of this false inter- 
pretation. Whenever aulos occurred in a text that we read in class, 
he did not fail to point out the sensitive ears of his beloved heroes, 
so obviously superior to the Wagner-glutted ears of modern college 
boys; a flute, the weakest of instruments, sufficed to inflame their 
ecstasy and desire for combat! 

The pipes on vases and reliefs, Greek and Roman, are not flutes, 
but double oboes of oriental shape, the sound of which could be as 
shrill and exciting as the sound of their relatives, the bagpipes of 
modern Scotch regiments. 

So strong was the power required to blow such pipes that a great 
many contemporaneous paintings and reliefs show the player wear- 
ing a leather band which passes over the mouth and ties at the back 
of his head, and which is held in place by a thong running over 
the top of the head. At the mouth it had two holes just large enough 
to allow the pipes to pass through. This contrivance gave a regular 
pressure to the cheeks, which acted as bellows, as they do with a 
glass blower (see also on p. 91). The Greeks called it fhorbeia, and 
the Romans capstrum. It is a freak of history that this mouth-band 
has been preserved in one remote country only— in Java, with her 




Greece y Rome and Etruria 139 

neighboring island Madoera, where the ancient double oboe was 
used and pictured in the first millennium A.D. 

Yet, there are many pictures of pipers without such a mouth- 
band, and poets occasionally praise the “sweet” tone of pipes ( gly- 
kys ), just as the Hebrews called their pipes a fyala instrument, and 
as later on in Europe certain oboes had a name derived from dulcis. 
We do not know whether such a difference of tone was caused by 
the size of the reed, the shape of the instrument or the mouth-band. 

But we do know that Greeks and Romans possessed many kinds 
of double oboes. The most important of them were the Phrygian 
pipes } in which the two tubes differed in length, the longer one being 
curved and ending in a wide, trumpetlike bell ; the fingerholes were 
placed at different heights on either tube and, according to Pro- 
phyrios, the bore was narrow. A Greek name for these pipes was 
auloi elymoi. The Lydian pipes y on the contrary, called tibiae ser- 
ranae or ‘Phoenician pipes’ by the Romans, had tubes of equal length 
with identical fingerholes. 

The pipes were made in several sizes and pitches. The Greeks 
distinguished parthenioi or ‘girls” pipes as sopranos j paidikot or 
‘boys’ ’ pipes as altos j teleioi or ‘perfect’ pipes as tenors ; hyperteleioi 
or ‘superperfect’ as basses. There are many other names which are 
not yet understood. 

According to ancient writers, the earlier pipes had only four, or 
even three, fingerholes. The bore was narrow enough to exclude the 
production of fundamentals, so that overblowing meant a jump of 
only a fifth instead of the usual octave. Even with more than four 
holes, the pipe was restricted to melodies in one of the three types 
of tonalities on which Greek music was based — that is, diatonically 
filled fourths with the semitone respectively placed at the bottom 
(Dorian), in the middle (Phrygian), or at the top (Lydian). Only 
since the fifth century B.C. has the number and arrangement of the 
fingerholes permitted playing in all three of these tonalities. Later, 
the number was increased to fifteen, and the makers were forced 
to invent special contrivances that stopped or half-stopped those holes 
which were not needed and could not be reached by the stretched 
fingers. They provided the pipes with collars that had corresponding 
holes and could be turned to cover or uncover the pipe holes, and 
sometimes the wind outlets of these collars had cup-shaped exten- 
sions to lower the pitch. Such perfected pipes have been found in 
Pompei and Herculaneum. 

It is a difficult problem to find out for what musical purpose twin 




140 The History of Musical Instruments 

oboes were used. Only one contemporaneous author, the Roman 
Marcus Terentius Varro (first century B.C.), gives a hint when 
he calls one of the tubes of a pair tibia incentiva y and the other tibia 
succentiva y but he does not explain why. It might be possible to 
interpret this enigmatic passage by referring to the use of the same 
word succinere in the early Christian Church. There it designated 
the interjection of an Amen or Hallelujah, with which the congre- 
gation responded to the psalmody of the soloist. Incinere y on the con- 
trary, doubtlessly meant ‘intone’; the Roman poet Propertius, who 
lived at the same time and in the same country as Varro, used it in 
connection with the words varios ore modos y to intone ‘various melo- 
dies with the mouth.’ Thus, one pipe gave the intonation, and the 
other the response. But this still would be unintelligible. If the in- 
toning pipe had played with the singer, both pipes would have 
played alternately, and it would be hard to understand why the 
player needed two pipes. It would be logical, on the contrary, to 
suppose an intonation in the narrower sense — that is, giving the 
tone and sustaining it throughout the verse. The second pipe, per- 
haps, played the refrain, while possibly the drone went on and sup- 
ported it, as in ancient Egypt and in the modern Orient. 

But all generalizations should be avoided. Within an era of nearly 
two thousand years and within a gigantic empire, the style of play- 
ing probably changed no less than the styles of architecture and fine 
art. The single Phrygian oboist who accompanied the Greek drama 
and whom one poet wished to silence because of his “loquacity,” 
certainly obscured the melodic idea with cascades of tumbling pas- 
sages and roulades in the manner of modern oriental pipers. His 
style might have been very different from the art of that oboe-girl 
who in the early morning came with the drunken Alkibiades to 
knock and shout at the door to attend Plato’s symposium with Aga- 
thon. 

And both styles might have been entirely different from that of 
the pipers in the musical competitions at the Pythian games in Del- 
phi. The ‘Pythian Nome’ performed by the competitors consisted 
of five parts or movements, such as the movements of a modern 
sonata, having different, indeed contrasting, characters. The most 
famous of these performances occurred in 586 B.C., when Sakadas, a 
celebrated piper, represented on his instrument the contest between 
Apollon and the dragon in five movements: the prelude, the first on- 
set, the contest itself, the triumph following the victory and the ex- 
piration of the dragon hissing out its last breath in a sharp harmonic. 




Greece , Rome and Etruria 141 

BAGPIPE. In a bagpipe, the mouth, in so far as it serves as a 
windchest, is replaced by the hide or bladder of an animal. A short 
tube, conducting the wind from the mouth, is inserted in one of 
the natural openings of this bag, and a clarinet in the other. This 
arrangement has two advantages: the wind chamber is larger, and 
the air can be compressed by a simple movement of the elbow in- 
stead of requiring constant pressure from the mouth. 

The origin of the bagpipe is unknown. On a relief from the thir- 
teenth century B.C., belonging to the Hittite palace at Eyuk, all 
too eager students have imagined they detected the earliest bagpipe j 
in reality, the bag is an animal offering, and the two “pipes” are 
ribbons hanging down from the two strings of a lute carried before it. 
It was also an error to see a bagpipe in the Aramaic word sumfoniah 
of the Book of Daniel, as we have shown on page 84. Again, we have 
explained on page 1 2 1 that such an instrument did not exist either 
in Israel or in classic Greece, (pi. IV f) 

The first bagpipe of which one can be sure existed in the first 
century A.D. Suetonius, the historian of the Roman Caesars, relates 
of Nero that “towards the end of his life he had publicly vowed 
that if he retained his power he would at the games in celebration of 
his victory give a performance on the water-organ, the choraulam et 
utricularium.” This latter name, meaning a leather bag, can hardly 
be explained otherwise than as a bagpipe. All doubts are silenced by 
the following passage, in Suetonius’s Greek contemporary, Dio 
Chrysostom, narrating that Nero “knew how to play the pipe with 
his mouth and the bag thrust under his arms.” And still a third 
author of the same time, Martial, speaks of an ascaules> or ‘bagpiper,’ 
using the Greek word in a Latin epigram. The instrument, then, 
must have been recently imported from Asia and, like modern South 
Asiatic bagpipes, was probably provided either with a single or a 
double clarinet. 

The further development of the bagpipe belongs to the history 
of medieval and modern Europe. 

CROSS FLUTE. While in pre-Christian times Greek and Ro- 
man artists have depicted many oboes, they have left no trace of a 
flute. The reader must be on his guard against statues in museums 
because the hands holding the instruments, being the frailest parts 
of the sculptural work, are nearly always broken off and restored by 
recent artists in an unauthentic form. The first and only flute de- 
picted in Greco-Roman antiquity, as far as we knew a few years ago, 




142 The History of Musical Instruments 

was a cross flute stamped on a coin of the Syrian town Panias, or 
Caesarea, from as late as 169 A.D. 

This flute has now been antedated by an Etruscan flute. 

The Etruscans have not yet been touched upon in this chapter. 
On the whole, the music of this people remained on a rather primi- 
tive level. Their paintings and reliefs almost invariably show reed 
pipes and plain lyres of the lyra shape j no kithara, no improved 
aulos occurs. The wall paintings in tombs such as the tombe delle 
Leonesse , del Triclinio , della Pulcella y dei Leofardi } are distinct 
enough to remove all doubt. 

However, a recent excavation of an Etruscan tomb of the second 
century B.C., the Sefolcro dei Volumni near Perugia, has revealed 
an urn, the so-called urna del fiautista f on which the sculptor had 
carved the head of a musician playing a cross flute, the earliest ever 
depicted. The instrument is rather short j if it were life-size it would 
measure less than two feet. It has the mouth-hole about a quarter 
of the way down its length and is held to the player’s right side. 
Both hands are stopping the fingerholes. (pi. VIII a) 

PAN-PIPES will be discussed in the chapter on Chinese an- 
tiquity. In Greece they were only shepherds’ instruments. “Behind 
the sheep, piping on their reeds, they go,” sings Homer. They had 
no place in art music. 

Pan-pipes were a set of graduated tubes, generally seven in num- 
ber, each resembling a simple vertical flute, stopped at the lower 
end and without fingerholes, giving one note of the scale j they were 
all joined together to form a raft. The upper ends formed a hori- 
zontal line, and the player could shift his mouth along them accord- 
ing to the note required. The line formed by the lower ends of the 
tubes varied in shape. The earlier Greek pan-pipes, up to about 400 
B.C., resembled the Chinese pan-pipes of the Han Dynasty at the 
end of the pre-Christian era: the raft was rectangular, the tubes 
being graduated in length internally. Later forms had one lower 
end cut off the rectangle $ or a larger corner, leaving a wing shape, 
which followed the real length of the tubes j or the diagonal line 
of the tubes sometimes descended in steps. 

Their name was syrinx or, more exactly, syrinx folykalamos, ‘the 
syrinx with many canes,’ while syrinx monokalamos designated a 
single vertical flute in learned texts. Philologists disagree on the 
etymology. The most likely root is Semitic srq, as in Hebrew sdrdq 
and Syriac sraq } ‘he hissed,’ and Hebrew sriqd, ‘whistling.’ 




Greece, Rome and Etruria 143 

The few excavated specimens are made of wood, bronze, clay 
or of a kind of resin j cane may also have been used but it is too 
perishable to have been preserved. One of them, a Roman instru- 
ment, consists of whistle pipes formed by channels in a solid piece 
of earthenware. 

Wherever there are pan-pipes, in Greece or in primitive coun- 
tries, they are connected with love charm. Legend relates that Pan 
was in love with a beautiful Arcadian nymph and pursued her until 
her flight was stopped by the river Ladonj she would have been 
caught had not a protecting divinity changed her into a cane. It was 
from this cane that Pan cut his syrinx to play upon when passion 
and longing possessed him. Preserved in Diana’s cavern near Ephe- 
sus after his death, it could test a maiden’s virginity by its sound. 

THE ORGAN, in Greek hydraulis , was the last step in the mech- 
anization of human blowing. It excluded the mouth and replaced 
its action by pistons and hydraulic compressors. The pipes were 
played by means of the most elementary type of keyboard. 

Looking for the origin of the organ, the author found an Alexan- 
drian terra-cotta figurine, from the last century B.C., of a seated 
Syrian piper, singing and playing. In the manner of itinerant min- 
strels this man combines several activities. An inch under his sing- 
ing mouth he is holding a pan-pipe j its long, bass canes are connected 
with a bag that communicates by a flexible tube with a bellows worked 
by the man’s right foot and compressed by his arm. The singer ob- 
viously plays his pan-pipes only between the verses, as singing ex- 
cludes blowing. While singing, he seems to work the bellows and 
produce a drone on one of the bass canes, (pi. VIII c) 

The combination of a set ’of pan-pipes and an artificial wind action 
must have been a slow evolution, and the famous invention of the 
organ, attributed to the engineer Ktesibios in Alexandria in the 
second half of the third century B.C., consisted in a special technical 
solution of the problem rather than in the principle of the organ it- 
self. From the ancient descriptions in Heron’s Pneumatikd , written 
about 120 B.C., and Vitruvius Pollio’s De architecture (first cen- 
tury A.D.) one knows that the wind pressure of the hydraulis was 
not supplied by bellows, but by a water compressor and pistons. 
Hence the name hydraulis, or ‘water organ.’ 

We do not know exactly to what extent this instrument was used 
in antiquity, but we know that it had a vogue in post-Christian times, 
especially in the Roman circus. Its loud, penetrating tone, so entirely 




144 The History of Musical Instruments 

different from the reserved sonority of most Greek and Roman in- 
struments, was particularly appropriate to robust entertainment. 

At first sight, the organ seems to be inconsistent with the sim- 
plicity of Greek and Roman instruments. The contrast is explained 
by the triumph of mechanics and machines, indeed of the engineer, 
in the last two centuries of the pre-Christian era. The center of 
technical art was Alexandria, the native town of the organ. 

A quantity of pictures on reliefs, clay figures, carved gems, vases, 
etc., and especially a clay model made in the beginning of the second 
century A.D. and preserved in the Musee Lavigerie de Saint-Louis 
at Carthage, show the general outline of such an organ. The pneu- 
matic action is concealed in a narrow, columnlike box reaching up to 
the player’s waist. The box is flanked on either side by hydraulic 
pumps worked by two additional men. The pipes stand vertically in 
rows similar to ours on the cover of the box. The player standing in 
front of the box between the two pumps pushes and pulls the sliders 
connecting the individual pipes. 

The Carthage model clearly shows stops, that is, sets of pipes one 
behind another $ and stops are mentioned by Vitruvius. The Roman 
architect explains that the windchest had longitudinal grooves, which 
could be opened by turning gears. The question is whether this con- 
trivance was a stop arrangement in the modern sense. 

The first idea would be to suppose that the ancient organ had 
stops differing either in pitch (such as our sixteen foot, eight foot, 
four foot), or in the type of pipe, such as open and stopped, narrow 
and wide, wood and metal, flutes and reeds. The organs depicted on 
art works, and even the Carthage model, do not indicate different 
types of pipes, nor do the literary sources. On the contrary, the Ro- 
man poet, Claudianus Mamertus, who lived in the fifth century 
A.D., says in one of his poems, speaking of the water organ: “Let 
there be also one who by his light touch forcing out deep reverbera- 
tions, and managing the numberless slides ( linguas ) in the sound- 
board of metal pipes, can with nimble fingers cause a powerful 
sound.” There is no mention whatsoever of a contrast between soft 
and loud. 

Differences in size, however, are indicated on the Carthage 
model, where the third row is nearly twice as tall as the front row, 
while the middle row has an intermediate height. 

Nevertheless, it would be overhasty to interpret the three rows as 
unison, fifth and octave stops, as in modern organs. A musical tractate 
of the first century A.D., the so-called Anonymus Bellermann, hints 





A. Etruscan flutist (after Alhini). 




B. Stringed instrument , Rome. Louvre. C. Syrian with the ancestor of the 

organ. 



PLATE VIII. 



Greece y Rome and Etruria 145 

at another answer. The hydraulis, it says, can only be played in six 
tro-poi or tonalities: Hyperlydian, Hyperiastian, Lydian, Phrygian, 
Hypolydian and Hypophrygian. Consequently, Dorian melodies 
were excluded. 

This selection is incomprehensible as long as the modern reader 
thinks of his chromatic keyboard running through seven octaves. 
This is a recent abstraction of all existing tonalities that we must not 
expect in antiquity j the Greek organist probably united in rows, in a 
musical way, the pipes necessary for a certain tonality, and not, in a 
logical way, all pipes belonging in all tonalities. Of the six tonalities 
that the Anonymus Bellermann indicates, Hyperlydian has, in our 
modern notation, two flats, Hyperiastian one sharp, Lydian one flat, 
Phrygian three flats, Hypolydian no sign, Hypophrygian two flats. 
The three Dorian tonalities, on the other hand, would require four, 
five and six flats. So the exclusion of Dorian from the organ is easily 
intelligible: the organ of that time had no flat beyond A\). 

TRUMPETS, the Greeks and the Romans said, were invented by 
the Etruscans, who were the leading bronze founders of the Mediter- 
ranean world before the Celts came. 

The Greeks had only a straight trumpet that they called salpnx f 
while the Roman name was tuba. It was closely connected with the 
trumpets of the ancient Assyrians, Egyptians and Jews, and the 
initial s+vowel indicates a pre-Hellenic origin of the name too. Gen- 
erally, however, it was longer than those ancient ones. The only 
Greek trumpet preserved was recently acquired by the Museum of 
Fine Art in Boston. Its tube is made in thirteen sections of ivory 
neatly fitting into one another, and strengthened at the joints by 
bronze rings j a long funnel-shaped bell is made of bronze j the 
mouthpiece is only slightly enlarged without being cup-shaped. As 
the trumpet is one and fifty-seven centimeters long it must be an 
alto with a note between / and g as the lowest available tone. The 
curator, Mr. L. D. Caskey, assigns it to the second half of the fifth 
century B.C. 

Roman tubas, chiefly used to give trumpet calls in the army, were 
simpler, made entirely of bronze with an evenly conical bore, a 
slightly expanding bell and a mouthpiece of either horn or bronze. 
Their average length was about four feet. A few specimens have 
been preserved, and most of them seem to have been military in- 
struments. The pressure in blowing must have been considerable. 
On some representations of trumpeters the free hand is on the back 




146 The History of Musical Instruments 

of the headj a chain, attached to the bell, might have been pulled 
to allow the player to brace his lips more firmly against the mouth- 
piece, and we even find the mouth-band of oboists used with the 
trumpet. The sound is said to have been harsh: “The loud trumpet’s 
brazen mouth from far With shrilling clangor sounds th’ alarm of 
war” (Iliad, 18). Aeschylos, in the Eumenides, calls the salpinx 
didtoros , ‘yelling,’ and Roman authors designate the sound of the 
tuba as horribilis , raucus , rudis or terribilis. 

Besides the straight trumpet the Roman army had a hooked 
trumfet that they called lituus , a long, slender, bronze tube curving 
upward at the end to form the bell. Its prototype was obviously a 
cane or tube of wood stuck into a cowhorn which then formed the 
bell. In bronze civilizations the combined form of two natural ob- 
jects was replaced by a homogeneous bronze trumpet in one piece, 
which at first showed its composite origin but in its later form had 
lost all vestiges of the original components. The original form still 
exists in Ethiopia and the Burmese hinterland $ some of the oldest 
Irish kdrnykes , kept in the British Museum and in the Irish Academy 
at Dublin, show the earlier stage of the hooked bronze trumpet. A 
similar development in the east is marked by the hooked trumpet 
carved on the temple at Angkor Vat in Cambodia (c. 1100 A.D.), 
and the modern Chinese trumpet, cha chiao. Later on, the former 
combination of a tube and a horn became less obvious, and the tec- 
tonic shape was replaced by a fantastic design j the bell had the form 
of a dragon’s head with open mouth and a crest reaching to the mid- 
dle of the tube. This was the typical Celtic karnyx described by the 
ancient writers and also carved on the triumphal arch for Emperor 
Hadrian (113 A.D.) and on Roman, Gallic and Britannic coins. 
Some Roman litui had a bell that recalled the Celtic dragon head, 
but the usual and final form of the lituus was undecorated, (fig. 35) 







figure 35. Trumpet, Madagascar. (After Sachs.) 

Preserved specimens are conical and short (seventy-eight and 
seventy-nine and five-tenths centimeters long); their pitch must 
have been a seventh above that of our bugles. The lituus is conse- 
quently designated as acutus or oxyfhonos by Roman and Greek 
authors, its sound as stridor, ‘shriek,’ and strefens, ‘bray.’ 



Greece y Rome and Etruria 147 

Curved trumpets. Too long a tube cannot be carried j the long 
trumpets of the Mongols and Tibetans rest on the ground, but skill- 
ful bronze-founding civilizations make the trumpet in a curved 
shape. Ancient Europeans, Swedes, Gauls and Iberians preferred 
curves shaped like the figures 6 or 9. The best solutions, however, 
were the Roman cornu and the ancient Nordic lurer. 

The cornu was used in infantry bands, at funerals and other 
solemn ceremonies as well as at bacchanals and circus plays. It had a 
narrow, evenly conical bore in the shape of a round letter G with a 
slender bell $ a wooden crossbar, forming the diameter, rested upon 
the player’s left shoulder and was grasped by his left hand, while 
the right one pressed the mouthpiece against the lips j the tube 
curved over the level of his head, and the bell turned to face for- 
ward. Specimens in a good state of preservation were found at Pom- 
pei and have been kept in the National Museum at Naples. Their 
tubes measure eleven feet long and closely resemble those of French 
horns in G. While modern experiments with a facsimile produced “a 
soft and yet voluminous sound, recalling that of our French horn,” 
and “already rather wide melodies in a range of seventeen har- 
monics,” Horace speaks only of the minax murmur , the ‘threatening 
rumble’ of the cornu j modern experiments usually show what one 
could do on an ancient instrument, but not what ancient players 
really did. 

The Roman army had also a variety of the circular cornu in the 
shape of a short trumpet. But its only evidence is on the monument 
of a Roman horse-soldier in the Stadtische Altertumer-Sammlung in 
Mainz. 

A thousand or more years earlier a Baltic people had already solved 
the problem of making curved trumpets. Although the cornu has 
some features in common with these earlier trumpets, we have no 
evidence of any relation between them. 

Lury plural lurer, is the Danish name applied to these trumpets 
of the Nordic bronze age. If we say ‘trumpets,’ we are not strictly 
consistent with modern terminology in which trumpet means an 
instrument with a bore, the greater part of which is cylindrical j they 
actually are tenor or alto horns, their second harmonic being situated 
between c and g. The three dozen examples of excavated lurer are 
entirely conical. They have a flat disk attached at the end of the tube, 
instead of a bell, and their mouthpieces resemble those of modern 
tenor trombones. All of them have a common characteristic: the 
second curve of the S-shaped tube is twisted in a plane at right angles 




148 The History of Musical Instruments 

to the plane of the first curve, and the two trumpets that form a pair 
are twisted in opposite directions. This is exactly the form of a pair 
of mammoth’s tusks, and these may have furnished the material for 
lurer, until the extinction of the mammoth necessitated finding 
some other material. 

The undeniable importance of the lurer has been foolishly exag- 
gerated by modern Germanic enthusiasts. We already have shown 
that the use of twin trumpets was frequent, and that they were not 
played in parts (cf. page 1 1 3) . Here we may add that the possi- 
bility of producing twelve notes on this instrument, as asserted by 
modern trombonists with modern mouthpieces, is a scientific falsi- 
fication. Modern violinists would be able to play medieval fiddles 
in as many positions as desired, and yet we know that in their time 
they were played in the first position only. It is a grave error to con- 
fuse the potentiality of an instrument with the music it actually per- 
formed. 

On the other hand, it is edifying to compare the supposed nobility 
of Nordic trumpet playing with the few violent notes that are 
roughly blown on a contemporaneous descendant of the S-shaped 
trumpet family, the ratia sringa or komhu of modern India, or with 
the sound of the Tibetan ceremonial trumpets which is called “hip- 
popotamus-like” by one witness, and compared with the roar of 
factory sirens in an industrial town by another. Remembering that 
a Greek author compared the sound of Egyptian trumpets with the 
bray of an ass, and that Roman writers spoke of the “horrible,” 
“rauque” and “shrieking” tone of their trumpets, it must be admitted 
that not one evidence of ancient and oriental trumpet sounds points 
to anything related to the noble tones of modern trumpets. 

THE DRUM ( tym'panon ) of the ancient Greeks and Romans 
was the usual hand-beaten frame drum of the eastern Mediterranean j 
it had no jingles and was generally painted. As a rule it had two 
skins. The handles attached to some drums of the fourth century 
B.C. would have been unnecessary with single skins, and the Byzan- 
tine lexicographer of the ninth century A.D., Suidas, clearly said 
that the ancient Greek tympanon was made of skins, ek derma tony in 
the plural. When played, the drum was held upright from under- 
neath. 

Besides the ordinary frame drum, Apulian vases of the last cen- 
turies B.C. show a strange variety of drum: instead of being flat, it 
looks like the shallow segment of a sphere, or a reversed bowl with 




Greece , Rome and Etruria 149 

the bottom cut off y the skin, though strikable only where it covers 
this small opening, yet is drawn all over the top and slanting sides $ 
along its rim there are fastening nails, while the center is generally 
marked by a dark circle surrounded by small dots. 

There are only two parallels among all known types of drums: 
the Chinese 'pang ku and the South Indian da§ari tappa((ai. The 
Chinese drum is made of six wedges of wood, kept together by a 
metal hoop and forming a sort of cake with a hole in the middle ; the 
skin, fixed with many iron nails, covers this hemisphere entirely, so 
that only its center, above the hole, can be struck as a drum head. 
The Indian drum has a metal frame and a calf’s skin and is played 
by the bare hand. 

The players of both Greek and Roman drums were almost ex- 
clusively women in the cults of Dionysos and Cybele. The drum had 
no place in any other form of music, including military music. 

CLAPPERS were also played almost exclusively by women. The 
krotala , Dionysian dance clappers, were made in various forms of all 
kinds of materials, mostly of wood in boot shape, similar to those 
described in the Egyptian chapter (cf. page 89). 

Another clapper, called kroupalon by the Greeks and scabellum 
by the Romans, belonged to the paraphernalia of the chorus leader 
and served to beat time. It was a kind of thick sandal, tied to the 
right foot and consisting of a block of wood cut out to form an upper 
and an under board, fastened together at the heel. Each board had 
a kind of castanet inside. In stamping, the boards with their casta- 
nets were clapped together with a sharp cracking sound. 

Cymbals came from western Asia to Greece at a relatively recent 
time with the orgiastic rites of oriental goddesses such as Cybele. 
They then were taken over into the service of Dionysos and into the 
theater. They were considered effeminate. Passages in contempora- 
neous writers and representations on art works indicate that both the 
harsh and tinkling cymbals were used, as in Mesopotamia and 
Israel. 

Struck disks of metal with a large central hole for a suspending 
cord were used as signal instruments. Their name was discus. In 
Rome, drivers struck them at the street corner before entering a 
narrow lane. Their origin was certainly Asiatic j in the temples of 
India metal disks with a clear, bright tone are used up to this day. 

One of the older Pythagoreans, Hippasos from Metapontos, de- 
vised four disks of bronze, so that they had the same diameters, but 




150 The History of 'Musical Instruments 

the thickness of the first was 4/3 of the thickness of the second, 3/2 
of the third, 2/1 of the fourth (e. g., (f g f c), “and by striking all 
of them he achieved a certain symphony.” 

In all sections of this chapter, Greece and Rome, and sometimes 
Etruria, were treated without much distinction. South Europe was 
a coherent musical district with a common heritage, in which the 
terms differed more than the instruments themselves. Greece, in- 
cluding the Greek colony, Magna Graecia, which covered southern 
Italy and Sicily, was dominant in art and science. Even in the times 
of the Roman Empire, Rome was ready to accept the cultural su- 
periority of Greece. In the musical field she did not develop any 
musical instruments independent of the Grecian ones, except for 
some military trumpets. 




7 . India 



A LL India was settled by the dark peoples speaking Munda and 
/ \ Dravidian languages before the pre-Aryan and Aryan civili- 
jl Jk-zations in the northwest pushed them southwards. Still, it is 
hardly possible to begin a history of Indian instruments with the 
Dravidian civilization because prehistoric evidences are almost lack- 
ing and historic evidences are comparatively recent. 

Instead, we begin with the pre-Aryan, so-called Indus civilization 
in the third millennium B.C., about which we know from the recent 
excavations at Harappa in the Punjab and Mohenjo-Daro in Sind. 

This civilization was remarkably advanced, resembling the cul- 
tures of Sumer and of Elam, and certainly related to them. The ex- 
cavations have been fruitful enough to give an idea of how the Indus 
peoples lived, what they grew and ate, what their tools and weapons 
were and what kind of religious belief they had. Unfortunately, the 
excavated material is extremely poor from a musical point of view. 
Some children’s rattles and whistles have survived, but those are all 
that can be claimed as instruments. A vertical conch shell found in 
the Indus valley may or may not have been a shell trumpet , and 
some round bronze objects resembling cymbals were more probably 
lids from vessels. Their form, however, with a central boss and a 
softly sloping and slightly turned up brim, is so closely related to 
actual cymbals that we may consider them precursors of the musical 
instrument. 

The only object that with certainty can be accepted as an instru- 
ment is depicted on an excavated clay statuette. The small figurine, 
though roughly made, distinctly shows a woman playing a small 
drum held under her left upper arm. The faithfulness of this statu- 

151 





152 The History of Musical Instruments 

ette can be assumed, as such axillary drums struck by women are 
represented on the oldest Indian temple reliefs, at Bharahat (second 
century B.C.). (pi. IX a) 

Further information must be sought in the still undeciphered, 
ideographic script of the Indus Valley civilization. One of its signs, 
and a very frequent one, seems to have been used as a suffix and 
vaguely resembles a lyre. But a careful comparison of all its variants 
was not able to convince the author that this sign portrayed any 
musical instrument. 

There is no doubt, on the contrary, that a second sign represents 
the Sumerian vertical arched harp with its nearly angular curve, re- 
sembling the one which is depicted on a Sumerian seal from about 
2800 B.C. in the University Museum in Philadelphia. This identi- 
fication is not without foundation ; pottery, art and script of the two 
civilizations are closely related and indicate an early intercourse be- 
tween the two countries. 

The vertical harp and the axillary drum are the only musical in- 
struments that we are entitled to ascribe to the earliest known civili- 
zation in India. 

Subsequent information from the north of India comes more than 
a thousand years later with the Rigveda, the religious hymns of 
Aryan invaders, the date of which is supposed to be between 1500 
and 1 OCX) B.C. 

The Rigveda mentions four instruments: aghafi, bakura, gar gar a 
and vapa. The first term is obscure, and its translations as ‘clappers’ 
or ‘drum’ are merely a guess. 

We know more about the bakura ; it is characterized as a loud in- 
strument used in battle to terrify the enemy. The name itself, like 
several other Sanskrit words, was traced by the author to modern 
Madagascar: in the northern district of this large island, bakora is 
the name of the shell trumpet. We may accept this interpretation for 
the Sanskrit word, as many ancient Indian poems give the shell 
trumpet (afterward called sankhd) the frightening and vindictive 
character that the Veda attributes to the bakura. 

The gargara is described as a stringed instrument} therefore, it 
probably was the horizontal arched harp, the only stringed instru- 
ment depicted on Indian reliefs before the Christian era. The in- 
strument vapa was probably a flute, since it was played by the 
Maruts, who were spirits of storm. A simple vertical flute, vepu or 
‘cane,’ is still used by aboriginal tribes of India. 




d ndta 



153 

New names are mentioned in the more recent Vedas. The Atharva 
Veda, the last of them, describes the dundubhilj as a wooden drum 
with cow skins, used as a thundering war instrument, which before 
battle was smeared with an offering-mixture, possibly of blood. 
Modern Hindu mistakenly make the word synonymous with na- 
gara , a modern kettledrum; no kettledrum existed either in Vedic 
times or in post-Vedic antiquity, and the dundubhilj. was certainly a 
different kind of drum. The word karkari y in the same Veda, may be 
a more recent form of gar gar a. For tupava the usual translation 
‘flute’ may be correct, but this interpretation is by no means certain. 
We also find, in the Yajur Veda V S 30, the classical terms sankha y 
which must have replaced bakura y and vipa y which has supplanted 
gargara. 

Before the Aryan invasions, there was in India “a Dravidian civi- 
lization of a more elaborate and developed character than the civili- 
zation, if civilization it can be called, of the Aryans.” (Slater) The 
Dravida later were pushed south and still occupy the southern part 
of India. “In so far as this Dravidian civilization was derived from 
outside sources its origin is to be traced to Egypt and Mesopotamia, 
linked up with India by sea commerce” in the third millennium B.C., 
or perhaps later. 

Are there marks of Mesopotamian or Egyptian influences on 
Indian instruments? 

The most striking evidence of an Egyptian influence is the word 
vipa. As this term, according to its spelling (p without a preceding 
r), must be a foreign word, there is little doubt of its identity with 
the Egyptian name of the harp. The term will be discussed again 
later. 

The typical South Indian trum / pet y called tirucinnam in Tamil, 
the main Dravidian language, is quite different from the more recent 
Indian trumpets. Like the Assyrian and Egyptian trumpets, it is 
about two and a half feet in length and consists of a rather large 
cylinder and a comparatively slim conical bell. Two of these trum- 
pets are blown simultaneously by the same player, though it is hard 
to understand how this is possible. A letter from the Government 
Museum at Madras, replying to an inquiry from the author, says: 
“The tiruchinnam have no special mouthpieces. In blowing them the 
upper ends are pressed against the lips. I am afraid the author of 
the Catalogue has used the expression ‘in the mouth’ incorrectly. 
The two trumpets of a pair are blown simultaneously or very nearly 




154 The History of Musical Instruments 

so, and as there is little difference in the sound, only the volume is 
increased. We shall watch the professionals and let you know whether 
any other results are observable.” Such a pair of twin trumpets is de- 
picted in use on one of the reliefs of the Tjandi Djawi in Java, which 
were carved at about 1300 A.D. 

The Indian double clarinet (Tamil magudi , Hindustani fungi) 
is made of two parallel canes glued together, exactly like the Egyp- 
tian double clarinet. Still, it has undergone an important change that 
the tropical flora made possible: the mouthpieces are concealed in a 
large calabash, the slender neck of which is held in the player’s 
mouth while its cavity serves as a wind chamber. The left pipe sus- 
tains a lower octave drone while the right pipe produces the melody. 
This is invariably played in the mode hanumatodi, which resembles 
the European Phrygian mode with minor second, third, sixth and 
seventh, or e' f g' a ' b' c" d" <?". It would seem logical to attribute 
Indian double clarinets to influences from the west, as the single reed 
is rare eastwards from India. They are played by Indian snake 
charmers to allure serpents out of their baskets or earth holes and to 
make them dance ; and the traditions and the implements of such 
jugglers are usually very old. 

Replacing the rigid calabash by a flexible bag, the Hindu and 
Dravida, as well as the Burmese, make single bagfifes which pro- 
duce either a melody or a drone. Sometimes the bagpipe has a double 
clarinet so that it can play a melody and a drone at the same time. 
The chief names are Tamil sruti and Hindustani masak. 

The Singhalese preserve a particularly large and archaic frame 
drum } the temmettama, which has a nailed skin and reaches a diame- 
ter of nearly four feet. It is not improbable that this Ceylonese drum, 
forced away to the extreme south of the continent, is a remnant of 
the old Babylonian temple drum. When, in the Babylonian chapter, 
we mentioned a frame drum ( imbutu , we stated that the radicals of 
the Akkadian name occurred again in the Tamil name of frame 
drums, tambattam. 

T he barrel drum is the last of these instruments similar to Egyp- 
tian instruments. It is first mentioned in the purapas , collections of 
myths and legends written in early Christian times, and its Egyptian 
counterpart is late as well. Both have the same peculiar shape: in- 
stead of being evenly curved, the outline is broken j the body has the 
form of two truncated cones united at their larger bases. This is a 
characteristic potter’s shape j clay is turned on a potter’s wheel and 
made to taper towards both ends, a straight board serving as a pat- 




India 



155 

tern. Clay is still used today as a material for these drums, and their 
Indian names, khol and mrdanga, signify ‘clayey/ When made of 
wood, a single block of the same shape is hollowed out; jack- and red- 
wood are preferred. 

The composite skins have always been made in a peculiar way, as 
they still are today, by gluing one or two overlapping circles of dif- 
ferent hides on top of the original layer of sheepskin. The center of 
the right head is covered by a hard, black paste of boiled rice, tama- 
rind juice and Manganese dust or iron filings. The left center has 
a paste as well, made of boiled rice, ashes and water, or of soojee and 
water; but it is applied at the beginning of the performance and 
scraped off at the end. 

The ring and the paste give the drum ‘harmonic overtones’ j while 
drums as a rule have irregular partials, a khol produces a funda- 
mental with its octave, twelfth, double octave and the major third 
above. Besides, the pastes enable the heads to be turned an octave or 
fifth or fourth apart, and even the rim and the center of the same 
head can be tuned to different notes. The intervals are varied accord- 
ing to the mode of the piece, the left hand producing the lower note. 
But the original significance of the tuning pastes was quite different. 
The code of sacrifices, the Atharva Veda, said that blood or red color 
could be painted on the skin as a sacrifice. Later, these sacrifices were 
replaced by agricultural offerings. The Chamar women in southern 
India, for instance, mix a paste of rice and saffron with a betel leaf, a 
betel nut and two pices, and also paint the skin with five spots of 
cinnabar before they use the drum to worship Dharti mat a. Mother 
Earth. The origin of the tuning paste, however, is unknown to mod- 
ern Hindu musicians. 

The two skins are fastened by hoops made of twisted thongs which 
run around the body at a slight distance from the heads. The two 
thong hoops are laced together by thongs which describe narrow 
W’s and which are tightened by small wooden dowels wedged be- 
tween them and the body. 

The skins are struck either with the whole hands, the finger tips or 
the base of the thumb. The players are noted for their technique; no 
musicians perform the thirty-five jatis or rhythmic schemes better 
than these drummers. “It takes a life time to acquire full proficiency 
in the art, as the performer must not only possess musical skill, but 
must be of good physique and have an accurate memory and supple 
hands” (Fredilis). 

Although these drums may have been influenced by Egypt, it 




156 The History of Musical Instruments 

would be hazardous to claim an Egyptian origin for them. This in- 
tricate style of drumming and the dominance of rhythm is character- 
istic of Indian music j it has no place in the very different art of 
Egypt. 

Information becomes more exact and safer when, under the in- 
fluence of Greek sculptors, Indian artists in northern and central 
India begin to carve reliefs on the walls of temples and of burial 
mounds. The oldest reliefs, on the stupa or mound at Bharahat in 
Central India dating from the second century B.C., include musical 
scenes with single musicians and bands, with trumpets, drums and 
harps. 

The arched har-p is figured over a period of a thousand years, from 
the Bharahat reliefs to temples erected about 800 A.D. The small, 
narrow body extends into the long neck to form a semicircle, and the 
upper end of the neck is bent outward to form a beak or a scroll. The 
strings are crowded close together leaving the two ends of the in- 
strument free, and are attached to the neck by simple loops without 
pegs. The player sits on the ground; she holds the harp in a horizon- 
tal position under the left arm and plucks the strings with a short 
plectron. (pi. IX a) 

In its shape, position and manner of playing, this instrument cor- 
responds exactly to the horizontal arched harp of Sumer depicted 
on the noted vase from Bismya. It cannot have been influenced by 
Egyptian harps because the latter were never of the horizontal type 
played with a plectron. The name of this instrument was probably 
vipa. The gigantic poem Mahabharata, which was composed between 
the fourth century B.C. and the seventh century A.D., mentions in 
19:35 that the girls playing the vina had their thighs skinned by the 
lower part of the instrument as if they were scratches of fingernails. 
This was perfectly possible with an arched harp, which rested on the 
lap, but not with a vina in the later sense, which rested on the ground 
and on the shoulder. The great theoretician Bharata, who lived in the 
first half of the first millennium A.D., made his experiments with 
two “vinas,” either having twenty-two strings. This number, again, 
is consistent with a harp, not with a stick zither. 

Trumpets. An end-blown shell trumpet, with a mouthpiece, is 
played by an ape on one of the reliefs at the temple of Bharahat 
(second century B.C.). The shell trumpet of modern India is a 
slim, white, polished turbinella rapa } pierced at the top to form a 




India 



157 

mouth-hole. Occasionally a mouthpiece and gold or silver decorations 
are added. Its name is sankha in Sanskrit, Bengali and Cannarese. 

The sankha is an exclusively religious instrument, used in divine 
worship and connected with legend and myth. As a trumpet, or 
simply as a sacrificial vessel, it is an attribute of Vishnu and other 
gods; worshipers of Vishnu paint it on their arms, and Lakshmi, his 
wife, has Sankha as a second name. A shell sucks away the blood of 
the giants that Parvati combats, just as in Greece Triton conquers 
the giants with a shell trumpet, and on the Last Day, when the 
world is in flames, Siva will sound the shell trumpet, as Heimdal 
blows the giallar horn at the Twilight of the Gods and the angel 
sounds the last trumpet on the Day of Judgment. 

On a relief of the first century A.D. at the temple of Sanchi in 
Central India, two (once more two!) non-Indian men, probably 
Afghans, play long trumpets which bend upward just beyond the 
mouthpiece for four or five feet and then jut forward to form a bell 
shaped like the gaping mouth of an animal. Exactly the same trum- 
pets are depicted at about the same time on a silver kettle from 
Gundestrup, Denmark. 

DRUMS, in their most usual form carved on ancient reliefs, have 
a slightly bulging barrel with two heads ; the thongs are directly 
fastened to the skins without a hoop and laced crosswise in X form; 
a central belt to which they are tied increases their firmness. This 
drum is struck either with the hand or with one or two sticks. The 
position in which it is held varies. Sometimes it is horizontally sus- 
pended from the neck. On the same relief referred to in the preced- 
ing paragraph, members of the band carry the drums from the 
shoulder so that they hang diagonally across the man’s chest and are 
struck on the same head with two sticks. A third position, in a women’s 
dance, may be axillary; but as the player is carved in profile, the 
shape and the position of the drum are not distinct enough to be 
conclusive, (pi. IX a) 

On some reliefs at Bharahat, the drum stick is hooked or coiled 
in the form of a bishop’s crosier instead of being straight. Such sticks, 
possibly connected with forerunners of a Chinese symbol, the mace 
of fortune, still exist in Tibet, South India, Sumatra and Borneo, 
while they have disappeared from Europe, northern India and 
Persia. 

It probably was Persia that gave India the hooked stick and the 




158 The History of Musical Instruments 

cylindrical drum with X-laces as wellj drums of this kind with 
crosier sticks are not found anywhere except on medieval Persian 
miniatures. In the third century B.C. the provinces of the north- 
west were under Persian rule and accepted a quantity of Persian 
words and Persian customs. 

Two such drums are sometimes placed together, one standing and 
one lying, to form a pair, at Bharahat as well as on later reliefs up to 
the fourth century A.D. One of the drums is horizontally laid on the 
thighs of a sitting woman, and the other drum stands erect before 
her j both are played with bare hands. Twin drums of a similar shape, 
but separately played by two standing men, appear on a relief of the 
temple at Sanchi in Central India (first century A.D.). 

Twin combinations of this kind exist far beyond the boundaries of 
India. Children in modern Bali have preserved exactly the same 
custom, and the Koreans suspend two cylindrical nailed drums from 
an upright frame so that they hang horizontally at right angles one 
above the other j as small clapper drums placed crisscross on a handle, 
they still are used in Japan. 

A different kind of drum is played in a martial scene at Bharahat, 
where apes are the performers. One sees a large drum supported 
against the player’s chest, his left arm is bent around the trunk of 
the drum and his right hand is striking with a stick. The author is 
inclined to conclude from this position and the analogy with ancient 
Peruvian representations that this drum is ‘shallow’ — that is, an in- 
termediate form between a barrel and a frame drum. Small dots 
around the skin are probably not nails as one might suppose j the 
sculptor’s style is too realistic to admit such a misplacement. They 
are more likely to be dabs of sacrificial paste, mixed from pills and 
vegetables. Later on, such pastes used on the skins of drums lost 
their symbolic character and became a device for tuning the skin by 
increasing the weight. 

One of the Bharahat reliefs shows an ape playing the oldest hour- 
glass drum — a waisted drum narrower in the middle than at the ends. 
It is not much longer than it is wide, and the skins are laced with 
nearly parallel thongs or cords and a central belt around the narrow 
waist. Suspended from the ape’s shoulder, the drum is played with 
two sticks, each striking one skin. 

Modern Indian hourglass drums are generally shorter and 
smaller. They have the central belt but the thongs are laced in W 
form. When played, they are held in the hand so that by pressing the 
lacing cords the man is able to alter the pitch. An apparently older 




India 



159 

type, called davandai in Tamil, is bigger, made of wood and struck 
with a stick} the usual smaller type is made of metal and struck with 
the bare fingers (Tamil udukkai). 

A typically Indian variety, damaru, is constructed as a claffer 
drum ; one or two cords, tied to the side of the drum and ending in 
a knot or ball, strike the skins when the drum is rapidly moved to 
and fro by a twisting movement of the forearm. It is the sacred at- 
tribute of several divinities: Siva above all} then, Brahma’s learned 
wife, Sarasvati} the goddess of death, Bhadra-Kali} the fourteen- 
handed god of anger, Aghora. 

The reliefs of Amaravati also depict a drum that seems to be re- 
lated to certain types of the Far East. It is represented as a circular 
disk, some two feet wide and suspended by a handle from a horizon- 
tal pole that two men carry on their shoulders while one of them, or 
perhaps both, beat it with violent strokes of a hooked stick. It closely 
resembles the Japanese ni-daiko , a laced drum some two feet wide 
which is carried in exactly the same way. 

All instruments discussed so far can be traced back to pre-Christian 
times} the following instruments belong in the last, post-Christian 
centuries of antiquity. 

CROSS FLUTES. While notched flutes and fan-fifes had no 
importance in India and beak flutes were mere shepherds’ instru- 
ments, the cross flute (Sanskrit vaipst) was the outstanding wind in- 
strument of ancient India. It first appears on the reliefs of the tem- 
ple at Sanchi in Central India in the first century A.D. On the reliefs 
of Amaravati, carved within the following three centuries, this flute 
forms a part of the so-called celestial music — that is, instruments of 
an aristocratic character which are depicted by the artists as being 
suspended in heaven to be touched by superhuman and invisible 
hands as an entertainment for the gods. One of the divinities, 
Krishna, played it himself as, saved from death by being hidden in a 
shepherd’s house, he became a cowherder. When his flute sounded, 
“the spirits were enchanted } the rivers paused and stopped flowing } 
the birds, halting in their flight, flew down and listened jealously} 
all the inanimate things under the sun grew brighter.” 

SHORT LUTE. In the first centuries A.D., Northwest Indian 
art was under a strong Greek influence and developed into a mixed 
style which generally is called Gandhara, after the name of a small 
country in Kashmir. Several statuettes and reliefs carved in this style 




160 The History of Musical Instruments 

represent players of a short lute, the venerable ancestor of the Is- 
lamic, the Sino- Japanese and the European lute families. 

The ‘short lute’ has a neck shorter than the body. Its origin is 
a wooden body tapering upward to form a neck and a fingerboard, 
not, as with the long lute, a stick with a small resonance shell at its 
under end. The musical difference is that in short lutes the melodic 
scale, in principle, is formed by all strings consecutively, whereas in 




figure 36. From an East Turkestanic fresco, 5th- 7th 
century A.D. (After Grunwedel.) 



long lutes it is obtained from one string only by stopping while the 
others accompany. 

The oldest short lutes are depicted on Persian figurines of the 
eighth century B.C., excavated from the Tell at Suza. The body is 
rather small and narrow, about two feet long and eight inches wide $ 
details cannot be distinguished. 

No trace of short lutes has been found between this earliest evi- 
dence and the Gandhara statuettes some eight hundred years later. 
But, again, the Gandhara style points toward an Iranian country. 

The Gandhara lute has a pear-shaped body tapering towards the 
short neck, a frontal stringholder, lateral pegs and either four or five 
strings. These are the well-known features of Far Eastern, Near 
Eastern and European lutes. 





PLATE IX 



India 



161 



Still, the Gandhara lute forms a strange variety within this large 
family: instead of a continuously tapering outline, the face has a con- 
tour broken on either side by a kind of barb. No Chinese, Arabian 
or European lute has a barb. It therefore must be supposed that the 
spreading of the lute from Iran east and southward had begun be- 
fore this local variety developed, (pi. IX b) 

The barb has survived in many forms in India, Afghanistan and 
the Pamirs. In a modern lute called rabob or sarod , the hollow under 
the barb is so exaggerated that it forms a deep channel and makes a 
kind of waist in the outline of the front, which forms a groove in 
the side of the body. All these waisted lutes (and some Indo-Persian 
long-necked lutes) are abnormally deep; instead of being softly 
rounded at the rear, they have a ridge so that they look “chicken- 
breasted.” In stating this, we remember a passage in the Mafatify 
al~ulum , the Arabian encyclopedia of the tenth century A.D., ac- 
cording to which a certain Persian lute was called barbaf for its re- 
semblance to the breast of the duck. Was this the same instrument? 

In ancient India, as in Egypt, there is no instrument for which 
we can trace a native origin. All of them seem to have come from 
the west and the north. Strangely enough, we will have to wait for 
the middle ages to find a native stock in Indian music, (fig. 36) 




8 



The Far East 



T HE relationship between the Chinese and the Greek men- 
tality is most striking in their similar attitude towards 
music. Plato, in the fourth century B.C., had suggested 
that music should be one of the basic influences in Greek education. 
Music shapes soul and character ; good music guarantees a well- 
ordered community, whereas bad music brings the State into dan- 
ger; national control of music and obligatory education would be 
essential to the community. 

These ideas were familiar to the Chinese mind before they came 
to Greece. More than a hundred years earlier than the Greek phi- 
losopher, the wise Confucius (551-478 B.C.) had preached exactly 
the same doctrine. 

In John Steele’s translation of the /-/*, or Book of Etiquette and 
Ceremonial , written in the time of the Chou, we read: “Of the six 
arts which covered the attainments expected of a gentleman in Old 
China . . . the knowledge of ceremonial practices which guided a 
man in daily life, at his audiences with his ruler, and in his ap- 
proaches to the ancestral spirit came first. . . . The practice of 
music and the knowledge of the significance of tunes, comes next.” 
Such a requirement is reminiscent of the musical equipment that 
the Italian Renaissance expected of a corteggiano. But the musical 
achievement of Chinese noblemen was less a social distinction than 
a necessity for a well-balanced personality. Confucius said, “It is by 
the odes that the mind is aroused. It is by the Rules of Propriety 
that the character is established. It is from music that the finish is 
received.” And the philosopher Mencius (372-289 B.C.) followed 
him: “By hearing the music of a prince, we know the character of 
his virtue.” 



162 





The Far East 



163 

The music of a prince includes not only the music that he per- 
forms personally, but also the music in his service. The State needs 
equilibrium as the individual does, and the emperor personifies the 
State. According to Confucius, “When good government prevails 
in the empire, ceremonies, music and punitive military expeditions 
proceed from the emperor. When bad government prevails in the 
empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions pro- 
ceed from the princes.” So one understands a story told in the works 
of Mencius: “Chwang Paou, seeing Mencius, said to him, ‘I had an 
audience with the king. His Majesty told me that he loved music, 
and I was not prepared with anything to reply to him. What do you 
pronounce about that love of music?’ Mencius replied, ‘If the king’s 
love of music were very great, the kingdom of Ts‘e would approach 
a state of good government.’ ” 

Once “the people of Ts‘e sent Loo a present of female musicians, 
which Ke Hwan received, and for three days no court was held. 
Confucius took his departure.” His leave was probably an act of 
protest because the text goes on to say that he “returned from Wei 
to Loo, and the music was reformed, and the pieces in the Imperial 
songs and praise songs each found their proper place.” 

As the State, the organized frame of the nation’s life, was con- 
sidered a microcosmos, an inseparable part and effigy of the macro- 
cosmos, it could be good only if in harmony with the universe. 
Music, securing the welfare of the State, had to take its law from 
the cosmos. 

The cosmos embodied eternal timej it then was the integration 
of the alternating seasons, of spring and summer, fall and winter. 
It embodied eternal space j it then integrated whatever was in the 
east and west, in the north and south. It was matter, integrating 
wood and metal, skin and stone j it was force, embodying wind and 
thunder, water and fire. Lastly, the cosmos was sound, in both con- 
ceptions, as pitch and as timbres. The universe is onej so time and 
space, matter and music, are congruent, as they are but various mani- 
festations of the same One. Their differentials, then, must be con- 
gruent as well: a certain season corresponds to a certain cardinal 
point, a certain matter, and a certain musical instrument j and the 
four seasons are separated from each other, not only by definite 
amounts of time but also by musical intervals. A false combination 
would endanger the world’s harmony. 

In consequence of this conception, ancient Chinese wisdom in- 
dulged in all sorts of co-ordinations. Lao-Tsze, in condemning sen- 




164 The History of Musical Instruments 

sual pleasure, compares the five notes of the pentatonic scale with 
the colors black, red, green, white, yellow, and with the tastes salt, 
bitter, sour, acrid and sweet. 

Color’s five hues from th’ eyes their sight will take ; 

Music’s five notes the ears as deaf can make ; 

The flavors five deprive the mouth of taste. 

The most important co-ordination in conditioning music is the 
one called <pa yin , of which we present the following abstract: 



CARDINAL 


year’s 


PHE- 


SUB- 


MUSICAL 


POINTS 


SEASONS 


NOMENA 


STANCES 


INSTRUMENTS 


northeast 


winter to spring 


thunder 


gourd 


mouth organ 


east 


spring 


mountain 


bamboo 


pan-pipes 


southeast 


spring to summer 


wind 


wood 


trough 


south 


summer 


fire 


silk 


zither 


southwest 


summer to autumn 


earth 


clay 


globular flute 


west 


autumn 


dampness metal 


bell 


northwest 


autumn to winter 


heaven 


stone 


sonorous stone 


north 


winter 


water 


skin 


drum 



Following this co-ordination, the Chinese have adopted a classifi- 
cation of instruments unique in the world. They distinguish eight 
classes according to the material used: gourd, bamboo, wood, silk, 
clay, metal, stone, skin instruments. 

Matter, in Chinese music, is far more than a means of bringing 
forth a sound. Like body and soul, a material and its sound are 
manifestations of the same phenomenon. Sound is almost tangible, 
and a sonorous stone, in Chinese terminology, would “receive the 
tone” at the end of each verse of the hymn to Confucius in order to 
transmit it to the following verse. A tone, in Far Eastern concep- 
tion, does not need any definite length or rhythm j it should not be 
cut off or superseded by other sounds j the longer it lasts, and the 
more it is isolated, the more a listener perceives the life of the sub- 
stance that has produced it. Occidentals might experience a similar 
sensation in the slowly fading pulsations of a church bell. 

From this ideology one can understand the relative importance of 
idiophones in Chinese music. Only one of the eight Chinese sub- 
stances provides a stringed instrument, and one a drum. Three sub- 
stances, on the other hand, furnish wind instruments, and three idio- 
phones. Idiophones are more essential in the Far East than in other 
civilizations. 

Being more important, many East Asiatic idiophones developed 




The Far East 



165 

into instruments capable of melody, although in western civili- 
zations they were almost entirely restricted to percussion. An idio- 
phone, however, could not be stretched or stopped in order to supply 
a series of notes; playing melodies required a set of them, similar 
in shape but of different size and pitch, and united in some frame 
to form a well-tuned chime. Such sets of stones or bells or gongs or 
metal slabs are the outstanding feature in East Asiatic music; no 
other civilization has created chimes of any kind. 

Exactness of pitch was harder to achieve in making chimes than 
in making stringed instruments or the majority of wind instruments. 
No stretching or relaxing, no artificial fingering, no correction by 
breath or lips could influence their scales; they had to be correct 
from the beginning, and pitch and scale became more important 
than anywhere else in the world. 

Pitch and scale, too, were controlled by the laws of cosmology. 
Their accordance with the universe was achieved by taking musical 
measures from nonmusical categories, just as nonmusical categories 
were measured by musical proportions. For example, the distance 
between the seasons could be measured by octaves, fifths and fourths 
while the pitch tone was provided by a tube exactly one (Chinese) 
foot long, and the distances between the finger holes of a flute were 
ruled neither by musical nor by technical reasons, but by inches. 
Myth relates that a new emperor, as one of his first acts, sent his 
minister to the western mountains in order to get the correct pitch 
from the bird Phoenix. In historical times the Minister of Measure- 
ments was in charge of the music; when invading barbarians had 
destroyed the standard instruments, subsequent dynasties tried hard 
to re-establish pitch and scale to save the nation. So Mencius could 
say that “in the matter of sounds, the whole empire models itself 
after the music-master K‘wang.” 

Men who conceived of music as sounding matter, and who exacted 
chromatic scales from the brittlest substances, of course stressed in- 
strumental rather than vocal music. In Marie Du Bois-Reymond’s 
musical diary, written in Shanghai in 1908-09 and given to the 
author, we read that a certain Chinese gentleman and player con- 
sented to sing into Mrs. Du Bois’s phonograph on the condition that 
the record would not be heard in China, as singing “did not suit 
a decent Chinese.” While in the Near East singing was much more 
essential, and instruments were rarely given independence, the Far 
East tended towards a self-sufficient instrumental music which cul- 
minated in the exuberant plenty of its orchestras. 




1 66 The History of Musical Instruments 

THE SHANG DYNASTY 

( FOURTEENTH — TWELFTH CENTURIES B.C.) 

Chinese history began in the fourteenth century B.C. with the 
Shang people who lived at Anyang in Northeast China, at the same 
time that the Kassites were ruling in the Near East and the eight- 
eenth dynasty was ruling in Egypt. 

Some parts of the vast anthology of ancient Chinese poems called 
Shih eking, the Book of Poetry , go back to the time of the Shang. 
In one of its odes, which can be dated 1135 B.C., we read: 

In what unison sounded the drums and bells! 

What joy was there in the hall with its circlet of water ! 

The lizard-skin drums rolled harmonious, 

As the blind musicians performed their parts. 

The Chinese names used are chung for the bell, and ku for the drum. 
Although bells and drums are mentioned, no specimens have been 
preserved. 

The only instruments of the Shang which have been excavated 
and preserved are sonorous stones, said to be like those of later 
periods, and something quite extraordinary — a globular flute carved 
from bone. 

GLOBULAR FLUTES ( hsiian ) have a small and bulging re- 
ceptacle instead of the usual tube j their tone, extremely poor in har- 
monics, resembles the vowel sound 00. 

Tracing back this instrument, we meet an early type in South 
Africa, where Caffre children sing into a hollow fruit instead of 
blowing. The globular flute may have been a mere voice mask, like 
early tubular and shell trumpets. As it developed from a voice mask 
to an actual flute, it was provided with a number of fingerholes. The 
original shell, usually a coconut, was replaced by earthenware in 
those countries where appropriate shells were lacking, in Central 
and East Asia for example. In this case the sharp-edged mouth-hole, 
cut somewhere in the side, was superseded by an upper orifice. An- 
cient Chinese authors said that such an instrument was molded on 
two eggs, a fowl’s egg for the outer, and a chicken’s egg for the inner 
surface. The number of fingerholes was five, and is now six. 

Though the globular flute of the Shang evidently has the shape 
of the modern hsuan, it is the only one made of bone. As we have 
not seen it, we describe it in Herrlee Glessner Creel’s words: 




The Far East 



167 

The Shang example is about two and a half inches high and more or 
less barrel-shaped. It is decorated with two so-called tao-fieh, or ‘ogre 
masks,’ such as are found on bronzes. There is a hole at the top to blow 
into, and five holes on the sides which may be stopped with the fingers to 
vary the pitch. Mr. Liang, who kindly demonstrated it to me, blew ‘do, 
re, mi, fa,’ and said that by blowing harder on one note it was possible to 
produce ‘sol.’ There are two remarkable things about this. In the first 
place, it shows that the Shang people must have known quite a little about 
music. Not all of the intervals were exact, though this might have been 
because the instrument was not completely clean. But the interval from 
‘do’ to ‘fa’ was a perfect ‘perfect fourth,’ accurately tuned. The most in- 
teresting thing about this instrument is that the notes mentioned are the 
first five notes of the major scale, involving a half-step which is not present 
at all in the modern Chinese five tone scale. They would seem, in fact, to 
indicate that an entirely different tonal system was in use at that time. 

We quote the last sentences not because we share the view they 
express, but, on the contrary, because they give the cue to combat a 
common but erroneous conclusion. The series of notes available on 
an instrument does not necessarily represent its scale ; the keyboard 
of an occidental piano with its twelve semitones within an octave 
gives the 'possibility of playing scales in twenty-four tonalities, but 
the scales themselves comprise only seven notes. Likewise, the notes 
mi and fa on the old globular flute can have been used alternately, to 
play either in the anhemitonic scale do re mi sol y or in the scale 
do re fa sol y anhemitonic as well. 

The clay flute has given birth to a strange offshoot: the egg shape 
has been abandoned for the form of any animal, usually a bird. The 
sound is not produced by the simple mouth-hole but by a whistle 
head, similar to that of the recorder family, inside of the head of 
the bird, which is at the outer end of the instrument. The mouth of 
the player is applied to the tubular tail which serves as a breath 
conductor; the hollow body is a windchest. Thus, the whistle is 
at the end of the wind system instead of at the beginning. If the 
player pours some water into the flute, it bubbles and interferes with 
the air current; the tone then becomes quavering, as with the trem- 
olo stop of an organ. 

In this form the globular flute is spread over the ancient and mod- 
ern world as a cheap child’s toy. But there is no doubt that it once 
had a charm power emanating from its zoomorphic shape. 

It was one of the curiosities of history when, about i860, a certain 
Donati at Budrio in southern Italy “invented” a globular beaked 




1 68 The History of Musical Instruments 

flute of clay or porcelain in the shape of a turnip with a whistle 
head and eight fingerholes in a convenient arrangement. This un- 
pretentious instrument, called ocarina , ‘anserine,’ or ‘of the nature 
of geese,’ became very popular with modest amateurs. Since the 
ocarina was made in complete sets from trebles to basses, ocarina 
societies, and even orchestras, using only this instrument were 
founded. Unconsciously Donati reunited the two separated branches 
of the globular clay whistle: the cavity sound and fingerholes of 
one with the cross arrangement and the whistle system of the other. 

STONES AND STONE CHIMES (ch'mg) are much valued 
as musical instruments by the Chinese. Certain calcareous stones 
struck with a sufficiently heavy stick produce an excellent sound j 
when they have been long exposed to the sun and are perfectly dry, 
their timbre is less brilliant than that of metal and clearer than that 
of wood. 

While today the use of stones is confined to Confucian temples, 
they were indispensable in antiquity on all formal occasions, official 
as well as private, at banquets and receptions, and they were even 
played in intimacy. The philosopher Mencius (372-289 B.C.), 
comparing Confucius with a musical performance, said : “A concert 
is complete when the large bell proclaims the commencement of the 
music, and the ringing stone proclaims its close.” Performing on a 
stone did not mean a plain and rough hammering. Confucius’s pupils 
relate that “the master was playing, one day, on a musical stone in 
Wei, when a man, carrying a straw basket, passed the door of the 
house where Confucius was, and said, ‘this heart is full that so beats 
the musical stone.’ ” The word reveals a delicacy in playing that we 
can hardly understand. 

The biggest sonorous stone occurs in Annamese temples j there, 
enormous slabs, many feet in width and about four inches in depth, 
are struck with small, though heavy, wooden clubs. The Chinese 
slabs are only from one to two feet in the largest dimension and cut 
in the shape of an L, except that the angle is obtuse. They are sus- 
pended. In this form they were probably used as money in remote 
times, just as today actual gongs circulate as money in southeastern 
Asia; some of the earliest coins of China had the same L form, 
though reduced in size. 

Sonorous stones are known far beyond the boundaries of China. 
Some have been found in Venezuela, and some replace the bells in 
Christian churches of Ethiopia and on the Mediterranean island of 




The Far East 169 

Chios. Still, there is no reason for connecting these with the Far 
Eastern stones. 

A relation with a certain West Polynesian rite, on the contrary, is 
possible, indeed probable, for reasons of cultural geography. To 
prepare the intoxicating drink kawa for religious purposes, maidens 
perform the solemn ceremony of sitting on the ground and pulver- 
izing the roots of the pepper plant, piper methysticum, on flat, sono- 
rous stones which are insulated with small pieces of coconut and 
tuned to definite pitches. In a former book the author has transcribed 
a piece of Samoan stone music. 

This may be an older stage that has been preserved, or a degen- 
erated one, or even an independent development. It shows, at all 
events, that sets of tuned stones can exist without the use of single 
stones j single stones did not necessarily precede combined stones. 
Moreover, the discovery that different stones produced different 
tones can be supposed to have led to musical utilization rather than 
to the much less impressive discovery that a beaten single stone could 
sound. 

The Far-Eastern stone chime or lit ho f hone, called pen chHng 
in Chinese, consists of sixteen slabs, L-shaped, about one foot on the 
longer side, all identical in size but differing in thickness. The slabs 
are suspended in two horizontal rows above each other from a rec- 
tangular stand j the upper row is tuned to the male, the lower .row 
to the female semitones, which will be explained later. Each verse 
of the hymn to Confucius is ended by a single blow with a discon- 
nected hammer in order “to receive the tone” and transmit it to the 
following word. (pi. X c) 

BELLS AND BELL CHIMES are the bronze age counterparts 
of the neolithic stones and stone chimes. 

A bell is a vessel, the edge or sound bow of which produces the 
strongest vibrations while the top is mute. 

Chinese bells were either struck by a clapper hung inside the bell 
(Chinese ling), or struck from the outside with disconnected ham- 
mers ( chung ). Both types are usually suspended, the former from 
the necks of animals, the latter from an upright stand. Besides, mili- 
tary bands of the Chou dynasty comprised at least two hand bells. 
In this section we will speak of the empty bell only. 

We do not know how the bell originated. Primitive peoples pos- 
sess rough bells made of natural material, such as crab pincers, shells 
and wood. But it is not sure that nonmetallic bells preceded the 




170 The History of Musical Instruments 

metal bell j most of them are clumsy imitations probably due to the 
lack of metal and foundries. It is not even certain that the riveted 
iron bells of African Negroes came earlier than the Chinese bells. 

Bells are amulets, in the Far East as everywhere else. They are 
hung around the necks of bulls and cows — not to control the ani- 
mals, but to protect them against evil spirits. Bells are suspended 
at the door to be rung by entering persons, not to warn the owner 
as today in some old-fashioned stores j the house and the caller must 
be protected against the demons who lurk under the threshold. 
Bells originally were not intended to call the churchgoers but to 
purify the holy place. 

In planter civilizations bells assume the special function of a fer- 
tility charm. In the modern Tyrol, farmer boys, each with a small 
bell in his hand, march round the fields to secure a good harvest. 
The Bari, a Nilotic Negro people, try to attract rain by filling a bell 
with water and sprinkling the soil. 

Bell ringing as a fertility and rain charm is a Chinese practice as 
well. The largest bell of China, in Peking — a gigantic instrument 
about fourteen feet in height, cast in the fifteenth century A.D. — was 
only struck when the emperor prayed for rain. The usual decora- 
tion of Confucian bells is associated with ideas of fertility. The ex- 
terior is divided into two zones: one of them is left undecorated and 
represents the field concealing the seeds j the other one generally 
has four squares of nine bosses each — nine being a sacred number 
that symbolizes renewal — and the bosses, according to Chinese 
sources, indicating female breasts, or rather nipples. 

In contradiction to these feminine connotations, blood was some- 
times mixed with the alloy. Legend relates that one emperor wit- 
nessed the trembling ox dragged to the slaughter as a sacrifice 
to the bell, and, pitiful, spared himj but a sheep had to be offered 
in his place. 

The memory of human sacrifices has survived in the legend of 
the casting of the Great Bell. Yung-lo, the third emperor of the 
Ming dynasty, ordered a mandarin to cast a bell which should be 
heard in every part of Peking. The mandarin obeyed, but the bell 
was honeycombed when the mold was detached from it. He made 
a second attempt and failed again. When, urged by the emperor, he 
tried a third casting, his lovely young daughter learned from an 
astrologer that success could only be secured if a maiden’s blood 
were mixed with the ingredients. So when the melted metal rushed 
into the mold, she threw herself into the boiling fluid. While the 




The Far East 171 

unfortunate father, insane with sorrow, was taken home, the bell 
was found to be perfect. 

In the Far East bells were originally quadrangular in cross sec- 
tion, as they were also in ancient Egypt and Ireland and still are in 
the Shan States of the Burmese hinterland. The dynasty of the 
Chou is said to have replaced the rectangular shape of the cross sec- 
tion by an elliptic one. From elliptic, it became circular in the six- 
teenth century, and in the eighteenth, oval. The characteristic bee- 
hive shape of Chinese bells, so different from the tulip shape of 
modern European bells, is also attributed to the Chou. 

The size must have been rather impressive as early as the Han 
dynasty. Chang Heng (78-139 A.D.), the author of satires against 
the luxury of the imperial residences, speaks of gigantic bells in 
the palaces weighing three hundred thousand pounds. This, how- 
ever, is certainly exaggerated. The world’s largest bell, the Tsar’s 
bell in Moscow, weighs 443,772 pounds and the Great Bell men- 
tioned above, which is rammed with a heavy beam hung horizon- 
tally, is estimated at fifty-three tons, or 1 18,720 pounds. 

Single bells in the palaces and the Confucian temples are called 
po chung. Suspended in a large ornamental frame with tigers and 
a hawk carved on it, the temple bell was placed on the moon terrace 
and struck with a beater between the verses of the Confucian hymn. 
As Chinese cosmology associated notes and seasons, the pitch of the 
bells, like that of sonorous stones, changed with the season of the 
year j the spring required a bell tuned to /#, while the autumn 
needed a bell in b. 

This association must have originated farther west. The Greek 
author Plutarch (c. 40-c. 120 A.D.), who, of course, did not know 
anything about Chinese cosmology, related that the Babylonians 
considered the proportion spring-autumn equivalent to a fourth in 
music, while spring and winter formed a fifth, and spring and 
summer an octave. These are the two systems: 



Interval 


Babylonia 


China 


octave 


summer— y 




fifth 


winter ■ —V 


—winter 


fourth 


autumn A 


r — autumn 


second 




summer 


ground-tone 


spring— 


— spring 



The two systems are identical except for the position of summer. 

It seems that bell chimes were older than single (empty) bells. 




172 The History of Musical Instruments 

Our earliest sources always speak of bells in the plural form, and 
when we read in the Shih Ching that to entertain the guests at ban- 
quets “the bells and drums are properly arranged,” it is hard to 
think of anything but tuned sets of bells. 

The bell chime, called pen chung in Chinese, corresponds exactly 
to the stone chime. Sixteen bells, identical in shape and size but 
different in thickness (the thicker the higher), are suspended in 
two horizontal rows, one above the other, from a rectangular stand \ 
the upper row is tuned to the male, and the lower row to the female 
semitones (to be discussed later on). 

The history of Chinese bell chimes reflects a continued frustra- 
tion. We read, as in an exciting novel, how the alien Emperor 
Tsin-hwang-ti had his men destroy all Chinese books and musical 
instruments in order to strike at the spiritual roots of the nation. 
We then read how some faithful court and temple musicians secretly 
buried a few of the venerable old bell chimes in their gardens to 
preserve them j how, later on, national emperors tried to re-establish 
the ancient music, but on the basis of doubtful tradition and errone- 
ous calculation j how these same emperors destroyed the old and 
authentic relics in order to dispose of unwelcome witnesses to the 
inaccuracy of their own attempts j how for many centuries musi- 
cians and mathematicians tried to correct the false restoration j and 
how, also, these men failed. 

THE DRUMS. The earliest sources closely connect “the large 
bells and drums.” But it seems that a drum fo fu or ‘right-left’ is 
even older than the drum ku mentioned in the Shih Ching. Unlike 
the modern po fu it was filled with rice hull. A temple musician held 
it horizontally on his knees and, at the end of each verse of the 
hymn to Confucius, beat it three times with the bare hands — once 
with the right hand on the right skin, ■po, once with the left hand on 
the left skin, fu, and a third time with both hands oh both skins, 
po fu. 

Drums filled with grain were, and still are, found over large dis- 
tricts of Asia, and were known by North American Indians, such as 
the Ojibwa and the Cree. These American frame drums are similar 
to the oldest two-skinned frame drums represented on statuettes 
from ancient Mesopotamia. The purpose of the second skin could 
not have been for tuning as the oldest drums were not tuned. These 
widespread examples of two-skinned drums filled with grain indi- 




The Far East 



173 

cate that the second skin may have been originally necessitated by 
the filling. 

Besides the grain drum, China had a clapper drum, t ( ao ku> as 
early as the Shang dynasty. A stick passes diametrically through the 
body and projects on one side to form a handle. Two beads sus- 
pended on the outside of the drum strike the skins when the drum is 
rapidly twirled to and fro. Today this small drum is a toy; in the 
times of the Shang and the Chou it seems to have been larger. 

Much more important than the grain drum and the clapper drum 
is a family of big barrel drums, made of wood, with thick cow skins 
nailed over both ends, and played with two heavy sticks. The dif- 
ference between the numerous members of this family consists 
in their varying sizes and playing positions. It is nearly impossible 
to put order in the chaos of names given to these drums at various 
times in China, Korea and Japan. The survey is facilitated if we 
keep in mind two chief shapes and two playing positions: 

Shapes: 

long drums , in which the length of the barrel is larger than the di- 
ameters of the heads 

short drumSy in which the length of the barrel is smaller than the di- 
ameters of the heads 
Positions: 

heads horizontal 
heads vertical 

Drums with the heads vertical are usually more archaic. 

In the Mesopotamian chapter we pointed out that the large 
Sumerian drums and the large barrel drums of the Far East were 
closely related and probably had a common origin somewhere be- 
tween Mesopotamia and China. If so, then the use of two sticks 
striking the same skin can be interpreted as derived from the two 
drummers striking the same skin on Sumerian reliefs. It should be 
emphasized that striking with a pair of sticks does not achieve the 
same rhythmic refinement as beating with the hands. 

The characteristic nailing of these Far Eastern barrel drums, 
excluding definite pitch and tuning, might have been practical as 
well as magic. All we know is that in Asia, Africa and Europe nails 
have a magic significance and are connected with certain rites; nails 
are laid in tombs and driven into doors and trees, and up to this day 
Italians put nails in their pockets to protect themselves against the 
evil eye. 




174 The History of Musical Instruments 

Mrs. Marie Du Bois-Reymond relates in her diary that before 
being nailed the skins were tightly stretched with cords. This 
vaguely shows a connection between the nailed and the laced drum 
and draws our special attention towards certain African drums which 
are both laced and nailed, wooden pegs being driven through the 
same holes in the skin which allow the cords to pass. 

The magic character of the nails enhances the magic character of 
the drum itself. As a talisman for luck and victory, the drum em- 
bodied the fate of the army. According to the book Tso Chuan 
(c. 600 B.C.), it was consecrated by smearing the skins with the 
blood of sacrificed men, usually war captives. In battle, the com- 
manding chariot carrying the drum and the flag was the palladium 
on which defeat or victory depended: “The eyes and ears of the 
army are on the flag and drum. It will advance or retire as this 
chariot does.” 

THE CHOU DYNASTY ( I 1 2 2-25 5 B.C.) 

Of the instruments of the following dynasty, the Chou, we have 
a more complete knowledge. Poetical sources are more frequent, 
and an exhaustive contemporary list of the instruments that the 
Chinese used at that time has been preserved. 

The idiophones among the instruments enumerated in the list 
are the percussion clapper, the trough, the tiger, the lithophone, 
the stone and the stone chime, the bell and the bell chime. 

THE PERCUSSION CLAPPER. This term seems to be some- 
what paradoxical; clappers are concussion, not percussion instru- 
ments. Here, however, the term is exact. Twelve narrow, flat bam- 
boo strips, each twelve inches long and one inch wide, are tied 
together by a leather thong like a bunch of keys. When struck against 
the palm of the left hand, the percussion of the whole implement 
against the hand combines with the concussion of the individual 
strips. These clappers were used by temple singers; the sacred poem 
that should be sung, was engraved on the strips. A bunch of en- 
graved bamboo strips was the ordinary form of a written book and 
the earliest pictographic sign for ‘book/ in the Shang script, repro- 
duced it distinctly. Thus, the clapper was said to commemorate 
the invention of writing, especially at the sacrifice to heaven, when 
thanks were given for the gift of writing as well as for all other 
cultural benefits. This may be true; but we rather believe that, to a 




The Far East 175 

more primitive mentality, the power of the holy words was strength- 
ened when they were sung, moved and written at once. 

The name of this clapper, ch'ung tu y meant originally a different 
instrument, a piece of bamboo split several times, about seven Chi- 
nese feet high and five to six inches thick, which was struck upon 
the ground. It still exists in Korea under the name tok. 

THE TROUGH, chu y first mentioned, as far as we know, in a 
poem written about 1100 B.C., is a wooden percussion instrument. 
A board, a foot or two square, forms the bottom j the four side walls 
slope outwards. A hammer, linked to a pivot inside on the bottom, 
is reached through a large hole in one of the sides and strikes the 
bottom at the beginning of the Confucian service. In the hymn to 
Confucius it gives three blows before each verse — that is, before 
each group of the four syllables which are sung in four prolonged 
musical notes. 

As the trough had the form of an ancient grain measure, the in- 
strument must have originated in a farming civilization. It ob- 
viously was connected with the music of certain agricultural rites 
similar to the Malayan rice pounding in tuned mortars. Its use for 
pounding grain would explain why the Chinese strike the inside of 
the bottom of their trough instead of the outside of the walls, which 
would be more natural. A forerunner to the trough still exists in 
the Korean chuk y a large trough some thirty inches high. and 
pounded with a pestle in phallic shape. 

THE WOODEN FISH (Chinese mu yu y ‘wood fish,’ Japanese 
mo kugyo). The Taoistic and Buddhistic cults of the Far East em- 
ploy a strange offshoot of the slit-drum, which belongs here, though 
it is not mentioned in the list of Chou instruments. A fish, in an 
increasingly stylized and unrecognizable shape, is carved from a 
piece of camphor wood, hollowed out through a small ventral slit 
and lacquered gold and red. The craftsmen skillfully carve a small 
ball, imprisoned, but free to move inside the cavity. Suspended or 
placed on a cushion or stand, the fish is struck with a heavy pointed 
stick. 

The animal has no eyelids} it symbolizes wakeful attention. 
When beaten, it attracts the notice of the divinity, exactly as He- 
brew and Egyptian trumpets. Being a water animal, it is particularly 
efficacious with prayers for rain. But as explained in the section on 
the bull-roarer, fish are closely connected with rites of death and 
resurrection. From this point of view, the ball moving inside may 




176 The History of Musical Instruments 

recall resurrection myths much as the Biblical tale of Jonah in the 
whale. Another detail connects the wooden fish with another fa- 
miliar myth. The oldest specimens have a piece of fruit carved in 
the mouth j this is the noted penny for the journey of the dead that 
we have preserved in a denegerated custom of our kitchen when 
we dish up a fish with a lemon placed in its mouth. 

THE TIGER, yii y scraped three times, marks the end of the 
Confucian service. It is carved out of a piece of wood to represent 
a crouching tiger on a socle. Along the back a dentated strip, sug- 
gesting the animal’s spine, is scraped with a wand of bamboo, one 
end of which is split down to the middle into twelve switches. 

To the Chinese the tiger is the animal belonging to west and 
harvest, to sunset and death. The late sinologist, Richard Wilhelm, 
once said that in the dying sound of the tiger an initiated person 
experienced the mystery of the Tao, the spiritual path of life. This 
may be true. But the association with death seems to be counter- 
acted by both the rod and the scraping action. The life-giving sig- 
nificance of scraping has been mentioned (cf. page 43), and the 
split rod is a well-known symbol of life in Asia, America and even 
Europe. 

PITCH- AND PAN-PIPES. The earliest Far Eastern wind 
instrument, mentioned in a Chinese poem written about 1 100 B.C., 
has been interpreted as ‘double flute’ by the translator of the Book 
of Poetry. The Chinese term, however, is unmistakably kuan. This 
word means a short cylindrical oboe in modern language. But we 
know from Tsai YU, in the sixteenth century A.D., that in ancient 
Chinese the name was given to a vertical pitch-pipe without finger- 
holes, which was tuned to one of the twelve lu or ‘standards.’ 

The lu t carefully fixed in ancient times by the Music Office of 
the Ministry of Norms, were the basis of the musical system of the 
Chinese. They were determined by a cycle of either ascending fifths 
or descending fourths which started from the central note or Huang 
chtmg: F sharp, C sharp, G sharp, D sharp, A sharp, E sharp or 
F, C y G y D y A, E and B. As the Chinese conceive the cosmos as the 
harmony of yang and yin — the male and the female force — and as 
they understand music as a substitute and representative of the 
universe, they attribute six out of the twelve lu to the male, and six 
to the female principle. Numbers are also either male or female, 
odd numbers being considered male, and even numbers female. 




The Far East 



1 77 

Thus the first, third, fifth, etc., lu. are male, the second, fourth, sixth, 
etc., female: 

Male F$—G$—A %—C—D—E 
Female G—A—B—C$—D # — F 

The scale of lu does not exactly correspond to our tempered 
chromatic scale. For they are not brought forth by an actual cycle of 
fifths under the control of a musician’s ear, but by pitch-pipes, the 
lengths of which are in the ratio 2 :3 or 3 14.. But these proportions, 
though consistent with theory, are inaccurate with stopped pipes j 
musical intervals thus obtained are too small. So the Chinese at last 
introduced fourteen lii instead of twelve in order to fill in the octave. 





figure 38. Pan- 
pipes, bundle form. 




The junction of a whole set of these twelve pitch-pipes resulted 
in the f* at hsiao that we blunderingly call fan-fifes in honor of the 
Greek god Pan, though it was an unimportant instrument in Hellas. 

Generally speaking, pan-pipes are sets of canes, usually stopped 
at their lower ends, which are tied together either in the fashion 
of a raft (raft- fifes) or of a round bundle ( bundle-fifes ) and blown 
across the upper ends in the manner of vertical flutes, (figs. 37, 38) 
Pan-pipes of the Far East have notched canes (see next section) 
and raft form. The classical number of twelve canes has been in- 
creased to sixteen by adding four shorter canes, just as in stone and 
bell chimes the original number, twelve, has been increased to six- 
teen. The modern flat case, from which the upper and lower ends of 
the canes project, is said to have been added only under the Mongol 
Yuan dynasty, about 1300 A.D. 




178 The History of Musical Instruments 

Even in the joined form of pan-pipes the set of twelve lii pipes 
must have preserved its character as a standard instrument for de- 
termining pitch long before it became a musical instrument. Other- 
wise it is not intelligible that, disregarding melody, it would be ar- 
ranged in male and female groups up to this day. At present, its 
disposition resembles the symmetric fronts of occidental organs; it 
has the male canes on one side and the female canes on the other 
side, the canes being arranged in such a way that the longest are 
in the center with the shortest at the sides, or else the longest at the 
sides and the shortest in the center. 

This symmetrical arrangement, however, must be a later dispo- 
sition. In earlier times the scale ran straight from side to side; the 
lowest note is said to have originally been on the left side, but in the 
Sung dynasty (960-1278 A.D.), on the right side, while the Ming 
dynasty (1368-1644) restored the ancient plan. This change possi- 
bly was not a difference of age, but rather a difference of sex, one 
source speaking of a male and another of a female pipe, which finally 
were united to form a composite instrument. An intermediate stage 
was preserved in ancient Peru; there, a left-sided and a right-sided 
raft of pan-pipes, though separately blown by two players, were 
nevertheless connected by a loose cord. The same arrangement is 
found in modern Bolivia, and the Karen-ni in the Burmese hinter- 
land also use a pair of pan-pipes connected by a loose cord. 

A still more important evidence of this stage exists among the 
Cuna Indians in Panama. The same player blows two pan-pipes 
called man and wife, tuned a fifth apart and connected by a loose 
cord. (A brief look at the scheme on page 177 will show that of two 
lii a fifth apart one is necessarily male and one female.) When 
played, the two instruments are joined face to face and blown si- 
multaneously, a male cane always accompanied by the corresponding 
female cane a fifth above. 

FLUTES. The oldest sources mention four flutes: the kuan and 
the hsiao in the twelfth or eleventh century B.C., the chfih in the 
ninth, and the yiieh in the eighth century B.C. Later sources speak 
of the yo and the ti. These names must be interpreted with the great- 
est care; in three thousand years they have changed their meaning 
more than any other musical instrument of China. 

The ch'th was a bamboo flute played in unison with the globular 
flute: 




The Far East 



179 



Heaven enlightens the people, 

When the bamboo flute responds to the porcelain whistle ; 

As two half maces form a whole one, 

says an ode of the ninth century B.C. In medieval sources it is said 
to have had 5 + 1 fingerholes and to have been a stopped ti, with a 
blow-hole “like a sour jujube.” The word “stopped” can only apply 
to the upper end and not, as we would use the term, to the lower one. 




figure 39. Modern figure 40. Chinese figure 41. Laotic 

Japanese cross flute. mouth organ. mouth organ. 

Since it had a blow-hole, the chHh must have been a cross flute — in- 
deed, the oldest cross flute in history, (fig. 39) 

To anticipate the result of the following paragraphs: all the other 
terms designate a notched, flute , that is, a vertical flute with a small 
notch cut in the edge of the upper orifice ; the notch, being beveled, 
facilitates blowing. 

The kuan has already been discussed j it was a notched pipe with- 
out fingerholes. The ti was said to have been similar to the kuan, 
except for having three fingerholes. Prince Tsai Yu said that he had 
heard that the ti came from the Chfiang people. This was the name 



180 The History of Musical Instruments 

given to the Chou by the Shangj it hints of a western origin of the 
instrument. 

The hsiao is mentioned in the same verse as the kuan. James 
Legge, the translator of the Book of Poetry , renders it by ‘pan- 
pipes.’ This translation is certainly not correct. The pan-pipes, called 
f*ai hsiao , were composed of twelve pipes, kuan. Would it not be 
meaningless to mention in the same verse, as being played together, 
both the single and the united pipes of exactly the same kind? The 
flute hsiao must have been something different. No medieval Chi- 
nese writer, indeed, thought of the pan-pipes. Among them, Prince 
Tsai Yu seems to be particularly trustworthy when he says that 
hsiao is the ancient name of the yo. Asserting this, he does not con- 
tradict the “common opinion,” as A. C. Moule says, but, on the 
contrary, he confirms it in its statement that the hsiao was a ti. 

For the yo , in spite of the six fingerholes that it has in modern 
China, had only three holes in ancient times, as in Korea today, 
and since it was a notched flute it must have been identical with the 
ti and the hsiao. 

And finally the hsiao was identical with the yiieh. Moule says 
that “the yo is now obsolete except as a wand used by the mimes in 
ritual dances.” Indeed, the yiieh is referred to when, about 700 B.C., 
the dancer sings: 

I dance in the ducal courtyard . . . 

In my left hand I grasp a flute ; 

In my right I hold a pheasant’s feather. 

And again, in the eighth century: 

The dancers move with their flutes to the notes of the organ and drum 
While all the instruments perform in harmony. 

We cannot end this section on the ancient flute without men- 
tioning that the modern hsiao or tung hsiao , to use A. C. Moule’s 
words, is “a bamboo pipe made in the same way as the yo, except that 
the top is closed by a knot of the bamboo. In this knot a notch is cut 
joining that in the side.” This instrument is intermediate between 
the whistle flute and the simple vertical flute and certainly more 
archaic than the latter. We may be sure that the hsiao of the Chou 
had this form} but it must be an unsettled question whether the 
other flutes mentioned in this section had the knot as well. 

The standard flute was tuned to the note huang chung (the ‘yel- 
low belP) or /#, which probably was identical with the Greek ‘mid- 




The Far East 



181 



die tone’ or mese. To produce this note the tube must be cut exactly 
the length of an old Chinese foot, that is, 229.9 millimeters or nine 
and one-sixteenth inches. Therefore, the flute is called yo in Chi- 
nese and yak in Korean j both terms designate ‘stalk, foot, measure.’ 
If we add that the center of the lowest fingerhole was at a distance 
of three (Chinese) inches from the end of the flute, and that the 
centers of the three fingerholes were each two inches apart, we face 
one of the most arresting problems in the history of musical instru- 
ments: what was the principle that guided primitive man when he 
got his knife or burning iron ready to cut fingerholes in a pipe? Did 
he pierce them at random? Or was he led by any special idea? The 
reader must not forget that these men had no pitch, no fixed inter- 
vals, no scale, no system. 

The question touched upon in the Egyptian chapter was finally 
answered by our late friend Dr. Erich M. von Hornbostel. The fol- 
lowing were his principal points: 

1 ) The series of fingerholes on pipes are not determined by any 
musical conception. 

2) They are, on the contrary, determined by measures of length, 
that is by feet and inches. 

3) Certain measures and certain musical notes were, to the an- 
cient civilizations, akin, indeed identical, being different manifesta- 
tions of the same idea} for both of them were equally expressions 
of the cosmos. 

4) Measures have migrated with the instruments over wide con- 
tinents and epochs. 

Let us try to explain these four statements. 

Concerning 1 : most pipes, both primitive and highly developed, 
have equidistant fingerholes. But this equidistance absolutely pre- 
cludes the production of any musical scale unless the notes are cor- 
rected by the size of the holes, the breath, the fingering, or some 
special device. Scales require a geometrical progression of the spaces 
between the holes, not equidistance j the distances must increase 
towards the lower end. 

Concerning 2 : inches are not the same as the American and Eng- 
lish measures of this name, which are equivalent to 2.54 centimeters. 
The inches spread over the world by pipe making are measures of 
the early civilizations, the Sumerian and the Chinese. Among the 
most common we quote: 




1 82 The History of Musical Instruments 

the inch of 16.53 millimeters, 
the inch of 19.84 millimeters, 
the inch of 20.04 millimeters. 

The first one is recorded on a statue of the Sumerian king, Gudea 
(about 2400 B.C.). The other two cannot be dated. 

Concerning 3: these inches, and the feet made up in groups of 
fifteen, sixteen or twenty, are sacred measures. Using them in a 
musical instrument was equivalent to giving it the sacred character 
necessary for the magic and religious purpose it served. 

Concerning 4: measures were not invented by primitive men who 
had no use for them. They came, on the contrary, from the highly 
developed cultures of ancient Asia, which had to survey areas in 
order to distribute land for cultivation and to erect temples and 
palaces. With the world-wide migrations of tribes, ideas and ob- 
jects, these measurements were spread over the five continents. They 
persisted even in European instruments as long as the nineteenth 
century j the flutist and flute maker, Theobald Boehm, was prac- 
tically the first, in 1832, to abandon the equidistant holes which 
always had to be corrected. 

If we are called upon to measure a pipe, we lay a ruler alongside 
the instrument so that zero is at the upper end (the end near the 
player’s mouth). Then we measure from the upper end to the cen- 
ter of each side-hole. The entire length is seldom important. 

The kind of inch that we find as the standard used for determin- 
ing the distances between the holes is a valuable clue in seeking 
the provenance of a type of pipe. The author’s latest experience in 
using this method was in investigating the flutes of Madagascar. 
Their simple shape gave no hint. The native name sodina (pro- 
nounced sudina ) was certainly derived from Malayan suling , as d 
and l are interchangeable in some idioms of Madagascar, and it 
pointed to a Malayan origin of the flute. However, as the kind of 
inch utilized never occurs with Malayan instruments, but is a fre- 
quent standard of measurement of Arabian flutes, it can be taken 
for granted that the flutes came to Madagascar with one of the 
Arabian migrations across the sea. 

THE MOUTH ORGAN (Chinese sheng, Japanese sho) was 
originally made with a gourd. Today the gourd is replaced by a 
piece of wood cut in the same shape. The neck serves as a mouth- 
piece and air conduct, while the body forms a windchest to feed the 
pipes. Thirteen or more slender canes of different length (the high- 




The Far East 



183 

est measuring sixteen to twenty inches) project upwards out of the 
windchest in a circular arrangement $ inside the windchest each 
pipe has a side-hole which is covered by a thin metal tongue. This 
tongue interrupts the air current in the manner of a clarinet’s reed. 
But instead of being a ‘beating reed,’ the tongue of mouth organs 
is a ‘free reed’} that is, it is made precisely the same width as the 
hole, so that it is free to move to and fro through the hole without 
being stopped by its edges. Outside the windchest each pipe has a 
fingerhole which, if the pipe is expected to sound, must be closed 
for the following reason. As the tongue is less elastic than in occi- 
dental organs and harmoniums, it is permanently held open be- 
cause of the air pressure in the windchest. But if this outer hole is 
stopped, the pressure inside the pipe equalizes the pressure in the 
windchest and the tongue is again able to close, so that the pipe is 
able to sound, (fig. 40) 

The player holds the pipes nearly horizontal. He ‘blows’ mainly 
during aspiration, probably to prevent the metal tongues from grow- 
ing damp and oxidized. The sound is extremely delicate and sweet. 

Mouth organs are tuned by semitones or lie; the melodies, how- 
ever, are pentatonic without semitones. These melodies are accom- 
panied by chords. In the court music of Japan old harmonies are 
preserved which were brought to the country a thousand years ago 
from China j some comprise three notes, some five, some six notes. 
Only two of the eleven usual chords correspond to occidental minor 
triads j the others consist of the notes of pentatonic scales sounding 
simultaneously (for instance: A B D E F#), or in other combina- 
tions (for instance: G§ A B C D F$). In modern China these 
complicated harmonies are replaced by simple parallels of fifths and 
fourths. In both cases the melody is below, as in ancient Greece and 
the earlier part of the European middle ages. 

Prototypes of the mouth organ are still found in the south and 
the east of Asia. The Hei Miao in western China use shengs with 
bamboo pipes fourteen feet high with brass reeds. The Mro and 
the Kumi in the district of Chittagong in Bengal have huge single 
pipes which are as long as a man is tall. A bottle-shaped calabash, 
pierced by the pipe, is situated somewhere near the middle of the 
pipe’s length and serves as a windchest. Inside the calabash the pipe 
has a hole covered by a free reed. The player’s mouth is applied to 
its neck. 

The circular arrangement of a set of smaller pipes in one calabash, 
that we find in China, Korea and Japan, has its primitive counter- 




1 84 The History of Musical Instruments 

part in Borneo, while the district between them — Upper Burma 
and Laos — has a mouth organ in raft form; in Upper Burma and 
the northern part of Laos two rafts of pipes cross inside the gourd, 
and either project beneath it (X-shaped), or else are cut off at the 
bottom of the gourd (V-shaped). In the most highly developed 
form of the raft-shaped mouth organ, in Middle and South Laos, 
the two rafts, sometimes as tall as twelve feet, are laid on top of 
each other and this double raft pierces through an elongated, 
wooden windchest, which is situated near the lower ends of the 
rafts. Even these tall mouth organs are light enough to be carried, 
as are all mouth organs. Several of these instruments played to- 
gether, particularly by young fellows in wooing games, combine 
rich harmonies in four parts. This is one of the most attractive musi- 
cal styles in the Orient, pure, serene and transparent, (fig. 41, pi. 
Xd) 

In China the mouth organ is said to have been invented by Em- 
peror Nyu-kwa in the third millennium B.C. as an imitation of the 
bird Phoenix with its body, head and wings. This tradition might 
have caused the use of mouth organs in Chinese funeral processions 
up to the present day, though today they are carried without being 
played; funeral music can be a resurrection charm as well as a pro- 
tection against evil spirits. 

In spite of tradition, the mouth organ is not mentioned before 
about 1 100 B.C., and no earlier picture of it could be found than on 
a votive stele dated 551 A.D., now in the University Museum, 
Philadelphia, (pi. X a) 

By that time the instrument had its widest range of distribution; 
the Persians then knew and used it as the mustaq sini, or ‘Chinese 
mushtak,’ and depicted it on reliefs at Taq-i Bustan and elsewhere. 

Once more in the eighteenth century the mouth organ was car- 
ried westward. A certain musician, Johann Wilde, known as the 
inventor of the nail violin, purchased or was given a sheng in St. 
Petersburg and learned to play die liebliche Chineser Or gel (“the 
charming organ of the Chinese”). The physicist Kratzenstein from 
Copenhagen heard him, examined the free reed and suggested to 
the organ builder Kirschnik in St. Petersburg that he introduce the 
free reed into the organ. Kirschnik, however, made no organ with 
free reeds, but only organ pianos. The first organ with free reeds 
was built by the famous Abbe Georg Joseph Vogler in Darmstadt. 
A large family of reed instruments, such as mouth harmonicas, 
accordions, harmoniums, was created from 1800 on. 




The Far East 



185 

THE LONG ZITHER is the oldest stringed instrument of 
China, and up to the end of the Chou dynasty the only one. Zithers, 
erroneously called lutes by the translator, are first mentioned in an 
ode written about 1100 B.C.: 

The modest, retiring, virtuous young lady: — 

With lutes, small and large, let us give her friendly welcome. 

The modest, retiring, virtuous young lady : — 

With bells and drums let us show our delight in her. 

The terms ‘small’ and ‘large’ lutes are supposed to correspond to 
the two words chHn and she in the Chinese original. These two 
types are nearly always associated in the sources of the Chou time: 

Loving union with wife and children 
Is like the music of she and ch‘in. 



Both exist to this day. (pi. X a, fig. 42, 43) 

There are many varieties of both the ch‘in and the she, but they 




figure 42. Ch‘in. 




figure 43. She. 



all have certain features in common. The strings are longitudinally 
stretched over a narrow, slightly convex board, the concave under 
side of which is closed by a flat bottom. When played, it is horizon- 
tally laid either on the ground, or on the knees, or on a table. The 
strings, made of silken threads, sound clearer than gut strings and 
less sharp than wires. 

First we will speak of the she , one of the instruments played by 
Confucius. This is an unfretted long zither with twenty-five open 
strings in pentatonic tuning (in earlier times there are said to have 




1 86 The History of Musical Instruments 

been fifty). A smaller form, called cheng in Chinese and so-no-koto 
in Japanese ( so corresponding to Chinese she ), has only fourteen 
strings in China. On unfretted long zithers the vibrating length of 
each string is determined by a shiftable triangular bridge wedged 
between it and the soundboard. 

Both the cheng and the she are composed of three parts, a main 
section that supports the strings, and two end pieces which are bent 
back. This triple arrangement recalls the tube-zither and the half- 
tube-zither of the Malayan Archipelago and a few African countries 
including Madagascar, all of which have a piece of bamboo as a 
body, either an entire tube or half of a bamboo split lengthways j 
the strings run parallel to each other the length of one internode in 
the bamboo and are formed by strips cut off the bamboo itself. Parts 
of the adjacent internodes (we call these parts transnodes') are left 
to form a head and a tail piece. The head and the tail piece are often 
of different lengths, and their lengths vary in different instruments. 
That these bamboo zithers were the prototypes of the Far Eastern 
unfretted zithers is confirmed by a Chinese tradition, according to 
which the cheng was originally made of bamboo. 

Nevertheless, the cheng is not earlier than the she. Even Chi- 
nese tradition considers it a relatively recent instrument j its inventor 
is said to have been General Mong t‘yen (d. 209 B.C.), who van- 
quished the Huns and built a part of the Great Wall. The connec- 
tion of the cheng with western China, indicated by this tradition, 
is corroborated by several other facts. At the Chinese court the 
instrument belonged to the two Mongolian orchestras $ the Kir- 
ghizes still have it as jataga in a comparatively recent form with a 
flat board and seven wire strings j and, finally, the name cheng is 
identical with the Persian name of the harp. However, bamboo large 
enough to make a cheng grew only in a southern climate, so that 
the early bamboo cheng must have come from farther south. An 
unexpected picture of the cheng was discovered by the author on 
the plafond of the Kolberg cathedral in Pomerania, painted in the 
fourteenth century A.D. 

Japan and Korea have preserved chengs with a smaller number 
of strings j Japan, especially, has kept all varieties, from the ichi-gen- 
kin or ‘one-string-zither,’ the ni-gen-kin or ‘two-string-zither,’ and 
the san-gen-kin or ‘three-string-zither,’ up to the nine-stringed sage- 
koto. The most important of these varieties is the six-stringed ya- 
mato-kotOy or wagon, which is said to have existed in Japan before 
the times of Chinese influence. 




The Far East 



187 

The jretted long zither is called chfin in Chinese, koto or kin in 
Japanese, and kum or komunko in Korean. Its body tapers slightly 
towards the rounded lower end; the strings held by two knobs at 
the back of the instrument run around the lower end and, diverging 
over the soundboard, are fastened by a row of pegs at the top. To- 
day the classical number of strings is seven, as it probably was also 
in antiquity. Some authors have concluded from ancient sources 
that the original number was only five, but they have mistaken the 
number of notes for the number of strings. The scale was pentatonic 
without semitones, and the sixth and seventh string continued the 
five-tone scale without adding new notes. There was a similar con- 
fusion in interpreting authorities on the Greek lyrej here, as well, 
the sixth and seventh strings continued a pentatonic scale without 
adding new notes and it was uncertain whether the word chorde 
meant string or note. Japan, however, has preserved to this day a 
fretted long zither with only five strings, the go kin y and as Japan 
still retains many objects forgotten in China, it is likely that once a 
five-stringed ch‘in existed. 

The seven strings of the modern ch‘in are made from a varying 
number of silk threads twisted together, and this quantity is in 
accordance with the so-called ‘Pythagorean’ relation between the 
tones to which they are tuned. 

Downwards, the succession of thread numbers runs: 48, 54, 64, 
72, 81, 96, 108, thus reproducing, in the number of threads, the 
tonal proportions %, 3 %7, %, %, 3 %7> %, or a half-toneless, penta- 
tonic scale of whole tones and minor thirds. But the tone of the 
strings depends on other factors as well, and the effectiveness of this 
traditional proportion is consequently imaginary. A similar calcula- 
tion occurs once more, in another instance: Arabian theorists of the 
tenth century A.D. report that the four strings of the lute, l ud y tuned 
by fourths, were composed by 27, 36, 48 and 64 threads — that is, 
not only the principle but the numbers as well were similar, 48 and 
64 identical, and 27 and 36, as halves of the Chinese numbers 54 
and 72. 

Instead of frets, there are thirteen nacre studs inlaid in the sound- 
board under the outer (lowest) string. Their arrangement is en- 
tirely different from the usual manner of fretting stringed instru- 
ments. Instead of being unilaterally arranged from one end of 
the string and giving a consecutive scale of half-tones, the studs are 
symmetrically disposed from the center towards the two ends, in 
V2, Yz and %, Y* and %, % and %, % and %, Ys and % of the total 




1 88 The History of Musical Instruments 

length. The musical result would be this curious scale: cdefoef 
g a <? ef g (f r e" g" c " This would be absurd, unless the studs 
were intended to serve the only form of playing in which it does 
not make any difference whether the string is touched either in one 
third or in two thirds of the string, in one eighth or in seven eighths 
— that is, when harmonics are used. 

A harmonic is produced when, instead of pressing the string 
against the fingerboard, the player lightly touches it in, say, a half, 
a third or a quarter of its length. He then does not shorten the 
string, but creates a node of vibration which hinders the string from 
sounding in its entire length and producing the fundamental j in- 
stead, he forces it to produce a partial or harmonic, the octave in 
the case of the node being in the middle, the twelfth, when the node 
is made in one third or two thirds — the double octave plus a major 
third, when the node is made in one fifth or four fifths (or two 
or three fifths), and so on. Notes produced in this way are somewhat 
frail as a consequence of lacking the fundamental vibration and 
several partials. 

Players of the chfin do not use harmonics exclusively. For, the 
manner of sound production is much more variable than with any 
occidental instrument. The right hand plucks while the left hand 
taps the string at a certain spot and glides to the following position 
without leaving the string and without lessening the pressure. If 
both hands play on the same string, the left hand action stops the 
plucked string but is separately audible as a series of vibratos, 
glissandi and dull beats j if the left hand plays on a different string, 
it forms a second part, which can be a counterpoint or a simple 
drone j chords are rarely heard. A special notation has symbols not 
only for pitch and time, but also for playing with one, two or three 
fingers, for pulling the string towards oneself or away, for plucking, 
rubbing, tapping. In China plectra and finger rings have been aban- 
doned in order to obtain an even more refined style of playing. 

Occidental listeners have great difficulty in perceiving the delicate 
shades of ch‘in playing and in appreciating its spirituality. But the 
average Oriental cannot appreciate it either. The ch‘in does not 
court popularity, nor does it suit dilettantism. It is the instrument 
of philosophers and sages. In the privacy of a closed room, alone 
or before a few selected friends who listen respectfully and silently, 
the immaterial notes of the chfin reveal to the listeners the ultimate 
truths of life and religion. 




The Far East 189 

THE HAN DYNASTY ( 20 6 B.C.-220 A . D . ) 

THE SHORT LUTE. Under the Han, the Chinese Empire 
reached the peak of its power j the Caspian Sea became its western 
boundary. As a consequence, western instruments were brought to 
the east, and from that time on stringed instruments had a more 




figure 44. 
Chinese lute 

fifa. 



important role in the music of China. It will suffice to discuss only 
the most important one, the short lute, which is called ft fa in 
China and biwa in Japan. It has already been mentioned in the In- 
dian chapter, (fig. 44) 

The Far Eastern offshoot of the West Asiatic lute has a graceful, 
pear-shaped body. Its back is rounded, though shallow, and its 




190 The History of Musical Instruments 

front is covered with a wooden soundboard. The silken strings are 
attached to a cross ledge on the soundboard near the lower end and 
do not run beyond it. Their upper ends are tied to lateral pegs, 
which have the specifically eastern form of slim reversed cones. The 
usual number of strings is four $ five strings are rare and so are six 
(two of these duplicating the two lower strings in a set of four). 
Their order, from the base to the treble string, follows the occi- 
dental arrangement, but the accordatura varies greatly, in China 
as well as in Korea and Japan. 

The melody is almost exclusively played on the highest string j 
the next string is rarely stopped, and the lower ones are generally 
left open. Players frequently pluck two notes simultaneously, pro- 
ducing seconds, thirds, fourths, fifths and other intervals, especially 
when the singer is silent. With older types of lutes a large heavy 
plectron is dragged over the strings and lands on the soundboard 
with a knock j lutes of a recent type are plucked with the bare fingers. 

The classic form of a pear-shaped lute is represented by the lute 
of the Japanese court orchestra, the bugaku biwa — that is, the biwa 
for the classic style in music and dance, which was brought to per- 
fection in the tenth century. It is more than three feet high, very 
broad and heavy, and rests in slanting position on the ground be- 
tween the legs of the sitting performer. To withstand the strong 
blows of the plectron, a solid band of leather is glued across the 
central part of the soundboard} two small, crescent-shaped sound- 
holes, above it, face away from each other. Four ledges glued on 
the edge at intervals upon the fingerboard serve as frets} the delicate 
trill of the strings vibrating against them is a characteristic quality 
of the biwa sound. According to Japanese sources, this biwa was 
originally played in a percussional style rather than in a melodious 
one, and perhaps played a role similar to that of the banjo in our 
jazz bands. 

A more recent form is represented by the Japanese satsuma biwa , 
so called after the southern part of the island Kyushu. This lute, 
serving to accompany the recitation of old epics, is laid on the knees 
of the sitting performer. It is shorter, only about three feet long, 
and appreciably narrower and lighter. The band of leather is re- 
placed by a band of lacquer} instead of crescent-shaped soundholes, 
two ivory crescents are inlaid and a small slit is cut in each of them. 

The chicuzen biwa f a variety of the satsuma biwa, derived its 
name from the northern part of the island Kyushu. It is still shorter, 




The Far East 



191 

two feet seven inches long, and the two sides are more straight than 
pear-shaped. It sometimes has five strings. 

The Chinese ft fa represents the most recent stage of the lute. 
It has four strings tuned to 1—4— 5— 8. The fingerboard is reeded 
with four adjacent convex frets, and six to thirteen more regular 
frets follow on the soundboard j this latter has no soundholes. Held 
upright on the thighs, it is played with the bare fingers which, in a 
rapid repetition, produce a kind of roll, while the left hand stops 
with much vibrato and Bebung (cf. clavichord). Usually several 
strings are played together in order to create either drones or chords. 
But most of these chords give the effect of drumlike percussion 
rather than of harmonies in an occidental sense. 

The earliest archaeological evidences of this lute family are on 
Chinese sculptures of the sixth century A.D., and from the year 
623 A.D. they are found on Japanese sculptures as well. The oldest 
specimens preserved were made in the eighth century A.D.j the 
Imperial Treasury, Shoso-in, at Nara near Osaka, Japan, still owns 
the marvellous Chinese lutes of sandal wood with tortoise shell 
and mother-of-pearl marquetry which Emperor Shomu of Japan 
offered to a new Buddha statue in 749 A.D. Consequently, the date 
935 A.D., generally indicated as the year in which the lute was 
introduced in Japan, is certainly erroneous, (pi. X a, b) 

The old path from West and Central Asia to the Far East, that 
is more clearly traced by the lute than by any other object, seems 
to have been extended, as early as the neolithic age, to a further 
westeastern path leading from the Pacific coast of China to the 
Pacific coast of America. There has been much discussion about 
whether, how and where the American civilization was influenced 
by ancient China. The following chapter will show to what extent 
the instruments of America resemble those of ancient China. 




. America 



CENTRAL AMERICA 

I N TWO regions of the American continent the Indians at- 
tained a relatively high level of civilization — in Central 
America, particularly in Mexico, and in the northwest of 
South America, particularly in Peru. 

The Mexican civilization originated in the conflux of peoples 
descending from the arid mesas in the north and south to the 
fertile plains and valleys. Such peoples were the Nahua (including 
the Aztecs), the Maya, the Chorotega and the Chibcha. As they 
were arrested in their evolution at a transitory stage between a 
neolithic and a copper age, their cultural development was uneven. 
Apparently in the eleventh century A.D., they reached a level far 
above primitivism in their hieroglyphic script, in a complicated 
calendar, and in magnificent works of architecture, sculpture and 
miniature painting. In comparison, they remained astonishingly be- 
hind in music, at least in instrumental music. 

FLUTES AND TRUMPETS. Central America had not one 
stringed instrument, and among all her idiophones, drums and wind 
instruments there was only one instrument capable of playing a 
simple melody. This was a small flute, called qoqoloctli, huila- 
cafitztli or tlapitzalli in Mexican, and cuiraxezaqua in Tarascan. 
It was a whistle flute, in which the upper end was stopped except 
for a small channel into which the player blew, and which directed 
his breath to the sharp edge of a side-hole. The upper end was 
sharpened to form a beak ( beaked flute), which allowed the player 
to grasp it with his lips. Mexican flutes usually had four, occa- 






C. Javanese metallophone and gong D. Javanese rejong (Ph. Bandara). 
chime (Ph. Bandara). 




E. Javanese xylophone (Ph. Bandara). F. Javanese barrel-drums { Ph. Bandara). 




G. Burmese xylophone (Ph. Scher- 
man). 



PLATE XI. 



America 



193 

sionally three or five, fingerholes near the lower end, the distances 
between which did not follow any metrical rulej sometimes two 
such flutes, with two fingerholes each, were tightly fastened to- 
gether to form a double flute. Flutes were made either of bone or 
of baked clay. In the latter case they usually ended in a false bell, 
the tube itself ending without expansion. As this form was neither 
technically nor musically justified, we can assume that it was imi- 




figure 45. Whistle 
flute of clay, Mexico. 
(After Izikowitz.) 



tated from the shape of Spanish oboes ( chirimias ), unless at some 
future date native specimens are excavated from pre-Cortesian 
tombs, (fig. 45) 

Older than the usual whistle flute was a whistle pipe without 
fingerholes, in which both the block and the side-hole were shifted 
down to the middle of the flute. This archaic type is still in use in 
British Columbia, Central California and, in South America, with 
the Tucano and the Cayapo. 

The miniatures in the Mayan codices show a second form of 
whistle pipe without fingerholes, which still exists among North 
American Indians. Instead of streaming directly into the flute, the 
wind is forced to leave the flute and to re-enter it by the following 
contrivance. Near the upper end the flute is stopped ; the wall has 
an outlet just above the stopper and a sharp-edged side-hole just 
beneath j a grooved piece of wood is tied over the two holes forming 




194 



The History of Musical Instruments 




figure 46. From Codex Becker, Vienna. (After Seler.) 



a detour and directs the wind from the first against the edge of the 
second hole. This curious variety of a whistle ( outside flue) is dis- 
tinctly drawn in the miniatures, (fig. 46) 

As far as these flutes had fingerholes, they were the only melodic 
instruments of Central America. Even the bone flutes blown by 
human victims about to be sacrificed as they climbed the steps of 
the pyramid, or by the doomed men accompanying the hearse of a 
prince, seem to have had no holes, as today the bone flutes of North 
American Indians rarely have fingerholes. They did not serve 
melodic purposes any more than the clay whistles, known as 
cohuilotl or chilitli y which were sometimes molded in the shape of 
flowers, fish, snakes or birds, or any of the following instruments. 

Trumpets were made in two forms. The priests of the rain gods 
used end-blown shell trumpets, called tecciztliy tepuzquiquiztli and 
quiquiztli in Mexican. Besides, there were tubular trumpets, called 
pungacuqua in Tarascan, which were made of wood, cane or clay 
and sometimes provided with a gourd that served as a bell. 

Most of the other instruments were idiophones. 

IDIOPHONES. Central America had two rattling instruments 
— rattling vessels , made either of gourds ( ayacachtli ) or of un- 
glazed terra cotta, and rattling sticks {ay on chicuaztli). These latter 
were used in the worship of water, rain and mountain divinities, in 
the same way that Malayan planters’ sticks, which contained a 
cavity filled with seeds, were rattled when the stick was pounded 
on the ground. 

More important was a scraped bone with a series of notches cut 
in one of its sides $ the Mexicans gave it the name omichicahuaztli. 
It played, as the first Spanish observer said, musica muy triste , 



America 



195 





figure 47. From Codex Becker, Vienna. (After Seler.) 



“very sad music,” at memorial ceremonies for those who had died 
in battle or as prisoners on the sacrificial stone. 

Its ordinary companion was the turtle shell, ayotl } played with 
a stag’s antler. It certainly was erroneous to interpret this playing 
as a gonglike striking j on miniatures as well as on clay figures the 
antler is represented as being so close to the shell that it must have 
been used to scrape the uneven surface rather than to strike it. 

The slit-drum called tefonaztli was relatively short and often 
carefully carved. Occasionally, it was made in the form of some 
animal, such as an alligator, ocelot or puma. Its narrow slit had 
the shape of the letter H, thus detaching two tongues which faced 
each other. Chiseled off on the inside to different thicknesses, these 
tongues produced different notes when they were struck with two 




figure 48. Mexican slit-drum. 

sticks, olmaitl. The slit-drums were placed on tripods to avoid the 
deadening contact of the ground, (figs. 47, 48) 

DRUMS ( huehuetl or ‘old-old’ in Mexico) were known in 
various forms. Two features seem to have been common to all of 
them: the lack of braces and of sticks. Probably all Central American 
drums were struck with the bare hands. Clavijero, one of the earliest 






196 The History of Musical Instruments 

authors on Mexico, writes: “They struck them only with their 
fingers, but it required infinite dexterity in the striker.” The skin 
seems to have been attached either by gluing or by a nailed ribbon. 

The actual shape of the smaller drums cannot be seen in the 
miniatures, which are our only source. A larger drum was held in 
a hobbyhorse position, as are certain drums of the Serpa on the 
Amazon as well as of some West and East African Negroes. 

The largest drums, called tlalpa htcehuetl , were either cylindrical 
or barrel-shaped, but played in a vertical position. Though a clay 
statuette from Michoacan in the Berlin Museum shows such a drum 
resting directly on the ground and played by a sitting man, the 
classical large drum of Mexico stood on a stand which, either sepa- 
rate or cut from the same piece, stood on three wide legs or rather 
triangular lobes, each of which tapered to the ground in steps. Some 
of these drums were finely carved. Similar drums on three legs 
occur in Polynesia, Melanesia, East and South Africa, and the 
African forms also have the skins nailed on. (fig. 47) 

A last drum is unique. Pictured in one of the Mexican codices it 
looks like a calabash in the form of a wide low U ; one end is open, 
and the other is covered with a drum skin. The instrument stands 
on the ground before a squatting player. 

Earthenware objects have been excavated in Costa Rica which 
obviously were drums, though quite different from these Mexican 
drums. Their shape varies between the goblet and the hourglass 
drum, and their plastic decoration, fluted grooves and a belt, sug- 
gests earlier bracing. 

All these instruments — rattles, scrapers, tubular and shell trum- 
pets, whistle flutes, slit-drums, hobbyhorse drums and footed drums 
played without sticks — belong to a very early stage of develop- 
ment ; all of them are included in the strata numbered three to six 
in the list of twenty-three pre-European strata in the author’s book 
Geist und W er den der Musikinstrumente. If China had any in- 
fluence on the evolution of ancient Central America, it must have 
been in early prehistoric times. 

SOUTH AMERICA 

South American antiquity refers to the pre-Colombian epoch of 
Peru and her neighboring countries in the north and west of the 
continent, Colombia, Ecuador, Bolivia and Chile. In historical 
times, up to about 700 A.D., the Aimara people ruled Peru; the 




America 



197 

Inca probably did not dominate the vast territory of northwestern 
South America earlier than 1200 A.D. 

The cultural standard of these countries, and even of Peru, was 
certainly lower than that of Central America in spite of their ad- 
vanced social organization, architecture and pottery j they had 
neither a calendar nor a script. Music, on the contrary, must have 
reached a higher level, as far as we can judge from excavated in- 
struments and scenes represented on vases. Flutes with numerous 
fingerholes and pan-pipes of many canes are evidence of elaborate 
melodies. The pan-pipes seem to have been brought to this con- 
tinent by some contact with the Far East. The ocean current that 
streams southward from Melanesia to encircle New Zealand, and 
then east- and northwards to Peru may have brought over occa- 
sional ships and men. 

PAN-PIPES ( huayra-fuhura ) were made of canes, but also of 
solid pieces of wood, clay, stone or metal with channels hollowed 




figure 49. Pan-pipe of stone, 
ancient Peru. 



out inside them. Some had the lower end open, some stopped j 
occasionally an open and a stopped set, an octave apart, were joined 
to form double pan-pipes played in a way that is not familiar to us. 

(% 49 ) 

Several features in South American pan-pipes point to the west: 
the instrument itself, well known and much used in East and South- 
east Asia and the Pacific Islands j the arrangement in double pipes, 
occurring in certain islands of Melanesia and Polynesia j the pe- 
culiar Melanesian and Polynesian ligature, the tubes being held in 
place against a cane splint by a laced cord. Moreover, the late Erich 
M. von Hornbostel found a striking conformity between the ab- 
solute pitches and the scales of American, Melanesian and East Asi- 





198 The History of Musical Instruments 

atic pan-pipes. Hornbostel’s results were not fully accepted by Ameri- 
canists who, more than other anthropologists, are inclined to deny 
foreign influences on their special proteges. It is true that musical 
measurements on museum pieces are not always convincing, and 
that most similarities are counterbalanced by appreciable differ- 
ences. If we discount this evidence, another fact is so striking that it 
can hardly be overlooked. In our first Far Eastern chapter, we ex- 
plained that the pan-pipe of East Asia was tuned to the twelve lu. 
These are the standard semitones, derived from a series of con- 
secutive fifths and transposed into the same octave; six of them, the 
odd numbered ones in the series, are considered male, and the six 
even numbered, female. The two resulting whole tone scales fit 
into one another, but the sets are divided, either into two separate 
instruments or into two wings of the same instrument. And this 
has happened also in America. Several potteries of ancient Peru 
depict twin pan-pipes exactly in the modern form that the American 
archaeologist, Charles W. Mead (who does not know the Chinese 
parallel), describes in the following words: “Two pan-pipes fastened 
together by a long cord and played by two performers are very 
common in Bolivia today. Each instrument has but half the notes 
of the scale, every other one being absent, and these must be given 
by the man playing the complementary pipe.” The Cuna Indians 
in Panama (who have a script related to the most ancient Chinese 
script) unite ‘male’ and ‘female’ pan-pipes in order to blow fifths 
parallels. To complete the picture, we recall that also the Karenni 
in the Burmese hinterland use their pan-pipes in pairs connected by 
a loose cord. No skepticism can deny the western origin of the 
American pan-pipes. A scale, alternately distributed between two 
pan-pipes which are connected by a loose cord, can hardly be sup- 
posed to have originated spontaneously in several parts of the world. 
Whoever believes in such a possibility would have to prove that 
male and female semitones are native to Indian music and cos- 
mology. 

FLUTES were vertical, with or without a notch. Cane and the 
bones of pelicans, llamas or deer provided the material. A cane flute 
from Peru with a silver lining was given to the author by its col- 
lector, the late Dr. Gaffron. 

There were from three to seven fingerholes; the holes of cane 
flutes were always frontal; some bone flutes had also a rear hole for 




America 



199 

the thumb. The scales printed in some catalogues of old Peruvian 
instruments, which were obtained by blowing and fingering these 
flutes without knowing whether or not cross-fingering and other 
correcting devices were originally used, are entirely meaningless 
and certainly false, particularly as “the written note is in many cases 
not the one given out by the instrument, but the one nearest to it 
in our diatonic scale.” It would be more important to find a non- 
musical measurement between the fingerholes as we have seen used 
in other flutes. Following this idea, the author found, on a well- 
preserved cane flute of the Gaffron collection, that the distances 
from the upper end to the centers of the seven front holes were in 
accordance with the oldest Chinese foot of 229.9 millimeters \ the 
maximum deviation was 1.1 millimeters, and the minimum 0.1 
millimeter \ the average deviation was only 0.6 millimeter. This 
is one more proof of a connection with the Far East. 

Another resemblance may be noted. The ancient Peruvians had 
a peculiar notched flute with five fingerholes made of black pottery. 
The outer end tapered and turned sideways, like a sausage. This 
apparently unique shape is also found in a flute of the Maori in 
New Zealand. 

Globular flutes , generally of earthenware, existed both in a plain 
form and in the shape of men and animals. They had only a few 
fingerholes, or sometimes none at all. Beside these more or less 
universal types of globular flutes, there was a native Peruvian form 
in the shape of various species of conch shells. 

The whistling fot } best known by its modern Spanish name, sil- 
bador — ‘whistler’ — was also indigenous. It consisted of two com- 
municating earthenware vessels, both of which were half-filled 
with water. When the player blew into one of them, the water 
was driven into the second one where the increased volume of 
water compressed the air and sent it through a whistle head. (fig. 
50,5i) 

A strange variety has been found as far north as San Salvador. A 
pottery figure representing a man sitting by a barrel contains two 
connecting cavities filled with water. When it is rocked from side 
to side in the player’s hands the air is forced through the whistle 
head. 

Except for pan-pipes and flutes, ancient South American instru- 
ments are quite similar to Mexican instruments. Here as well, 
stringed instruments are entirely lacking. 




200 



The History of Musical Instruments 




figures 50, 51. Whistling pots, Peru. 



IDIOPHONES. The Peruvians inherited from prehistoric 
times gourd rattles and primitive strung rattles y usually made of 
shells or deer hooves, as in North America. They had metal jingles 
filled with pebbles as well, and small metal bells without clappers, 
either founded or made of thin metal bent into a conical shape. They 
were sounded before certain idols. The Peruvians also had strange 
wooden bells in rectangular form provided with several clappers 
which are also used in Esthonia, Burma and the western part of the 
Malayan Archipelago. 

On some statuettes players with spondylus pctorum shells in the 
position of cymbals are represented. Were they cymbals? It is not 
probable that a civilization familiar with metal work should have 
used shell for cymbals, and also that the two shells were held near 
together instead of being separated. Shells in an analogous position 
are used in Torres Strait between Australia and New Guinea — but 
not to be clashed together. The natives scrape them against each 
other. This may also have been the case with the Peruvian shells. 

Slabs of sonorous stones have been found in Venezuela and 
Ecuador, though not in Peruj and circular, and slightly concave- 
convex, metal disks have been discovered in Peruvian tombs which, 
on account of their clear and resonant sound, are claimed to be 
gongs. 

DRUMS ( huancar ) were shallow and cylindrical. One of the 
three excavated specimens, in the Munich museum, is well pre- 
served ; it consists of two wooden hoops held apart by a few cross- 
pieces of wood. The two skins of these drums are sewn or nailed 
together in such a way that they completely cover the cylinder. One 
of the three drums is covered with painted designs, (fig. 52) 




America 



201 




figure 52. Peruvi- 
an drum, skeleton. 
(After Izikowitz.) 



Held in one hand, the drums were struck by one beater only, as 
some statuettes from the central part of Peru indicate. But it is not 
clear whether the beater was a tiny stick tied to a cord, or the 
knotted end of the cord itself. The material for the skin came from 
the llama or the deer, and also sometimes from the human hide 
of slain enemies. Making use of a foe in this way was a method of 
acquiring his vigor and of terrifying the enemy, and was a well- 
known magic rite among American Indians. One ancient writer 
tells in detail how an Inca king, entering his capital after a rebellion, 
had the complete skins stripped from the live bodies of six sub- 
jugated chiefs; he then had them inflated in human shape, and 
ordered his soldiers to drum upon the stomachs. 

TRUMPETS were made either of conch shells or of wood or 
of clay. The shell trumpet was an end-blown strombus with or*with- 
out a metal mouthpiece, as in East Asia. Sometimes the shell shape 
was imitated in clay. One single, side-blown triton tritonis has been 
excavated in Peru, which is the more remarkable because this sea 
shell is said never to be found on the west coast of South America. 

Tubular trumpets occur as straight tubes of wood without any 
mouthpiece or bell, and as coiled trumpets made of clay, sometimes 
with only a slight expansion at the end, sometimes with a bell rep- 
resenting a jaguar head or even a human shape. It has been sug- 
gested that this astonishing coiled form was inspired by European 
models. The author is inclined to deny such a relation, since in this 
case the coil would have imitated the elongated shape of the Euro- 
pean trumpet instead of being small and circular. Inorganic imita- 
tions usually are recognizable from their lack of appropriateness; 
here, on the contrary, the coiled tube is better suited to clay technique 
and to the fragility of the material than a long straight tube. 

Very short, straight, clay trumpets have been preserved in the 
old cemeteries of Nasca, that is, in the earliest stratum of Peruvian 





202 The History of Musical Instruments 

civilization. As there is no mouthpiece and the upper orifice is 
rather large, they may have been voice masks or megaphones. 

Metal trumpets, too, were played in ancient Peru. The Chronicle 
of the First Augustine Friars tells us that worship of the god 
Tantazoro included the use of fourteen trumpets of silver and 
copper. A silver trumpet in the Ethnographical Museum in Berlin 
is seventy-seven centimeters long and ends in a funnel-shaped bell. 

We must now try to answer the question asked at the end of the 
preceding chapter: whether, in neolithic times, these instruments are 
likely to have been brought to America from China. 

It would be hard to deny a connection between both the Chinese 
and the South American notched flutes, and the Chinese and the 
South American pan-pipes. We have presented our arguments in 
the sections dealing with the two instruments. Here, it will only be 
emphasized that the notched flute, outside of America, is confined 
to the Far East, including Mongolia. In this case, as in those fol- 
lowing, we neglect Africa as a continent acculturated by the various 
Asiatic countries. Some other common features are also striking: 
the lack of stringed instruments, the occurrence of nailed drums, the 
use of sonorous stones. 

But instead of confining ourselves to these particular instruments, 
we must examine the field as a whole and find the area of distribu- 
tion of all ancient American instruments in order to come to a scien- 
tific conclusion as to their provenance. 

Ancient American instruments include a first group, existing all 
over the world: jingles, bells, shell trumpets, whistle, vertical and 
globular flutes. But the remainder of the instruments offers a sig- 
nificant picture. The curious ‘outside flue’ of the whistle flutes is 
known in Bhutan, Borneo and the Philippines; the central flue 
occurs in eastern Bengal, in Burma and on the Nicobar Islands; 
sausage flutes are made in New Zealand; trumpets of wood and 
cane, with or without gourd bells, in Burma, Australia and the 
Pacific Islands; gourd rattles in Hawaii; stick rattles in the Malay 
Archipelago; scrapers in India, the Far East, Java, Torres Strait; 
slit-drums in Burma, Malakka, the Archipelago and the Pacific Is- 
lands; wooden bells in Burma; elongated tree drums in Nias; 
drums on legs in the Pacific Islands. 

This implies that, except for a few universal instruments, all 
relatives of American instruments are exclusively found in a ter- 
ritory comprising China, the area between China and India, the 




America 



203 

Malay Archipelago and the Pacific Islands. More than fifty per- 
cent can be located in the Burmese hinterland and the adjacent 
countries — that is, among peoples supposed to have been the abo- 
riginals of what is called China today, who were driven southward 
by the invading Chinese in neolithic times. Ancient American in- 
struments can be classified as ‘Pacific. 5 




THIRD PART 

The Middle Ages 




10 . The Far East 



I N THE middle ages, China was more than ever exposed to 
western influences. Frequently being conquered by foreign 
rulers, or conquering foreign countries herself, she was in 
continuous contact with neighboring civilizations. These influences 
were particularly strong in music. The court established orchestras 
from India, Samarkand, Kashgar, Bukhara as well as Tibet, Mon- 
golia and other countries, and Chinese tradition, usually well in- 
formed and reliable, traces most Chinese instruments back to In- 
dian, Mongolian, Turkestanic and “barbarian” origins, (pi. X a) 

It would be tempting to bring order into the confusing mass of 
Far Eastern instruments by basing a classification on their prove- 
nance. But this cannot yet be done. We know too little of medieval 
Central Asia and the migrations and trade routes from or across 
Mongolia and Turkestan. Thus, we prefer a systematic arrange- 
ment. 

IDIOPHONES. In the middle ages bronze cymbals and gongs 
were added to the bells and bell chimes of antiquity. 

Cymbals (Chinese fo) were said to have been brought from 
India j another Chinese source enumerates them among the instru- 
ments of an East Turkestanic orchestra which was established at the 
imperial court after the conquest of the Kingdom of Kutcha in 
384 A.D. This statement is corroborated by the important fact that 
the Korean name of the cymbals, tjapara, is obviously derived from 
a Turkish word; in modern Turkish cymbals are called calfara. 
Moreover, Central Europe first acquired cymbals when Avars and 
Huns — that is, Turkish peoples — invaded the Continent in the mid- 
dle ages. Turks were expert metal workers. 




208 The History of Musical Instruments 

Most Far Eastern cymbals have a large boss, and the rim is either 
flat or curving slightly upwards. Their size varies greatly ; beside 
small specimens one finds very large ones in lama temples ; the 
Crosby Brown Collection in the Metropolitan Museum in New 
York owns a pair twenty-two to twenty-three inches wide. But these 
Chinese lama cymbals are not as large as some gigantic cymbals in 
Mongolian temples which measure one meter. 

About three hundred years after the first mention of cymbals, a 
metallo'phone (Chinese fang hiang) is said to have been introduced. 
It was an imitation in iron or steel of the old Chinese stone chime, 
a set of sixteen slabs about eight inches long suspended in an up- 
right frame. The new instrument was first brought to China by the 
orchestra of a “barbarian” people — that is, either Turkish or Tungus 
— in the seventh century A.D. As there were probably no Tungus 
orchestras, the reference apparently indicates a Turkish origin, and 
this is the more likely because some of the Turkish tribes, the Tu-kiu 
for instance, were skillful workers in iron at the time of this or- 
chestra. 

A gong (differing from a bell in that the vibrations issue from the 
center, while the rim is dead) is first mentioned in the time of 
Emperor Hsuan Wu (500-516 A.D.), and the Chinese attribute its 
origin to the country, Hsi Yu, between Tibet and Burma. It seems, 
however, that this ancient instrument was not the small, bossless 
gong, lo , that the Chinese use today; its name sha lo meant also a 
basin; it was larger than the present gong and had a powerful sound. 
It was possibly similar to two instruments existing to this day : the 
Korean tjing, from fifteen to sixteen inches wide and rather deep, 
and the rang of the Garo (an aboriginal tribe in Assam, which has 
preserved many implements of ancient China). 

There is also a gong chime , called yun lo and attributed to Mon- 
golian influences by the Chinese. It has no relation with either the 
usual gong or the splendid chimes of the Malayan Islands, and is 
musically of little interest. Ten small, bronze disks shaped like 
small soup plates, about four inches in diameter, are suspended in 
a wooden stand to form three vertical rows. The arrangement 
within these rows is either 



10 or 10 
987 987 

456 654 

321 321 










W ' ^ W I 






A . Arabian frame drum ( 12th century ), 
/row <? relief in the Museo Nazionale in 
Florence . 






5 . /Vo w an Arabic manuscrtft ( early 
13th century ) y Museum of Fine Arts } 









* / rr 

Iff ‘1 






% 



’Vi 



6 \ Turkish drum . From a fainting by 
Vittore Carpaccio {early 16th century ) 
in the Academy in Venice. 



PLATE XII 



The Far East 



209 

1, indicating the lowest, and 10, the highest note of a more or less 
diatonic scale j number ten, added at a later time, is never played. 

(% 53 ) 

A new type of instrument may be called a resting bell y Chinese 
effing. It is a heavy basin of bronze, placed on a cushion with the 
open side up and struck on its thick edge with a plain wooden stick. 
Most resting bells are small $ the largest, in the Chao Ch‘ing 




figure 53. Chinese gong chime. 

Monastery at Hangchow, is two and a half feet wide. The sound 
of these bells is remarkably full and clear, much better than the 
tone of Chinese suspended bells. Their prototype is possibly pre- 
served in a Korean earthenware pot ( tjangkun ) that the player 
strikes with a split bamboo wand. 

We could pass over a small rectangular block in the form of a 
brick, made of redwood and called fang in Chinese, had it not a 
certain interest as having recently been introduced in occidental 
dance bands. It is nearly ten inches long and slit both next to the 
upper and the lower surface, as if one had started to cut a piece 
from the top and the bottom of a loaf without detaching the slices. 
Struck with a stick, the two slices or, acoustically speaking, tongues, 
produce a dry but definite tone. 





210 The History of Musical Instruments 

This section cannot be concluded without mentioning the jaws ) 
harf (Chinese ku chHn ), the first evidence of which is said to be 
in a book of the twelfth century. In its North Chinese form it seems 
to be the oldest iron jaws’ harp. Instead of being made in two 
separate parts welded together, like the European jaws’ harp, it 
is cut out of one flat piece of iron in a horseshoe shape. A tongue, 
wide at the root and pointed at the end, is cut loose from the frame 
by two slits, thus being reminiscent of the earlier bamboo instrument. 

TRUMPETS are made in several forms. The oldest one is an 
end-blown shell trumpet (Chinese hat lo, Japanese hora) held by 
inserting the hand into the natural opening of the conch. The in- 
strument is used by boatmen and also by Buddhist priests. 

Among tubular metal trumpets, one type (Chinese hao t ( ung, 
Japanese dokaku ), too large to be played without being rested on 
the ground, is particularly remarkable because, instead of a bell, 
it has a long wide cylinder, made either of wood, iron or brass. The 
tube itself is sliding — that is, when not in use it can be pushed into 
the bell in the manner of a telescope. The mouthpiece, as in all 
trumpets of the Far East, is shallow and broad-rimmed. A pair of 
these clumsy trumpets, employed in funeral processions, are played 
only when the men stand still and can rest the bell on the 
ground. 

This curious instrument has a parallel in a region of South 
America centering in Brazil. The bell, in this Indian trumpet, is 
made of a wider section of bamboo than the tube. (fig. 24) 

A trumpet with a hook-shaped end, cha chiao in Chinese, has been 
mentioned in the Greek and Roman chapter, (fig. 54) 

The usual brass trumpet (Chinese la fa, Japanese rafa, both 
from the same Mongolian term, rafal) is reminiscent of the straight 
trumpets depicted on medieval European art works. It has a thin, 
conical tube, made of two or three sections fitting and telescoping 
into each other, a rather large bell, and bulging rings that mark the 
beginning of each section, (fig. 55) 

This trumpet, as its name indicates, came from Mongolia and 
Tibet. However, the most characteristic trumpets of these coun- 
tries, the Mongolian buri and the Tibetan dung, were never in- 
troduced in China. They are made of red copper in straight form, 
occasionally with gold and silver decorations added. Since they 
reach the gigantic length of sixteen feet they have to be rested on 




The Far East 



2 ] 




figure 54. Chinese 
hooked trumpet. 



figure 55. Chinese 
straight trumpet. 



212 The History of Musical Instruments 

the ground while played, or have their bells supported with a cord 
by a boy servant. Their low and terrifying notes, alternately sounded 
on twin instruments, are heard only in Lamaistic rituals. 

REED PIPES. Instruments with a single beating reed, or clari- 
nets, have no importance in the Far East. The only type found 
today is a plain bamboo clarinet with six fingerholes, under the 
names ch'un kuan or la fa in Chinese, which is a child’s toyj some- 
times two of them are joined to form a double clarinet, tui hsiao. 

In earlier centuries the Chinese used a clarinet, the two ends of 
which were covered with caps of ox-horn. The one at the outer end 
served as a bell, and the other as an air chamber that enclosed the 
beating reed and forced the player to blow without grasping the 
reed with his mouth. According to Chinese tradition, this clarinet 
was Tataric. No specimen has been preserved, and an illustration 
in an old Chinese treatise, which is our only source, does not in- 
dicate whether it was a flute, an oboe or a clarinet. But we can be 
sure that it was a clarinet since it was similar in shape to a scattered 
family, the rare members of which are found on the coasts and 
islands along the sea route leading from the Indian Ocean through 
the Mediterranean into the Atlantic. They occur in Ceylon and the 
Greek Archipelago, among the Basques and also in Wales, where 
they are known as fibgorn (English hornfife ). 

The cylindrical oboe (Japanese hichiriki , Chinese kuan ) is made 
of hard wood, bone or horn, has 7 + b fingerholes and a long double 
reed measuring about three inches. The instrument is said to have 
come from Kutcha in East Turkestan. This is possible j but it prob- 
ably originated farther west. It has been used in the Caucasus and 
Phoenicia, in ancient Egypt and the modern Islamic countries and 
in ancient Greece $ the Arabic name * irdqia , ‘from the Irak,’ points 
to western Asia. (pi. X a) 

The conical oboe of the Far East is remarkably slim. Each of its 
7 + b fingerholes lies in its own individual groove carved around 
the pipe and giving it a fluted profile j the mouthpiece, the lip- 
supporting disk and the bell are made of metal. 

The Chinese call it an Indian instrument, and this derivation is 
confirmed by the fact that the Mongols also trace their oboe, which 
is identical, back to India. The lamas, relating this, add that this 
sacred instrument imitates the voice of the Indian bird, galatingga. 
Its Mongolian name, bishur , is certainly connected with the word 
blsa that a Persian manuscript of the fourteenth century A.D. men- 




The Far East 213 

tions as the name of one pipe (the modern spelling is ft so). The 
Chinese name sona y on the other hand, is identical with Turkish, 
Persian and Hindustani names of the same instrument, surnd and 
surnay ; an older Mongolian form is suru-nai. The strange Japanese 
name charumela or charumera (r and l are not differentiated in 
Japanese) is obviously the old Spanish term for oboe, charamela. 
Portuguese traders and Spanish Jesuits went to Japan in the six- 
teenth century, and being the first Europeans who had come there, 
they had an influence on terminology. 

FLUTES in the Far East are usually made of bamboo, except for 
the globular clap pipes spoken of in Chapter 8. 

The only whistle flute is the Chinese t*ai fting hsiao y with six 
front holes and, above them, a hole covered with a delicate mem- 
brane which, vibrating with the flute, makes the timbre somewhat 
nasal. 

The notched flutes of the ancient Far East have already been dis- 
cussed. Here we add a vertical flute (Japanese shaku hachi) f unique 
because of its thickness, which is made of bamboo and provided 
with 4 + h fingerholes, yielding a chromatic scale by half-stopping. 
There is no notch ; but the fact that the underlip of the player al- 
most completely covers the open end shows the relationship with 
the old notched flute, tung hsiao y the upper end of which is blocked 
except for a narrow flue. “Well played, it is one of the mellowest 
of wind instruments ; but the exceeding difficulty of playing it at 
all justifies the tradition of secrets which have been handed down 
from Omori Toku, a hermit of Yedo, from generation to genera- 
tion of patient teachers and patient pupils” (Piggott). 

Of cross flutes the Far East knows four main types. The first one 
(Chinese cttiK) has 5 + 1 holes; the second one ( ti tse in Chinese, 
set teki in Japanese) has six fingerholes in front and an additional, 
nonstopped hole covered with a delicate membrane, usually onion- 
skin, to give the tone a nasalizing timbre by its vibration; the third 
one (Japanese yamato fuye), of the same kind, is delicately wrapped 
in silk threads and lacquered; the fourth one (yoko fuye) has seven 
front holes. The Japanese term fuye derives from fuku, ‘to blow’; 
yamato means ‘mountain-pass’ and probably designates the ancient 
pass taken by the immigrants from Korea, (fig. 39) 

The art of playing these flutes differs essentially from the oc- 
cidental styles; sustained notes are considered lifeless and dry, un- 
less the player slightly sharpens or flattens their beginning and 




214 The History of Musical Instruments 

their end, and his skill and taste in producing these deviations is 
one of his greatest achievements. 

DRUMS. In the medieval and modern Far East there are two 
main types of drums always distinguishable from each other by the 
manner of fastening the skins — that is, either nailed or braced. 

In the chapter on the ancient Far East we discussed nail drums 
in barrel shape with the length about the same size as the diameter. 
Another type of nailed drum, so shallow that its diameter was 
much greater than its length, was certainly used in medieval times, 
and probably also in antiquity, although there is no direct evidence 
of it. Today it is found in Japan, but no longer exists in China or 
Korea; its principal species is the large, picturesque ‘hanging drum,’ 
tsuri daiko. The wooden body is lacquered, and the skins are covered 
with colorful paintings of the Phoenix or the Dragon surrounded 
by jagged clouds. The drum is suspended in the middle of a cir- 
cular stand, which is richly carved and lacquered and terminates in 
a golden flame with three balls of fire. The player, sitting in front, 
strikes the center with two leather-knobbed sticks, the right one of 
which is called the male, and the left one the female stick. 

Braced drums in spool shape probably existed in medieval 
times in China and Korea though today they are found only in 
Japan, where their origin is attributed to Turkestan and Tibet. 

The shape of these drums is similar to that of a spool; two pro- 
jecting disks are connected by a cylinder, either straight or slightly 
bulging, of smaller diameter. The disks are formed by skins stretched 
over wide, flat rings; hemp or silken cords are laced in W form be- 
tween them and are encircled by a central belt. 

The most important is the ‘large drum,’ da daiko , the skins of 
which are more than six feet wide while the cylinder has a length 
of five feet. Piggott states that it is used 

only on the great occasions in the Bugaku orchestra instead of the tsuri- 
daiko. It is erected on a special platform, draped and tasseled, with a gold 
railing and steps. The drummer, who is specially selected for his skill, 
stands in front of the drum, the directions being that he should, for greater 
vigor in striking, place his left foot on the platform, and his right on the 
upper step. It is surrounded with a broad rim ornamented with phoenix 
and dragon, and edged with red kwayen y or ‘flames.’ This frame is fixed 
into a socket in the platform. 

Of the small varieties, the kakko y lying on a low stand, is the most 
important as counterpart of the tsuri daiko in the bugaku orchestra. 




The Far East 215 

Their rhythmic style is interesting as the accents differ from oursj 
indeed, they are the reverse : 

occidental accents || f 
beats 1234 

Japanese accents *f 44 

Outside the Far East, drums with protruding rings occur only in 
South India and Ceylon. Tavil is their native name. These also 
have the W-laces and the central belt of the da daiko. 

In the area between these two districts, Ceylon and Japan, the 
W-laces plus the belt are found on a special form known as the 
hourglass drum — that is, a drum consisting of two cups united by 
their small ends. Their structure is reminiscent of the spool drums, 
and there is probably an intimate connection between the two drums. 
Both have protruding rings, W-laces and central belts. The only 
question is which came first. According to the historical sources, the 
hourglass drum was imported from East Turkestan in the fourth 
century A.D. ; the provenance of the kakko and its relatives is not 
indicated. The geographical criterion suggests that the hourglass 
drum is newer, as it occupies a vast central territory between the 
two small districts of the barrel drum. Technical criteria back this 
conclusion: all hourglass drums are small and portable, while the 
Japanese barrel drums can be traced back to gigantic specimens more 
than six feet wide and include an archaic type filled with rice. The 
development from barrel-shaped spool drums to hourglass drums 
is easy to understand. The purpose of a central belt is to gather in 
and thus tighten the laces. But a bulging body would prevent the 
laces from being gathered by a central belt, whereas the addition 
of broad, protruding rings holds the cords away from the body so 
that they can be drawn in at the middle. Such rings, then, are 
justifiable only with cylindrical and barrel-shaped bodies. In hour- 
glass drums they are not necessary and must be vestiges of an earlier 
form. The latter must be more recent. 

Again, the older hourglass drums are preserved in the Far East. 
Their Korean name, kal ko y similar to Japanese kakko y emphasizes 
the connection with the barrel drums of the head-ring type. More- 
over, the Korean is the largest of all hourglass drums j some speci- 
mens are three feet long. The ordinary Far Eastern hourglass drum, 
best known by its Japanese name tsuzumi, is much smaller. The 
body is lacquered black with gold decoration in all cases ; but the 
colors differ according to the player’s rank: lilac for the highest, 




21 6 



The History of Musical Instruments 




light blue for the next rank, orange for the ordinary rank. The 
drummer grasps the cords tightly in his left hand so that he can 
alter the pitch, and strikes with a stick one foot long. (cp. fig. 56) 

BOWED INSTRUMENTS. Who were the inventors of the 
fiddle bow? In the last century, some scholars have ascribed it to 
Scandinavia, some to India. Both were wrong. 

Looking for the earliest evidences of the bow, we find the first 
mention in Persia in the ninth century j in China, a bowed zither is 
spoken of in the ninth or tenth century j in Europe, fiddles are de- 
picted in the tenth century. No fiddle bow is represented on the 
detailed reliefs of the Hindu-Javanese temple at Borobudur (c. 
800 A.D.). Apparently, the fiddle bow came to be known in the 
civilized world between 800 and 900 A.D. 

The Chinese bowed zither is attributed to the Mongols, and the 
usual fiddles of the Far East are said to have come from “the bar- 
barians in the west.” A tradition in the Islamic world indicates 
Kurdistan as the homeland of certain Persian fiddles 3 the oldest 
European fiddles are closely related to modern Turkestanic in- 
struments, and so are the fiddles of India. Thus all evidences point 
to Inner Asia. 

The bowed zither just mentioned is said by the Chinese, Lyeu 
Hyu, in about 900 A.D., to have been related to the zither cheng (cf. 
page 186) and to have been played at the Chinese court in a Mon- 



The Far East 



217 

golian orchestra. Such an instrument still exists in modern North 
China as ya cheng or la ch ( in. Its hollow wooden body is shaped 
like one half of a truncated cone (i. e. bisected longitudinally). Ten 
pairs of silken strings, tuned to a pentatonic scale without semitones, 
are stretched lengthwise over the rounded front and regulated by 
iron pegs. 

Later, at a time that we cannot as yet ascertain, another instru- 
ment, the fiddle (that is, a bowed lute), became popular all over the 
east, the usual name of which, hu chTin^ hints to a Central Asiatic 
origin, as hu is one of the names that the Chinese gave to the Turkish 
Uighurs. The body is formed by a tiny cylinder, a few inches long, 
one end of which, covered by a lizard- or snakeskin, serves as a 
soundboard, the other end being left open. The body, usually made 
of bamboo, or sometimes of a hexagonal piece of wood or of a 
coconut, the top of which has been removed, is diametrically pierced 
by the handle in the manner of a spit. The two strings are generally 
tuned to a fifth, and there is no fingerboard. The player, holding 
the fiddle down in a vertical position, stops the strings with the 
fleshy part of the fingers. The bow cannot be removed from the 
instrument, as its hair passes between the strings j it rubs the under- 
side of one string and the upperside of the other. The bow is grasped 
with the palm facing upward so that the thumb is above the bow and 
the fingers below. Because of the constant vibrato and glissando of 
the left hand, the sound is rather whimpering. 

The Chinese distinguish a quantity of types and varieties that we 
enumerate here in the interest of museum curators. 

I. With rear pegs, soundboard of snakeskin, strings looped to the handle 
by a cord 

A. Cylindrical body of bamboo and two strings 

a. diameter of the body 2 inches: tan ch ( tn 

b. diameter of the body 1 inch: hut hu 

B. Hexagonal wooden body 

a. two strings: erh hu 

b. four strings: su hu 

II. With lateral pegs, soundboard of wood, strings passing over a 
ledge at the upper end of the stick which terminates its vibrating 
length 

A. Body made of coconut 

a. soundboard fitting over opening without projecting, like a 
lid: hu hu 

b. soundboard fitted into the opening: t ( t chf 'in 

B. Pear-shaped body of wood: ta hu chfin. 




218 The History of Musical Instruments 

Archaic forms of these fiddles, with only one string and without 
pegs, still exist on the northern and the southern periphery, among 
the Gilyak on the Amur and the Assamese between Tibet and Burma 
(and occasionally in East Africa), although they have entirely dis- 
appeared in the Far East. A step farther back leads to one of the 
oldest stringed instruments, the musical bow (cf. Chapter i). 
Like this primitive instrument, the oldest Far Eastern fiddle con- 
sists of a body pierced by a wooden handle, a string stretched be- 
tween the two ends of this stick, and a small cord looping the string 
to the handle near its upper end, often with no apparent purpose 
since the tension is controlled by a peg. 

FLAT LUTES. About 500 A.D. the family of lutes was en- 
riched by a new branch, confined to Central and East Asia, in which 
the bulging shell was replaced by two flat surfaces connected by a 
shallow wall in the manner of the guitar. Its modern representative, 
because of its circular form, is called yiieh chfin in Chinese, and 
gekkin in Japanese, yiieh and getsu meaning ‘moon.’ It has a short 
but distinct neck, a pegbox with lateral pegs, ten frets, a string- 
holder on the wooden soundboard, two silken, double strings a fifth 
apart, and is played with a plectron. (fig. 57) 

The present short neck replaced an earlier longer one which ap- 
pears on East Turkestanic frescoes of about 500 A.D., and still exists 
in Mongolia, China, Japan, Annam, Cambodia. Chinese tradition 
attributes the invention of the instrument to the Tsin Dynasty (2 65- 
419 A.D.). A specimen of the eighth century is preserved in the 
famous treasury, Sho-so-in, at Nara near Osaka in Japan j it is a 
marvelous inlaid piece with ten frets on the neck and four on the 
soundboard. 

A general survey of the lute shows two stages of development, 
the earlier one being characterized by a medium length neck, and 
the later one by a short neck. We distinguish: 

Medium length neck 

Octagonal body, in Mongolia, Japan ( genkwan ) and China 
{shuang chfin) 

Circular body, in Annam ( cat dan nguyet ), Japan {ku) and Korea 
( wol kum) 

Short neck and circular body, 

in Japan ( gekkin ) and China {yiieh chfin). 




The Far East 



219 

LONG LUTE. A small, heavy, redwood frame, sometimes 
square, sometimes rounded, is covered with skin on both faces. It 
is pierced by a plano-convex stick of redwood about a yard long; 
three silken strings, tuned by long lateral pegs, are plucked with a 
large heavy plectron. The older, Japanese accordatura is ground- 
tone, fourth, seventh ( 1-4-7) > a more recent tuning is 1-5-8. This 
is a popular instrument, which is said to have been brought to Japan 
as late as about 1560 A.D. 

It is easy to see that this instrument has come to the Far East 
from western Asia; with its long pierced stick, its small body and 
its three strings on lateral pegs, it is the counterpart of the Persian 
tanbur or sitar. Even the names correspond; both Persian si tar 
and Chinese san hsien mean ‘three strings.’ It is tempting to try to 
explain the Japanese name, shamisen y in the same way. This is not 
possible: ‘three strings’ would be san gen in Japanese; moreover, 
the original form of the Japanese term is jamisen , or ‘snakeskin- 
line,’ which only later was changed to resemble the Chinese word. 

THE DULCIMER AND THE HARP. The section on Far 
Eastern stringed instruments is not complete without mention of 
two foreign instruments, the more recent one of which has proved 
popular, while the other one, although of a venerable age, has never 
gained a footing. 

The dulcimer y called yang chHn or ‘foreign zither’ in Chinese, 
will be mentioned later on among the Persian instruments. It has 
been generally accepted in the Far East. 

The harf was imported from East Turkestan with several kinds 
of drums and cymbals, after the Chinese had destroyed the kingdom 
of Kutcha in 384 A.D. Its shape, preserved in some native illustra- 
tions, corresponded to that of the vertical angular harp with twenty- 
five strings as used in Persia, and so did its Chinese name k‘ung hu y 
derived from cank y the Persian name of the harp. (pi. X a) 

The harp was never really accepted in the Far East; it was played 
only by foreigners from the west, and was soon given up. Obviously, 
it could not compete with the highly developed native zithers which 
had been adapted to the new flexible style of postdassical times. 

In the B.C. centuries, Chinese music must have been very precise, 
being based on the regulated distinctions between the notes of the 
scale. It had only two stringed instruments and depended on a great 
quantity of idiophones and chimes with unalterable pitches. Medi- 




220 The History of Musical Instruments 

eval and modern Chinese music, under the influence of Central 
Asiatic taste, abandoned rigid pitches. Preferring gliding scales and 
the delicate shadings of sustained notes, it did not favor idiophones 
and chimes and adopted instruments, particularly stringed instru- 
ments, that were capable of a flexible style. 




1 1 . India 



T HE passage from antiquity to the middle ages in India 
was marked by a process similar to that in the Far East. 
The only stringed instrument of Indian antiquity — the 
harp, with its open strings — was abandoned in the middle ages in 
favor of a quantity of instruments with stopped strings, zithers, 
lutes and fiddles. The new style that resulted, however, differed 
from that in Far Eastern music. There, instruments with flexible 
intonation were introduced to compensate for the rigid and un- 
yielding pitches of chimes. In India the rigidity of melody was 
eased by the gamakas. These constitute a style that is characterized 
by numberless shadings, graces, slides, tremolos, rising and fall- 
ing, which soften the melodic line of Hindu music. They are the 
“life and soul” of Indian melody; in Somanatha’s words, “music 
without gamaka is like a moonless night, a river without water and 
a creeper without flowers.” 

Melodic disintegration is counterbalanced by submission to a 
strict rhythm. Rhythm to the Hindu is far from being mere time 
beating; it is the regular repetition of a complicated pattern of 
beats, which is indispensable as an accompaniment to every kind of 
music. As a result, there is a disproportionate percentage of drums 
in Indian music. 

It would be tempting to attribute both the shaded melody and the 
rhythmic patterns to the strong penetration of Islamic culture be- 
tween 1000 and 1600 A.D., as they are the typical features of Per- 
sian and Arabian music as well. But the importance of rhythmic 
patterns is native to India; the reliefs of Indian antiquity almost 

always depict one or more drums in any musical scene. 

221 




222 The History of Musical Instruments 

In the following sections of this chapter we will usually indicate 
the Sanskrit names of the instruments, although this classic lan- 
guage is no longer spoken. This seems to be the best expedient, as 
otherwise each instrument has numberless names, varieties and spell- 
ings in the hundreds of Indian dialects. 

PRE-ISLAMIC TIMES 

The most important source of information about Indian musical 
instruments and their chronology is found outside India, at Borobu- 
dur in Java, where, about 800 A.D., Indian settlers erected a gigan- 
tic temple, the outer walls of which were covered with several hun- 
dreds of reliefs depicting Hindu life before Islam. Some twenty 
among them represent musical scenes with aristocratic, military 
and popular instruments, probably a complete anthology of the 
instruments used in India in the second half of the first millennium 
A.D. Some other sources confirm the evidence of Borobudur. 

IDIOPHONES. The first iconographic record of the hand bell 
or ghapta is not conclusive. As late as the seventh century, it is de- 
picted in one of the caves at Aurangabad j yet five hundred years 
earlier the Greco-Syrian philosopher, Bardesanes, had related that 
while the Hindu priest prayed, he sounded the bell. It was small 
and tulip-shaped, with a thick clapper. As it was exclusively used 
by priests in the worship of Hindu divinities, the handle was finely 
decorated with religious symbols, such as Siva’s trident, Vishnu’s 
eagle or Hanuman, the king of the apes. 

Hindu-Javanese reliefs depict several other kinds of bells: twin 
bells held in either hand, bells hanging from the necks of elephants 
and larger bells suspended in an upright stand, in the fashion of the 
Far East. Frequently, two small empty bells are clashed together 
like cymbals, a manner of playing that probably had come from 
East Turkestan. They are not always easy to distinguish from cup- 
shaped cymbals. 

Cymbals might have been introduced by the invading Hunsj 
they are first represented on a relief of the temple at Garwha, 
which dates from the fifth century A.D. In Hindu mythology they 
are attributes of Ravana, head of the night spirits, and of the Kin- 
nari, the sirens of the Hindu pantheon j Vishnu himself strikes 
them when the Destroyer Isvara and Bhadrakali, the goddess of 
death, dance at Chidambaram. 




India 



223 

Hindu cymbals are either ‘clashing’ or tinkling.’ The tinkling 
cymbals ( mandira or tala) are small, heavy and unconnected j they 
have a sloping rim and a broad central boss, or no rim at all, and may 
be related with the cymbal bells just mentioned. They are used in 
chamber music j all rhythmic patterns can be performed on them. 
The clashing cymbals ( jhanjha ), connected by a loose cord, are 
made of thin bronze with a wide, flat rim and a central boss. 

Gongs ( kaipsya ) are small and flat without a boss; they are not 
frequent in India. The first evidence of them is on a relief of the 
temple at Aihole in the seventh century} no specimen is depicted 
on the Borobudur reliefs. 

Instead of gongs, all temples of India have a thick circular disk 
of bronze ( ghafi ) suspended on a cord. Struck with a wooden ham- 
mer at a particular moment in the Hindu service, during the fuja 
(adoration), it produces a clear and brilliant tone. On the eastern 
peninsula and in Tibet, the disk has a fanciful, triangular outline 
that the natives interpret as a crescent or a mountain. 

The Borobudur reliefs depict a specifically Indian instrument 
that up to this day has played a certain role in ordinary street music 
— the big pottery jar, called ghafa in Sanskrit. Its mouth is gen- 
erally pressed against the player’s stomach to fill and deepen the 
sound} but sometimes the man holds it away to make the timbre 
higher and drier. Both hands alternately play, hitting with wrists, 
fingers and nails, continually varying the timbre and the pitch and 
performing the rhythmic patterns with an astonishing technique. 
Moreover, it seems that many players have preserved the old asso- 
ciation of instrument playing and acrobacy} they like to toss up the 
pot between two strokes and let it fall down at the end of a piece 
so that it is dashed to pieces with the final note. 

DRUMS. The pot is sometimes depicted with a skin covering 
the mouth, and used as a hand drum. But the pot drum seems to 
have disappeared since the days of Borobudur and to have been 
replaced in Islamic times by the (abla and the batfiya. 

Of tubular drums Borobudur depicts three kinds: one, cylindri- 
cal with W-laces, played with a stick} a second, barrel-shaped, with 
Y-laces that is handbeatenj a third, elongated, conical and bulging, 
handbeaten at the smaller end. The latter drum is represented in a 
set of three, two standing upright and the third one lying on the 
ground before the sitting player. This set-playing doubtless goes 
back to the drum pairs described in the first Indian chapter. 




224 TA<? History of Musical Instruments 

And probably it was these sets which finally developed into the 
unparalleled drum chime of Burma ( tshaing vaing). A quantity 
of carefully tuned drums, normally twenty-four, are suspended 
inside the walls of a circular penj the player squats in the center 
and with his bare hands strikes the drums in a swift, toccatalike mel- 
ody. The drums themselves, ranging from about five to sixteen 
inches in height, are wooden, conical and slightly bulging j leather 
thongs laced in narrow W’s are stretched between the two twisted 
thong hoops. The drum chime is an interesting fusion of Indian 
and East Asiatic elements: India has adapted the East Asiatic idea 
of a chime to her drums, the least appropriate of instruments. 

STICK-ZITHER. It is a common error to suppose that a name 
has always been applied to the object that now bears it, whereas 
their union is often rather loose. The noted vine is a good example. 
Usually it is referred to as one “of the earliest instruments of In- 
dia.” But the name alone is old, and is very probably derived from 
Egyptian vtn , as explained on page 94 j the instrument to which 
it belonged in antiquity, the harp, disappeared from India more 
than one thousand years ago. After its extinction, the name passed 
to the stick-zither, (fig. 58) 

Not earlier than the seventh century A.D. the temple at Mavali- 
puram depicts the first stick-zither. There, as well as on reliefs in 
Ceylon, Cambodia and Java, it has a primitive form which still 
exists in Siam and Cambodia as f ( in and sadiu ; it consists of a stick 
with a half calabash attached near one end to serve as a resonator. 
It usually has two strings. The calabash is rested against the player’s 
chest, with the stick pointing toward the ground j the left hand 
stops the strings while the right hand plucks them. About 1000 A.D. 
the half calabash was rested a little higher against the man’s shoul- 
der j soon after 1000 A.D. the opposite end of the stick was pro- 
vided with half a calabash as wellj the modern form with a whole 
calabash at each end was created about 1400 A.D., and since that 
time the upper calabash has rested upon the left shoulder. 

The vina, or mahati vine (‘large vina,’ Hindustani bin), in its 
classical and present form is a zither with a round stick and two 
big gourds suspended near the ends. One of the gourds rests on the 
player’s left shoulder, the other one under his right arm, the stick 
being held obliquely across his chest. Four or five wire strings, 
plucked with a wire plectron worn on the finger, produce a clear 
delicate melody and occasional chords j one of two additional thin 





Russian hurdy-gurdy flayer, Macedonian lira flayer. South Italian fijjerari with fiffi 

* fogna. 




India 



22 5 





figure 59. North Indian vina. 




figure 60. South Indian vina. 



steel strings placed outside the melody strings and played with the 
small fingers of either hand, or with the right thumb, contribute a 
jingling and sparkling treble in the higher octave j and all this 
silvery tone secures volume by the resonance of the big gourds. 
The melodies themselves are free and expansive, and some twenty, 
large, moveable frets, projecting from the stick like vertebrae in 
a backbone, are shifted so easily that the different intervals of the 
innumerable Indian scales can be observed, (fig. 59) 




226 The History of Musical Instruments 

The sensitiveness of this instrument and its complicated finger 
technique exclude amateur playing j the vina is a solo instrument 
for the finest musicians only. 

This older vina is rather rare today. All over the south, includ- 
ing Bombay, the lower gourd is replaced by the solid body of a 
lute with a wooden soundboard, and the upper gourd is preserved 
only in a diminutive form. A narrow strip of metal laid on the top 
of the bridge is supposed to improve the timbre of the strings. At 
Channapatna and Bareilly in southern India a special caste pos- 
sesses the secret process for manufacturing the wire strings and sells 
them at a high price, (fig. 60) 

Before discussing the instruments introduced under Islamic in- 
fluence, we must describe some fiddles and wind instruments which 
do not belong either to the older Hindu group represented on tem- 
ple reliefs, or to the Muhammedan group. With one exception they 
came from the north at a time remote enough to be spread all over 
the vast country but also recent enough to prevent them from being 
handed eastwards to the Malays, or even to the Burmese. We begin 
with a curious species of fiddle. 

SHORT FIDDLES in India have a really fantastic shape. One 
of them, the sarinda, played by lower castes, has a body which, 
though made of wood, is a shape more typical of leather or some 
pliable material. The box is a thin shell, the edges of which are 
drawn together like a bag at the lower end. In their upper part the 
edges are pulled out to form curved barbs on either side, and this 
part of the body remains entirely open so that one can look into it. 
Only the narrow space between the lower edges is covered by a small 
piece of skin which forms the soundboard. Altogether the outline of 
the opening resembles the longitudinal section of a mushroom. The 
instrument has a short neck without frets, lateral pegs inserted in 
a cubic block of wood serving as a pegbox, and three horsehair or 
gut strings in g' f c'. (fig. 61) 

A specifically North Indian variety is the sarangi. It is a clumsy 
instrument, hollowed out of a single block of heavy wood, with a 
waisted front which is entirely covered with skin. As with the sarinda, 
the short, broad neck has no frets, and the button-headed pegs are 
laterally inserted in a cubic block of wood which forms the pegbox. 
Three gut strings in cf gc are the regular equipment j but usually 
a fourth wire string in d is added. The finger tips do not stop the 
strings by touching them on the front j instead, the fingernails are 




India 



227 

used to stop them on the side, as with certain bowed instruments of 
eastern Europe. Behind the three or four bowed strings, a quan- 
tity of thin wire strings, eleven to fifteen, are attached to smaller 
pegs in the neck. These wires resound sympathetically, as in the 




figure 61. Indian figure 62. Indian figure 63. Tibetan 

fiddle sarinda. fiddle sarangi. triple flute. 

European viola d’amore. The bowing hand is held with the palm 
upwards, (fig. 62) 

There is little doubt that these fiddles came from a horse-breeding 
country in western Central Asia; primitive forms are still in use in 
Turkestan (as kobyz ) among the Kirghizes and the Tatars. 

FLUTES AND TRUMPETS. Besides the vertical and the 
crossflutes mentioned in the first Indian chapter, India has various 
whistle flutes both with and without a beaklike, chamfered upper 
end. Possibly they appear on one of the Borobudur reliefs, but we 
are not sure that our interpretation is correct. A native authority, 
Mr. P. Sambamoorthy, tells us that their tone is low and sweet and 
charms “the sheep when played by the shepherds in the valleys by 
the side of the hills. This is the common pastoral instrument of the 
shepherds and cowherds.” 





228 The History of Musical Instruments 

In the north, two flutes, tightly bound together, are used as 
double -flutes , and the Tibetans have even triple flutes of the same 
kind ( gLingbu ). (fig. 63) 

As to trumpetSy Borobudur depicts only single and double speci- 
mens of the short and clumsy instrument that we discussed in the 
first Indian chapter. The modern trumpet of the north is entirely 
different, resembling the Chinese trumpet. It is slender and conical 
and consists of four sections fitting into each other like those of a 
telescope j the end of each section is marked by a bulging hollow 
ring. Telescoping construction and bulbs are not functional parts 




of the instrument. A close relation to trumpets of Central Asia 
and the Far East therefore seems probable. Many Indian trumpets 
borrow even the peculiar embossed leaf decoration of the bell char- 
acteristic of Mongolian trumpets, as well as their Mongolian name, 
buri. 

The coiled trumpet (Sanskrit turya') is also related to Central 
Asian trumpets. The tube is bent in the shape of the European 
trumpet. It has been questioned whether it came from Asia to the 
Occident, or vice versa. The Mongolian name seems to indicate an 
Asiatic origin. 

The large curved horn of India ( rapasrnga ) has certainly not 
come from Mongolia; nor do we find horns of this kind anywhere 
else in Asia. It probably is a native form. Two curved sections of 
brass or bronze fit into each other so that they can be turned to form 
either a crescent or an S. The sections form a continuously conical 
bore and are demarcated by bulging rings. The vehement sound of 
such horns is heard on various occasions, among which is a sunset 
ceremonial, a custom reminiscent of the old solar charm connected 
with trumpets, (fig. 64) 



India 



229 



ISLAMIC TIMES 

The continual cultural influences felt from the northwest and 
north culminated in a strong penetration of Islamic faith and Arabo- 
Persian influence. It is not difficult to distinguish the Arabo- 
Persian part in Hindu music, and especially in Hindu instrument 
making. Not only were the outer shapes of most of the foreign 
instruments preserved, but the foreign names also were kept in- 
tact or else superficially adapted to native idioms. Terms such as 
sitdr and rabab were not changed, and others, as Sanskrit sanayi 
and tamburiy or Marathi sarod , can easily be traced back to the Per- 
sian words surnaya } (anbur and sarud. 

DRUMS. The group of frame drums includes both pre-Islamic 
and Arabo-Persian types. The pre-Islamic drums have a large frame 
of wood or iron, usually not a perfect circle, and one thick skin 
with tightening thongs which converge radially to form a star on 
the open back. Two small sticks strike the head. This drum is only 
used by aboriginal tribes, the Khota for example, who call it tam- 
ba(tam , and the Khondo. It is probably related to the drums of 
Central and North Asiatic shamans. 

A second group belongs in the Semitic type and is frequently 
designated by Arabic and Persian names such as daf and ddera. 
These instruments are strictly circular or octagonal} the single skin 
is glued or nailed on the frame and struck with the bare hand. 

Kettledrums will be discussed in detail in the Near Eastern chap- 
ter. In India they are chiefly used in the nahabat } the noisy band 
officiating in state ceremonies and processions, which, beside the ket- 
tledrums, includes cymbals, trumpets and oboes. Emperor Akbar, 
in the sixteenth century, had a band of forty-two drums, a pair of 
large cymbals, eleven shrill oboes, ten trumpets and two horns. 
These bands are much smaller today. 

The most impressive instrument of such a band is the sahib- 
nahabaty or ‘master drum/ a pair of silver kettles, having the gigan- 
tic diameter of five feet and weighing about four hundred and fifty 
pounds. They are mounted on an elephant and draped with a hang- 
ing cloth ten feet long} each drum has its own player sitting on its 
rim and striking with a silver stick. 

The sutri-nahabat brings up the rear of the procession. It is a pair 
of smaller copper kettles, draped and mounted on a camel, and 
both struck by the same drummer. 




230 The History of Musical Instruments 

Smaller kettledrums, placed on the ground, are made of clay 
in an oval formj all of them have Y-shaped thongs attached to a 
twisted thong hoop, and interlaced with a central belt also of thongs. 
Pairs of shallow drums of this kind are usually called nagara ; the 
deeper drums are called pikara and damama. 

Unlike other countries, India uses kettledrums also in chamber 
music. The most important chamber drum is the haipy This is a 
small kettledrum of clay, wood or copper. A hoop is rolled up in 
the edge of the skin j it is stretched by means of leather thongs laced 
in W or Y formation. The usual partner of the barnya, the pabla y 
has the shape of two truncated cones, the lower one being much 
smaller than the upper one, and is made of wood painted in various 
colored stripes — red, yellow, black, green. The skin has a circular, 
black paste and an outer hoop made of twisted thongs, from which 
other thongs run down in W’s and are tightened by shiftable wooden 
dowels. The manner in which the bottom is carved shows clearly 
that this instrument originally had a second skin, such as with the 
/ pakhavaja y which was given up when the drum came to be used in 
a vertical position. Both drums are played with the bare hands. 
When played by the same man, the barnya is at his left, the tabla 
is at his right and produces the higher note. 

Great technique is required in playing the baipya, for it is the left drum 
that mars or makes the performers’ efforts. When a new singer appears, 
the town-people of the musical circle always produce their most trusted 
Tabalchi [tabla player] to try the new comer’s capacity . . . and every 
possible cross rhythm is put forth to lure the Gavaya (singer) into the 
many pit-falls prepared for him. 

THE OBOE, imported from Persia, preserved its Persian name 
surna in North India, though Sanskrit changed both the spelling and 
pronunciation to sartayi. Sometimes two of these oboes are connected 
at an acute angle to form a double oboej but usually a second man 
accompanies the sanayl on a separate drone oboe of the same kind 
called sruti (the term for ‘quarter-tone’), in which all the finger- 
holes, or all but one, are closed with wax. The same custom is found 
in South India j there the large nagasuram plays with the drone 
oboe ottu. Mr. P. Sambamoorthy relates that oboe “music is in 
great demand at weddings, ceremonials, processions and festivals. 
Expert performers are paid fabulous sums for their performances.” 
Playing “is the monopoly of certain castes in southern India and 
elsewhere.” Having “a continuous tradition behind them,” they 




India 



231 



figure 65. Indian 
double oboe. 





FIGURE 66. Siamese 
oboe. 




figure 67. Javanese oboe. 



often “hold hereditary appointments and in most cases they are 
given inams of land” in return for their services, (figs. 65, 66, 67) 

BROAD-NECKED LUTES are a distinct and exclusively In- 
dian variety of the Southwest Asiatic tanbur-sitar family. With the 
tanbur, they share the small and pear-shaped body covered by a 
perforated wooden soundboard, the long straight neck with a flat, 
fretted fingerboard, the wire strings and the mixed frontal and 
lateral position of the button-headed pegs. Contrary to the tanbur, 
they have a disproportionately wide neck and shiftable wire frets 
which, before each piece, are placed in the position necessary to pro- 
duce the tonality required. 

Lutes of this kind are called sitar. But the name is misleading, 
as this Persian word means three-stringed. Three-stringed sitars are 
rare in India, most of them having from four to seven strings. The 
melody, however, is played on the last string only (with a few ex- 
ceptions), while the others serve as a drone accompaniment, sound- 
ing beneath or tinkling on the highest string opposite the melody 
string. To pluck them, the player puts a tiny wire plectron on his 
right thumb. 






232 The History of Musical Instruments 

The exuberant imagination of India has created more varieties 
of this instrument than can be conveniently enumerated. It will 
suffice to mention the large kaccafi vipd y with a big gourd and six 
strings in c'" <f' g<f cf the sauktikd vipa , with a nacre body taper- 

ing to the head of an ibisj the kinnari vipa , with an ostrich egg for a 
bodyj the frasdripi vipa , with an additional neck and fingerboard 
alongside with the first onej and the kdca vipa , with a glass finger- 
board. 

Much more usual than these species is a strange form which is 
used to accompany singers with a drone without playing a melody. 
Tamburiy its name, is derived from Persian ( anbur . The general 
outline resembles the sitar — a long, broad neck, cut away squarely 
at the upper end, and a relatively large round body of wood or, in 
cheaper instruments, of gourd. But there are some differences: the 
soundboard is slightly convex} the pegs are attached in different 
positions, two being inserted in the front, one from the right, and 
one from the left side} frets are lacking. The four wire strings are 
tuned to g cf c' c. The three first are made of steel, and the fourth of 
brass. They are invariably plucked one after another in the indi- 
cated order without using a plectron } as a result, the harmonics are 
clearly heard, above all <?", the fifth partial of c. The timbre is full 
and delicate and provides an ideal background to the voice. 

The family of broad-necked lutes has a branch of bowed lutes or 
fiddles. The main instrument is the esrdr y a strange mixture of the 
sitar and the sarangi. From the latter the esrar has taken the waisted 
body, skin-covered front and sympathetic strings which echo the 
metallic, but delicate, sound of the bowed strings } the sitar has con- 
tributed the long broad neck, the shiftable frets and the wire strings. 
The accordatura is not uniform. 

Even more elaborate than this hybrid instrument is a variety 
called mayuri in Sanskrit, and tdyus in Hindustani, both names 
meaning ‘peacock.’ It is picturesquely shaped and colored like a 
peacock, the bird consecrated to the queen of the gods. A mayuri is 
mentioned in the Hindu orchestra at the imperial court of China 
as early as 500 A.D. But it is not likely that this was the same instru- 
ment that bears the name today. 

This plenitude of Islamic instruments shows the importance of 
Islamic influence on Indian music. With Indian culture, Islamic 
influence spread eastward to the island settlements of India, affect- 
ing their religion and their social habits. The musical influence, how- 
ever, was slight. 




12 . Southeast Asia 



PRE-INDIAN PERIOD 

E VEN in prehistoric time the vast peninsulas and islands to the 
east and southeast of India were particularly devoted to in- 
strumental music and created numberless instruments of an 
original character, which were carried both eastwards to the Pacific 
Islands and westwards to Africa in early migrations. The xylophone 
was among them, and the tube-zither — a piece of bamboo with 
strings slit from the rind itself and held away by tiny bridges. A 
few later instruments, originating in an epoch between middle and 
high culture, must be mentioned separately. There is the strange 
rattle angklung , the two or three vertical bamboo tubes of which, 
carefully tuned in octaves, slide to and fro in grooves of the rec- 
tangular frame and strike against the rim. (fig. 68) A mouth or- 
gan of the type found between Burma and Borneo, and a large 
bell in an upright stand are both carved, with other Hindu instru- 
ments, on the Borobudur reliefs of which we will speak in one 
of the next paragraphs. The most characteristic of the bronze in- 
struments of that late prehistoric epoch is the drum-gong. 

DRUM-GONGS, made of an alloy which contains a certain ad- 
mixture of lead, are cut in two pieces} a rather short, hollow cylin- 
der, one to two feet high with gracefully curving sides, is covered 
at one end by a flat circular plate, the other end remaining open. 
This plate in early specimens is larger than the opening and is sol- 
dered to the end of the cylinder, with its edges projecting slightly. 
The gong is suspended from the ceiling so that the head hangs ver- 
tically} a squatting player beats the center of the plate with a big 

233 





2 3+ The History of Musical Instruments 

lower sound. 6 ’** U W ‘ th * Ilght bambo Oi the plate produces a 

I (I A /\ 




_• ^ IGURE 68 * Javanese angklung and suspended xylophone. 

Thel mS'qtty ° f ‘ *“ kinds - 

has, at the center, an engraved star with Jth COn £ entric circl es and 
little frogs cast in bronze single nr r ^ e *g h t or twelve ra ys } 
another, are soldered along the rim A° or , three sittin g on one 
suspending cords are soldered to the^Zdf^nt^ 1 ^ f ° r the 
are large and have single frogs on a omWri ? d f r lnstrum ents 
specimens are smaller and have double or trM r^’ m ° re recent 
Chinese, type is small and has a head nlat C ^ ro ^ s ’ tile latest, 
without frogs. Cad p ate fittin g into the opening 




Southeast Asia 



2 35 

The relation of the drum-gong to the ordinary gong is uncertain. 

On the other hand, there is little doubt that it came from, or at 
least was inspired by, a skin drum. Most drums are similarly divided 
into a resonating cylinder and a flat circular head that is meant to be 
struck; several drums have ear-shaped handles as well, and the 
decoration of the head is paralleled by the frequent painting of drum 
skins; the star with eight rays, in particular, occurs in Muhamme- 
dan North Africa. 

Though the transformation of bamboo, wood and skin into bronze 
with musical instruments probably began before, and was continued 
during, the time of Hindu influence, the bulk of bronze instruments 
did not appear till much later when the Indian period in Southeast 
Asia had come to an end. 

INDIAN PERIOD 

History in the southeast began in the first centuries A.D. when 
it became an immense, though loosely knit, Indian colony. Nearly 
the entire coast from Burma to the boundaries of China, some dis- 
tricts in the interior, and the large Malayan islands, Sumatra and 
Java, formed numerous states under the predominance of Indian 
civilization. 

One state, the Sumatran empire of the Salendra dynasty, became 
particularly important, in the eighth century, extending its he- 
gemony as far as western and Central Java. The outstanding monu- 
ment that it left in Central Java, the gigantic stupa at Borobudur, is 
a fertile source of information not only about Indian religion, archi- 
tecture and sculpture in the Archipelago, but also about Hindu- 
Malayan music. Many musical scenes are depicted on the two thou- 
sand reliefs which adorn its walls. 

There we find several kinds of bells and cymbals; conical, cylin- 
drical, hourglass and pot drums; cross flutes, single and double 
trumpets and shell trumpets; arched harps, stick-zithers and lutes. 
All instruments of ancient India are represented. At the same time 
their Sanskrit names appear in the older Javanese literature as well 
as in a quantity of inscriptions on stone and bronze: ghapfa, mr- 
danga , sankha y tala y vipa and many others, (pi. XI a, b) 

All these Indian instruments have already been discussed; the 
pear-shaped short lutes only deserve special consideration because 
they resemble not only the lutes represented on Indian art works 
about 500 A.D., but also the Sino-Japanese lutes of the biwa family. 




236 The History of Musical Instruments 

The West Asiatic lute may have come to the southeast through 
China as well as through India, though a single instance of Chinese 
influence in the Indian period is not probable, (pi. XI a) 

Far Eastern influence had full scope only in the next period when 
Hindu influence had declined. 

POST-INDIAN PERIOD 

This period begins with the end of Sumatran supremacy in Java 
in the ninth century. A short time afterwards, about 920, Central 
Java was deserted, we do not know why, and East Java became the 
political and cultural center. The Indian character was rapidly lost. 
Rene Grousset’s words in regard to sculpture can also be applied to 
Malayan music of this later period: it had less serenity, but was 
“more living and dramatic in its inspiration and more impetuous in 
its movement.” 

Balinese music (which has preserved this earlier post-Indian char- 
acter better than Javanese music) is certainly dramatic and im- 
petuous. All instruments sound together in a noisy introduction 
that culminates in an overpowering crash followed by a sudden 
silence full of tension j a flute, soft and dreamy, emerges from the 
void and soars high above the dumb rhythm of a drum, until it 
fades away in a glitter of the orchestra hurrying on to another 
stretta and another crash. 

Even the briefest allusion to Southeast Asiatic music cannot 
avoid the word ‘orchestra.’ Everywhere else music of the highest 
rank is performed by soloists or small chamber groups j in the 
southeast, between Burma and Bali, it is played by orchestras, or 
gdmelans in Malayan. Some are small. The one which accompanies 
the Burmese marionette play (pwe) consists of a clapper, two dif- 
ferent pairs of cymbals, a gong chime, a drum chime, one or sev- 
eral barrel drums and a loud oboej it is very picturesque, with the 
two chimes in red and golden lacquered circular pens, and the big- 
gest drum suspended from a snake-shaped beam. 

In Bali, on the contrary, some bands are as large as our sym- 
phonic orchestras. The largest type of orchestra, called gamelan 
gong, is composed of a large quantity of metallophones in various 
sizes and forms, several gong chimes, two gigantic gongs suspended 
from an upright stand, half a dozen or more single gongs and two 
conical drums which guide the changing tempo. In the glittering 
peal of this strange orchestra one can distinguish the plain and sol- 




Southeast Asia 237 

emn melody of the bases, its paraphrase and loquacious figuration 
in the smaller chimes, and the punctuation of the gongs, of which 
the smaller ones mark the end of shorter sections while the power- 
ful basses of the large gongs conclude the main parts, (pi. XI c, f) 

While these gamelans, with the one exception of the drums, are 
entirely composed of bronze instruments, other orchestras consist 
exclusively of bamboo and wood. The Balinese gamelan djoger, 
which accompanies performances of public dancing-girls, has three 
instruments closely resembling metallophones with suspended slabs, 
but made of bamboo instead of bronze j three instruments of a gong- 
like sound, each made of a bamboo strip suspended over a resonance 
boxj and a drum. Some authors have taken this gamelan for an 
older type preserved from premetallic times. The opposite is true. 
It is hardly necessary to prove that single strips over resonance 
boxes are substitutes for gongs, and actual bamboo xylophones 
would have been made, as other bamboo sets of the Malayan Archi- 
pelago, of round bamboo — not of strips that exactly imitate the 
shape of bronze slabs. The bamboo gamelan must be postmetallic. 

No doubt these orchestras, sometimes made of bamboo, some- 
times of metal, do not represent consecutive stages of evolution. 
They embody the same idea, found previously in ancient China, 
that the elements themselves are to take life and to sound} the 
mystic gongs, which at regular intervals divide the symphony and 
then fade away, belong to the same conception of “matter called to 
life” of which the introduction to our first Far Eastern chapter has 
spoken. 

The scales of the southeastern orchestras are five-toned, though 
differing from the pentatonic scales of China and Japan. Three main 
systems are used: one Siamese, and the two Javano-Balinese sys- 
tems, S (a)lendro and Pelog. 

In Siam the octave is divided into seven equal parts each of which 
measures 120 % or between 171 and 172 Cents, that is, hundredths of 
an equally tempered semitone. Since two hundred Cents correspond 
to a whole tone, the Siamese tone is approximately % of an occidental 
tone. 

In Slendro the octave is divided into five equal parts. Expressed 
by the same musicological measure of a Cent, this division is 120 % 
or 240 Cents to each degree. Compared to the two hundred Cents 
of an occidental tone, 240 Cents are % of a tone. 

Pelog is more complicated. The octave is divided into five un- 
equal parts, and their size varies considerably in different instru- 




238 The History of Musical Instruments 

ments. On an average the scale is composed of two major thirds, 
one whole tone and two semitones (e. g., e f g b J e'). 

The Siamese scale and (sometimes) Pelog are heptatonic or 
seven-parted, but only as far as the system is concerned; the melo- 
dies composed in these systems omit two notes; they select only five 
of the seven available notes and thus are pentatonic or five-parted, 
like slendro. 

Occidental musicians have great difficulty in conceiving of the 
equidistance of these unfamiliar % and % tones; they are always 
tempted to relate them to western distances and to think of them 
as alternating minor thirds and major or minor seconds. 

Since slendro and pelog are used in the same orchestras, Javanese 
and Balinese instruments with fixed pitches — xylophones, metallo- 
phones and gong chimes — are made in both systems. 

THE XYLOPHONE, discussed in the first chapter, reached 
the high point of its development in the trough xylophone (Java- 
nese gambang ) in Southeast Asia. The light, supporting frame is 
replaced by a rectangular wooden resonator in the form of a trough 
or a cradle; the wooden slabs, carefully cut and tuned, lie crosswise 
on its upper edges and are generally secured by small pins which 
pierce the slabs at one end and lie between them at the other end. 
(pi. XI e, g) 

On reliefs at the temple of Panataran in Java, carved in the four- 
teenth century, such xylophones figure in a little story which, though 
not conforming to morals, is unfortunately true to man’s habits. In 
a landscape two xylophones are placed alongside one another. A 
girl is playing on one of them while, in front of her, an older man, 
possibly her teacher, is playing the other. On the next relief prac- 
ticing is brusquely interrupted; the two instruments are leaned 
against a tree and the professor withdraws with the girl in a some- 
what impetuous manner. The third relief can be passed over, since 
it omits the xylophones as irrelevant to the situation. 

These distinct reliefs show some interesting details. Three points 
are noteworthy: a duet is being played; two longer slabs are added 
at the right side of each instrument; and, finally, the sticks are in an 
unusual form. They are not simple sticks with a striking knob; each 
player holds a pair of sticks at a uniform angle in each hand. It is 
not clear whether the sticks are separate or attached in a Y-shaped 
fork, but in either case the player beats two slabs simultaneously, 
thus doubling his melody in parallels. 




Southeast Asia 



239 

The same method of playing is current among African Negro 
tribes, for instance the Azandeh in East Africa j and here, as else- 
where in Africa, two or more xylophones are played at once. 

This similarity is probably not a coincidence. Many implements, 
tools, weapons and instruments in a well-defined area of African 
Bantu districts are so closely connected with the corresponding ob- 
jects of southeastern Asia that an early communication across the 
Indian Ocean through the Zambezi valley can be assumed. Certain 
accordances in the tuning of xylophones in Asia and Africa confirm 
this statement. 

METALLOPHONES are bronze adaptations of the xylophone. 
No primitive types existed j the bronze slab came late enough to 
profit from the highly developed trough xylophones j the Javanese 
saron cannot have been constructed much earlier than 900 A.D. 

The modern saron has a wooden resonance box which frequently 
is carved in the shape of a crouching dragon. Resting crosswise on 
its upper edges, the slabs are secured by small pinsj these pierce the 
slabs at one end and are inserted between the slabs at the other end, 
thus isolating them. The slabs are tuned with a file — filing the ends 
of a slab raises the pitch, filing the central part lowers it. 

Sarons are constructed in four main sizes an octave apart, each 
one comprising one octave. They play different parts in the orchestra, 
the lower ones in heavy notes, the higher ones in tinkling semi- 
quavers. 

The saron is not the only metallophone of the Archipelago. A 
second type, the gender , said to have existed as early as 1157 A.D., 
is a further departure from the xylophone and is better equipped to 
resonate metal sound. Its slabs are strung on two cords stretched 
over the edges of the trough at a distance of less than an inch. Under 
each slab is an open, resonating bamboo tube, placed vertically in- 
side the trough and tuned in unison with its corresponding slab. 
As the resonator reinforces the fundamental, the tone is fuller and 
softer, persistent and mysterious. In rapid passages the left hand 
acts as a damper as the right hand strikes the following slab. 

This instrument, too, is constructed in four sizes an octave apart 
with distinctive roles in the gamelan like the metallophones with 
resting slabs, (pi. XI c) 

Readers familiar with modern instruments will have realized that 
the gender is similar to the French celesta. Possibly its inventor had 
seen a Javanese gamelan in Paris j but this is not certain. 




240 The History of Musical Instruments 

GONGS are the most important metal instruments in the south- 
east. There are many types and sizes. Still, all of them are covered 
by the same short definition: a gong is made of bronze in the form 
of a flat or bulging surface in circular shape with the rim bent down; 
it is hit in the center by a stick, the rim being dead (unlike a bell, 
in which the center is dead). 

The provenance of the gong is not certain. But Chinese tradition 
seems to be right in ascribing it to a country between Tibet and 
Burma. The earliest mention of a gong is in a Chinese source in the 
first years of the sixth century; in the ninth century the gong is re- 
ported in Java, and in the following centuries it is found in nearly all 
the islands of the Malay Archipelago, and finally even in some parts 
of New Guinea. With this expansion the center of gravity was 
shifted to the western islands; the making of the best gongs today 
is the specialty and privilege of a few old foundries at Semarang 
in Java, in which the skill has been handed down from generation to 
generation. 

The gong is involved in every kind of human activity. It accom- 
panies dances, songs, religious and secular ceremonies, and is even 
used to transmit messages by a sort of drum language. It also has a 
strong magic power attributed to it, especially in lower civilizations. 
It chases evil spirits, heals sickness and attracts the wind; drinking 
from a gong enforces an oath, and bathing in a gong gives health. 
This power, added to the price of a gong, makes it an object of the 
highest value, a badge of rank and property and even a form of 
currency. The esteem in which it is held is indicated by the fact that 
certain individual gongs have proper names, such as Sir Tiger or 
Sir Earthquake. 

The oldest gongs were apparently flat gongs with a flat or slightly 
bulging surface and a shallow rim. They are more widely distributed 
than any other gongs, extending from India to Japan and Borneo. 

This kind of drum probably came from the shamanic frame drum 
used all over North and Central Asia and India. It has its outer 
shape, and in some cases the rim slanting inward as in certain Cey- 
lonese frame drums; like the shamanic drum, it is held in a vertical 
position and struck with one stick. Frequent decorations in form of 
concentric circles engraved around the center are reminiscent of sim- 
ilar paintings on ancient Greek frame drums. 

A second form is the gong with a boss in the center of the face, 
which is struck by a stick. It does not exist in India, but is found in the 
eastern part of the Archipelago. Possibly the boss has developed 





From a capital in the Museum at Tou - 

louse ( 1 2th century). From the cathedral in Amiens (14th cen- 

tury). 



PLATE XIV. 




Southeast Asia 



241 

from the circular, slightly convex lump of tuning paste that we fre- 
quently meet in the center of the head of Hindu and Malayan 
drums. 

The most recent type is the deep gong which is used only in the 
area between Burma and the eastern Archipelago. Its walls are thick, 
and the rim is deep; a boss makes it look like the cap (biretta) of 
Catholic priests. Gongs with deep bosses are called male, those with 
shallower bosses female. Both forms are made in all sizes j some 
are just a few inches wide, some reach a diameter of more than three 
feet and a weight of one hundred and eighty pounds, (pi. XI c, d) 

Of all types the deep gongs have the greatest musical value ; their 
tone is pure, distinct and full without clinking harmonics. Their 
notes act as punctuation points in the gamelan. Smaller gongs, rest- 
ing on low, four-legged stands, mark the end of smaller periods, 
while the largest gongs, suspended from upright frames, accentu- 
ate the main divisions with the solemn pulsations of their majestic 
basses. 

The deep gong alone, owing to its pure and distinct tone, could 
be used in a gong chime. 

GONG CHIMES (Javanese bonnang ), the outstanding instru- 
ments of Southeast Asia, have been built in various arrangements. 
The fundamental arrangement, however, was not changed. There 
is a low horizontal frame or bed ; each gong rests on crossed cords 




in a separate partition of the frame, and is easily reached by a squat- 
ting player. A relief on the temple at Angkor Vat in Cambodia 
(eleventh century A.D.) shows nine gongs in a quadrant-shaped 
bed, and in Java we have evidence of a previous semicircular ar- 
rangement. The full circle is the characteristic shape of Burmese, 
Siamese and modern Cambodian chimes. 



242 The History of Musical Instruments 

The Archipelago in Malacca have straight, not circular, beds, with 
a row of gongs tuned either to a slendro or to a pelog octave. Only 
Java has an enlarged gong chime comprising two octaves arranged 
in two rows resting on the same bed. The row next to the player 
consists of female gongs and produces the lower octave j the farther 
row consisting of male gongs is tuned to the higher octave. As the 
melody is usually struck in parallel octaves, the arrangement of the 
gongs does not follow the scale, in order that gongs tuned an octave 
apart will not lie directly behind one another, thus inconveniencing 
their simultaneous playing. But there is no definite rule. (fig. 69, pi. 
XI c) 

All kinds of gong chimes are built in several sizes an octave apart. 
As in the case of the metallophone, the higher chimes dissolve the 
plain melody played by the lowest chime into a rapid tinkling figura- 
tion. 

Bali and Java have one more gong chime, the curious rejong. 
This is a dumbbell-shaped piece of wood, with a deep gong nailed 
at either end. The sitting player holds the instrument across his lap 
and strikes the two differently tuned gongs, each with one stick. 
Rejongs are always played in pairs, so that four different notes are 
available. “The larger rejong voices one rhythm, arising from the 
syncopated alternation of the two lowest notes of the scale, while 
the smaller one sounds an opposite rhythm with the two highest 
notes. The two opposing rhythms interlock in such a way that an 
even and rapid stream of notes may be kept up indefinitely” 
(McPhee). 

ISLAMIC INFLUENCE has left a quantity of traces in South- 
east Asia, but most Islamic instruments have been absorbed by primi- 
tive tribes and have no place in art music, with the exception of the 
Persian s-pike fiddle (called rabab or kamdnga a ( guz in the Near 
East). It has a small coconut shell covered with skin and pierced 
by a long stick with lateral pegs. The three gut strings are replaced 
by silk threads, and the spherical body is transformed into a shallow 
heart shape. The Siamese and Cambodian varieties ( sa tai and tro 
khmer ) are carefully made and tastefully turned out of ivory and 
nacre, while Malayan fiddles, which have preserved the old Persian 
name in the form rebab , are much simpler. Though quite foreign 
to the nature of the Javanese gamelan, the flexibility of tone of this 
fiddle is often used by orchestra leaders to counterbalance the rigid- 




Southeast Asia 243 

ity of the fixed scales of xylophones, metallophones and gong 
chimes, (fig. 70) 

And now we turn to the Arabo-Persian instruments in their na- 
tive area. 




13 . The Near East 



T HE Arabian civilization is older than is generally sup- 
posed. Arabian kingdoms can be traced back to the third 
millennium B.C. One of them was Sheba, whose queen 
visited King Solomon. When the old trade routes between the 
Mediterranean and the Orient, on which these civilizations de- 
pended, were gradually abandoned at the rise of the Roman Em- 
pire, their wealth, power and culture decayed. New centers, how- 
ever, deriving their trade chiefly from the west, grew up in the 
first centuries A.D.; Al-Hijaz on the west coast of Arabia, for 
example j and outside the Arabian territory, Al-Hira close by an- 
cient Babylon, and Palmyra in Syria. A quantity of large towns in 
the Near East still preserved the traditions of an old Semitic civiliza- 
tion, notwithstanding foreign domination. 

In these towns migrating Arabs mingled with all the nationali- 
ties of the Near East, and their musical life had an international, 
interoriental character which, much too carelessly, we call Arabian. 
The young Persian king, Bahram Ghur (430-438), was sent to 
the Mesopotamian town, Al-Hira, to study Arabian music. In 
about 600 A.D., Hassan ibn Thabit saw at the Syrian court of the 
Ghassanids “ten singing-girls, five of them Byzantines, singing the 
songs of their country to the accompaniment of the lute barba(> and 
five others from Al-Hira, who had been given to King Jabala by 
Iyas ibn Qabisa, singing the songs of their country. Arab singers 
also came from Mecca and elsewhere for his pleasure.” Everywhere 
slaves, sold from country to country, spread the styles and instru- 
ments of their homelands j in the tale of King Omar bin al-Nu’uman 

in The Arabian Nights the princess has her slave girl bring some 

244 





246 The History of Musical Instruments 

instruments of music, and the maid “returned in the twinkling of an 
eye with a Damascus lute, a Persian harp, a Tartar pipe, and an 
Egyptian dulcimer.” 

Gradually the instruments lost their regional character when, 
beginning in the seventh century, Islam unified the Near East and 
extended a homogeneous culture to an immense zone between the 
Malayan Archipelago and Spain. The Kurdish spike fiddle then was 
found in the Balinese gamelan as well as in the hands of the Egyp- 
tian bardj the old Semitic frame drum was struck by the Arabian as 
by the Spanish girl j the Persian oboe was blown by the Dayak in 
Borneo as in Morocco. 

In Europe, more than in Asia, oriental instruments went far be- 
yond the frontiers of Islamic empires and settlements. From south- 
ern Italy and Sicily and, above all, from Spain, which had Arabian 
and Moorish rulers from 71 1 to 1492, they spread all over the Con- 
tinent. Only a few of the earlier instruments remained hidden away 
as folk instruments in remote valleys and islands. 

At the beginning of modern times Europe possessed almost ex- 
clusively instruments of Near Eastern descent, some of them Byzan- 
tine, but most of them Islamic. 

FRAME DRUMS were the first instruments mentioned in pre- 
Islamic Arabia, where they played the same role that they did in 
all Semitic countries, as the indispensable musical attributes of 
women both in mirth and in mourning, and as the rhythmical in- 
struments on which the professional singing-girls accompanied their 
songs and dances, (pi. XII a) 

One of their names must have been mizhar y which prob- 
ably is preserved in one modern name of the frame drum, 
mazhar , and did not designate a lute, as Dr. Henry George Farmer 
believes. A better-known name, closely related to Hebrew tof y was 
duff. This term has the general meaning ‘frame drum’ today j in a 
narrower sense, it is given to a square or octagonal drum with a 
shallow frame, two skins and inner snares, which resembles certain 
frame drums in ancient Egypt and Sumer. Round drums, on the 
contrary, have the general name da ( ira or ‘circular.’ The girbal is 
mentioned in Muhammad’s time and later on in the Arabo-Spanish 
middle agesj as its name means a riddle or sieve, it probably had a 
rather large frame. 

The four kinds of modern round drums can be divided into two 
main groups. The first sometimes has no jingling contrivance, or 




The Near East 



2 47 

sometimes has jingling disks in its frame. In this group the (Ber- 
ber?) bandair is large (diameter of sixteen inches) with snares, the 
tar middle-sized (diameter of twelve inches) with no snares, the 
req small (diameter of ten inches) with no snares. The second 
group has jingling rings, and the only example is the mazhar> which 
is large (diameter of sixteen to nineteen inches). All these round 
drums have one skin only. With a few exceptions there are five 
groups of jingling contrivances, in medieval miniatures as well as 
in modern specimens. Since to Arabian mathematicians five is the 
first so-called circle number, the five groups of jingling disks or rings 
in the frame were very probably the numerical expression of the 
circular form of the drum. 

The fingers strike either the middle, the border or an intermedi- 
ate place, according to the three dynamic intensities of Arabian 
music, turn, ka and tak , or forte, piano and mezzoforte. The method 
of holding the instrument varies j the Egyptians, for instance, 
grasp the drum with both hands, the Tunisians with the left hand 
only. 

These modern drums, the names of which do not appear earlier 
than the Abbassidic epoch (from 750 A.D. on), brought their names 
with them when they came to Spain. 

FLUTES. Only one wind instrument is used in Arabian art 
music, the simple vertical flute, which in Egypt can be traced as far 
back as the centuries before 3000 B.C. The Algerians still use its 
oldest Arabic name, qa$aba or quffaba (not ‘gesba’), the plurals of 
which are qa$abat and qifab; the Persian name nay is used between 
Egypt and Persia. The instrument is a cane, some sixty or seventy 
centimeters long and provided with five or six fingerholes arranged 
in two groups. Its scale starts on the octave harmonics, the funda- 
mentals being too weak to use. In some specimens overblowing is 
facilitated by a rear hole which divides the air column exactly in 
the middle. The musical qualities of the vertical flute have been 
described on page 90. 

A smaller variety, half the length, with 6 + b fingerholes, is 
called sabbaba or ‘young.’ This name has migrated as far southwards 
as Madagascar, where it still exists as sobaba y and in medieval Spain 
it reappears with the assimilated article as y as axabeba or, in a more 
modern spelling, ajabeba. 

Pan-fifes — musiqar or musiqal — are no more indigenous than 
their names imply. All the pan-pipes that the author saw in Egypt 




248 The History of Musical Instruments 

were very small and made of pasteboard. They obviously were 
imported from Europe. 

A beaked flute, roughly made of cane and very short, is known 
in the western half of the North African coast and called gawdq. 
It has no place in art music. 

THE OBOE of the Near East is conical, except for a few varie- 
ties. It is made of wood and turned on a lathe so that it is smooth 
and perfectly round, and it expands at the end to form the bell. 
Occasionally the bell is of metal. Out of 6 or 7 or 8 + b fingerholes, 
the three uppermost can be closed at will by a turning device inside, 
which has the effect of an occidental guitar cafotasto, that is, cutting 
off a part of the range. The player holds the double reed entirely 
inside his mouth, and his stretched lips rest against a circular disk 
that surrounds the reed at the point where it enters the tube. He is 
trained to blow without pausing for respiration, like other oriental 
pipers, and the author was told in Egypt that the apprentices prac- 
tice this technique with a bamboo dipped into water. We have 
already spoken of this manner of playing on page 9 1 . 

The earliest evidence of a conical oboe is on Jewish coins of the 
second century A.D. (cf. page 120). With the Muhammedan con- 
quest, this kind of oboe spread over the world of Islam, from Tur- 
key to Madagascar, from Morocco to the Malayan Archipelago, 
and even beyond, over Tibet and the Far East. (pi. XII c) 

The classical names are surndya in Persian, and mizmdr in Ara- 
bic. Still, various countries use their own idiomatic terms j in Al- 
geria and Morocco it is called gaifa (spelled rheita in the bands of 
French colonial regiments as the Arabic sound is intermediate be- 
tween gh and r) j in Tripolis and Tunisia the oboe is called zuqra. 
The author has found, in Egypt, the modern names sibs for the 
smaller variety and aba (from French hautbois ) for a larger va- 
riety. 

Both sizes of oboes belong to an ensemble called ( abl baladi which 
plays at wedding and circumcision processions. It consists of three 
extremely shrill oboes, two large ones and a small one in the hands 
of the leader, a pair of kettledrums, naqrazdn, and a cylindrical 
drum, { abl baladi, after which the ensemble has been named. In the 
taqsim, or prelude, the drums are silent j the sibs plays the melody 
while the larger oboes play a drone. In the second part, when the 
drums join in, the two larger oboes accompany the sibs in the lower 




The Near East 



249 

octave. This must be an old custom, for the same is true for the 
Turkish oboes surle played by Croatian gypsies. 

CYLINDRICAL DRUMS like the (abl baladi are made of 
wood in a shallow form, the height of the cylinder being smaller 
than the diameter. The two skins are stretched by two hoops at 
either end, one concealed ‘flesh hoop,’ as American drummers say, 
and an outer ‘rope hoop,’ the rope hoops being connected by Y 
cords. The player hangs the drum from the shoulder so that the 
heads face sidewards. He strikes both skins with flexible beaters 
which are either two sticks or, as in Egypt, a stick (right) and a 
bundle of thongs (left) j dull sounds ( dum ) are produced by 
hitting the center, clear sounds (tak) by striking the border. 

Shallow drums are typically Near Eastern. They are unknown 
even in Islamic India, while, on the other hand, no barrel drum 
exists in the Arabian area. The shallow drum certainly originated 
either in Turkey or in Arabia, but it is not clear which. The Arabs 
give the name fabl turki only to a large variety carried on the back 
of a donkey, which became the ancestor of our occidental bass drum; 
they call the smaller type, from which our side and tenor drums 
originated, pabl baladt — that is, domestic drum. (pi. XII c) 

It is also doubtful at what time these drums originated. As late 
as about 1200, Mesopotamian miniatures still depict a ‘long’ drum, 
not a shallow one. Its length is twice the size of the diameter ; ij is 
made of a yellow wood and laced by cords in X; decorations in 
triangles and lozenges arc indicated between the laces. The player 
stands erect in the middle of the sultan’s band; he carries the in- 
strument on a shoulder belt and plays with a hooked stick (right) 
and the bare hand (left). Some relation between this drum and 
the drums of early India is obvious. 

On the other hand, Dr. Jeffrey, head of the Oriental Department, 
Columbia University, kindly writes me that fabul “is not an Arabic 
word in origin, but was borrowed from the Latin tabula ” 

KETTLEDRUMS are open receptacles which, in the majority 
of cases, are egg-shaped or hemispherical with a skin stretched over 
the opening. Clay was the original material which afterwards was 
replaced by metal. 

The first evidence of Arabian kettledrums is in the tenth century 
encyclopedia of the Ihvoan al-$afa‘. The book enumerates the bowl 
drum, qasa t (a name which it shared with the bulging body of the 




2 so The History of Musical Instruments 

lute, ( ud), and the deeper kettledrums, (abl al-markab (the naq- 
qara ) and kus. 

Dr. Henry George Farmer believes that the kus was an earlier 
drum. He writes that an Indian “is credited with having played the 
kettledrum kus in the Prophet’s military expeditions.” This would 
hint of an Indian origin. Farmer’s source, however, is neither con- 
temporary nor Arabian; the statement is taken from the narrative 
of a Turkish traveler who wrote in the seventeenth century, a thou- 
sand years after the Prophet’s expeditions. It is likely that the Turk 
called the drum by the name which was familiar to him. 

As far as we can tell, the kettledrum originated in two forms. The 
older one can be seen on a relief at Taq-i Bustan in Persia, carved 
about 600 A.D. and representing a drummer with a small shallow 
bowl drum which stands on the ground and is struck with one, or 
perhaps two, sticks. It may have been the tas mentioned in Persian 
texts of that time, as such a drum still exists in northern India 
under the name tasa. 

The first evidence of a larger kettledrum is found on Mesopo- 
tamian miniatures of the twelfth century A.D. The very first of 
them gives an invaluable clue to their origin; instead of being 
rounded, the instrument has the flat bottom of a pot drum. Thus, 
it seems probable that the larger kettledrums were derived from 
the pot drums of primitive men, which on a higher level are de- 
picted on the Hindu-Javanese temple at Borobudur (c. 800 A.D.). 
Through many centuries the Persian miniatures depict them as 
preserving the same form. Later on, the kettledrum was rounded 
like an egg; this may have been an adaptation to facilitate carrying 
the drums on the back of a horse or a camel. In all the miniatures 
two drums of different size are used simultaneously; they are placed 
on the ground and inclined not towards the player, as in occidental 
orchestras, but away from him, this being a better position when 
the player stands erect. An interesting detail is the hook form of 
the oldest kettledrum sticks, which has been referred to in Chapter 
7. In a miniature of the Loutrell Psalter (early fourteenth cen- 
tury), in the British Museum, a player is represented in the same 
fashion, with two kettledrums inclined away from him and played 
with hooked sticks. 

On the later oriental miniatures the sticks are only slightly bent, 
or sometimes straight, with either pointed or knobbed ends; on 
some paintings the drums are struck with the fists. A final detail 
which these miniatures present is the change from the egg shape 




The Near East 



251 

to a more or less hemispheric shape — that is, with the largest di- 
ameter at the head. This change accompanies the transition from 
clay to metal, the bulging egg shape being typical of pottery, the 
hemisphere, on the contrary, of metal work. The earlier, oval form 
using clay as material persists to this day in Indian kettledrums of 
Persian origin, khoradhaky damama, fikara, nagara y and, with them, 
a shallow bowl drum tdsa or qa$a ( a. 

In modern times one can distinguish the following kinds of 
kettledrums. 

Naqqdrya: two large flat kettles played on the back of a camel, the lower 
in pitch at the player’s right, the higher at his left, and struck with tw’o 
sticks 

Naqrazan: two smaller kettles played on the back of a donkey, shallow, 
but nearly hemispherical, struck with two sticks 
Naqqara: two small kettles, played with two sticks 
Tail sdmi: one kettle of a very shallow shape, carried by the player and 
struck with two sticks 

Tabl al-gdwlg or sdtuis: one shallow kettle played on horseback, struck 
with one stick 

Tabl migri: one shallow kettle, struck with thongs. 

All these kettles are made of metal and tightened with cords. 

The naqqara and its Arabic name came to Europe chiefly as a 
result of the crusades. As early as about 1300, the French were 
using the Arabic term nacaireSy the Italians naccheroniy and the 
English nakers. The instrument is depicted in the Loutrell Psalter 
that we quoted, and, for example, on Lippo Memmi’s painting, 
“The Coronation of the Virgin,” in Munich (first half of the four- 
teenth century). 

SHORT LUTES, carved out of a single piece of wood with no 
distinct neck and tapering towards the pegbox, are found first in 
Iran, the same country which afterwards became their center ; 
Elamic clay figures attributed to the eighth century B.C. show them 
in rough outlines } the strings and their attachment are not dis- 
tinguishable. 

There is no further evidence of the short lute until, many cen- 
turies later, it reappeared in the Islamic Near East} its pegbox was 
bent backwards in a sickle shape and contained lateral pegs} the 
stringholder was not frontal but on the lower end of the body, and 
a skin served as the soundboard. 

Islamic migrations and conquests carried this lute eastwards from 




252 The History of Musical Instruments 

Persia as far as the Celebes, and southwards to Madagascar. In all 
these countries it has been called by a name probably of Turkish 
origin, and variously spelled as gambusy kabosa or qu'puz. Arabic 
literature adopted this name at the end of the Abbassidic Dynasty, 
in the beginning of the eleventh century A.D.j in Egypt it was in- 
troduced at about 1200 A.D. Today this lute is extinct in the Near 
East. 

The short lute with an inferior stringholder traveled westwards 
into southern Europe. In the tenth century such an instrument was 
carved on a wooden pulpit in the small church of San Leonardo in 
Arcetri at Florence. Pegs are not indicated, but the pegbox, bent 
back, suggests lateral pegs. The soundboard is divided by a cross 
line into two halves, probably of wood and of skin. The three strings 
are plucked with a big plectron probably made of wood, similar to 
that used on Indian lutes of the short type. (pi. XIV a, c) 

The short lute is frequently pictured on Spanish miniatures of 
the thirteenth century, and it found its way into Europe through 
Spain rather than through Italy. 

Nevertheless, the Turkish name qu'puz seems to have been un- 
known in South and West Europe, though it was used in the cen- 
tral and eastern parts of the continent. In a poem written in the 
early fourteenth century, Gottes Zukunft by Heinrich von der 
Neuen Stadt, verse 4672 mentions die kobus mit der luten. This 
word had probably entered through Hungary, where it can be 
traced back to the middle ages as koboz ; and it certainly had come 
to Hungary from Byzantium, since a Greek tractate on alchemy, 
written about 800, mentions a kobuz or pandurion with seven frets 
and three, four or five strings. 

The Christian Spaniards, on the contrary, seem to have called 
the same instrument a Moorish guitar j in his poem, El libro de 
buen amor (fourteenth century), Juan Ruiz, archpriest of Hita, 
mentions it immediately before the lute: 

Ally sale gritando la guitar a morisca 

de las boxes aguda e de los funtos arisca. . . . 

“There the Moorish guitar emerges with its shrill and harsh notes.” 

The Moorish guitar was more and more influenced by the in- 
strument which we call a lute today. In the sixteenth century it was 
given a new name, mandola or mandoray a thin pear-shaped body 
composed of slender staves or ‘ribs/ a frontal stringholder, a sound- 
hole with a carved rose, a short neck and double strings ; only the 




The Near East 



253 

sickle-shaped pegbox of the older instrument was preserved, (fig. 71) 

The lute in question was given a bow before the year IOOO, and 
as a bowed instrument was called rabdb ; it existed beside the 
plucked lute. It kept the pear-shaped body tapering towards the 
pegbox, the front covered with skin and the lateral pegs. But the 
number of strings was reduced to one or two, and the sickle-shaped 
pegbox was cut off so that only its stub was left. (fig. 72) 

THE LUTE WITH A FRONTAL STRINGHOLDER cor- 
responds in the Near East to the vina in India, and the koto or 
ch‘in in the Far East. It is the noblest instrument of art music, 
made according to mathematical principles and the object of cos- 
mological speculation. It is characteristic that in an area in which 
singing is more important than playing the chief instrument is one 
which serves to accompany the voice. 

The Asiatic countries and Egypt designate it by its classical, 
Arabic name ( ud. The principal meaning of this noun is not ‘wood/ 
as generally supposed, but ‘flexible stick.’ This corroborates our as- 
sertion that the earliest lute came from the musical bowj but, ob- 
viously, the name must have belonged to a long lute whose handle 
was derived from a ‘flexible stick,’ before it was given to the short 
lute, which probably was not, or at least not directly, connected 
with the musical bow. 

The North African countries west of Egypt prefer the Greek 
word qi(ara> which was taken over into Arabic before IOOO A.D. 
with many other musical terms of the ancient Greeks. The philos- 
opher Ibn Sina (Avicenna), who was born in Persia in 980 A.D., 
was the only writer who used the Persian term barbaf. 

According to a writer of the fourteenth century A.D., the ‘ud 
was “invented” in the third century A.D. in the days of Shapur I, 
who was king of Persia from 241 to 273 A.D. This is not true, as 
we have seen on page 160. Not only do we possess art works in the 
so-called Gandhara style of about 100 A.D. with representations of 
this lute, but the instrument had also existed in the orchestra of 
the Chinese Han Dynasty (206 B. C.-220 A.D.). 

These earlier lutes, as well as the ones that Persian painters later 
depicted in their miniatures, had the main features of modern 
oriental lutes: the bulging wooden body with a thin wooden sound- 
board, the frontal stringholder, the lateral pegs and the double 
gut (or silk) strings. Still, they resembled the modern Japanese and 
Chinese lute rather than the modern Arabian lute. The wide, pear- 




254 The History of Musical Instruments 

shaped body tapered towards the pegbox, not forming a distinct 
neck, and two crescent-shaped soundholes were cut on either side 
of the soundboard instead of the large central soundhole. 

The classic number of strings was four pairs. They were called, 
from the lowest to the highest, hamm y ma(la( y ma(nd y zir y the lowest 
of which, bamm y means ‘high,’ just as the Greek hy'pate. 

The four strings symbolized the elements, the phases of the 
moon, the directions, the seasons, the weeks of a month, the divi- 
sions of a day, of the body, of human life, and the four humors — 
that is, in descending order, the yellow bile, the blood, the phlegm, 
and the black bile. They were tuned a fourth apart and, according 
to the theorists of the tenth century, they were twisted from threads, 
the number of which decreased in the proportion 3: 4* from bamm 
to zir they consisted of 64, 48, 36 and 27 threads respectively. 

A fifth pair of strings, above zir, seems to have been introduced 
as early as the ninth century to make the range of two octaves com- 
plete. The present five pairs of strings are tuned to dead/ g' y that 
is, the fifth pair is added below. 

Lutes seem to have had no frets, either in old times or today, in 
spite of the constant use by the theorists of the word ddsatin, plural 
of Persian dast or ‘hand,’ which is used to indicate frets. And it 
would have been difficult to string them securely around the sloping 
end of a pear-shaped lute. Very probably, the frets existed only 
theoretically to symbolize the positions of the stopping fingers. 

The strings are plucked with a quill plectron, zahma. The tone, 
therefore, is more energetic than that of a European guitar. Skill- 
ful players produce a surprisingly multiform timbre and a delicate 
cantabile y which is far superior to the dry and boring tone of modern 
occidental players who try to reproduce the lute music of the six- 
teenth and seventeenth centuries. 

All strings are used to play the melody. Chords are unknown; 
occasionally drones are played to accompany a melody. The effect of 
a sustained note is achieved by repetition or by a swift alternation 
between the note and its octave. 

In its modern form, the oriental lute has a distinct neck, an 
almond-shaped body and a central soundhole with a rose. These 
transformations seem to have taken place in Andalusia, where 
oriental and occidental tendencies mingled. From Andalusia the 
improved instrument was carried back to Egypt, and forward to 
Europe. There it became the instrument known as lute in the 




The Near East 



255 

modern sense of the word, an instrument which achieved and sus- 
tained an important position for more than three centuries. 

THE SPIKE-FIDDLE, found all over the Islamic world, in- 
cluding Siam and Cambodia, is a ‘pierced fiddle’; the round handle 
projects through the body and protrudes at the lower end, forming 
a foot similar to the spike of a cello, on which the instrument is 
rested. The pegs are lateral, and a piece of skin forms the sound- 
board. While east of India the spike is of wood or ivory, it is made 
of iron in the west. 

At the western and the eastern extremities of its area of distribu- 
tion the spike-fiddle is rather primitive; the Malayan as well as 
the Egyptian fiddles have only one or two strings. Egypt has several 
species, the kamanga a ( guz or ‘old fiddle,’ tuned to a and e ; and 
the kamanga far fy or sogair or ‘part of a fiddle,’ tuned to e' and b y 
both having a small coconut body and two hair strings. Besides the 
two kamanga, there is a related fiddle, rabab y with a quadrilateral 
frame, the upper and lower sides of which are parallel, and two 
skins closing it from the front and the back, forming a kind of 
frame drum which replaces the coconut body. With one string this 
instrument is called rabab assa ( ir or poet’s fiddle. As such, it accom- 
panies the endless recitations of public narrators. With two strings 
it is called rabab al-mogannt, or ‘singer’s fiddle’, and accompanies 
songs. 

In southwestern Asia the kamanga a ( guz has sometimes three or 
even four strings, and in some countries — Turkestan and Kashmir, 
for instance — a set of sympathetic wire strings is stretched behind the 
bowed strings. The accordatura for three (bowed) wire strings is 
usually the ground tone, its fifth and its octave or ninth. 

The spike-fiddle is mentioned as early as the tenth century A.D. 
by the great theorist Al-Farabi who, although he wrote in Arabic, 
was a Turk. Tradition assigns its origin to the North Iranian dis- 
trict, Kurdistan. 

THE LONG LUTE, in Arabic tanbur , has a full metallic tim- 
bre, but can also be played very delicately. The player can shake 
the lute at the end of a melodic period and make the sound fade 
away with a vibrato that resembles the Bebung of a clavichord. 

The long lute has a small, pear-shaped body and a long neck 
without a pegbox, many gut frets, a few thin wire strings and a 
plectron made of tortoise shell. It has faithfully preserved the 




2 $6 The History of Musical Instruments 

outer appearance of the ancient lutes of Babylonia and Egypt j its 
pegs, however, are curious in form and position. Shaped like the 
letter T, they are inserted, some from the front, some from the side j 
their position is mixed , as we shall call it, thus possibly testifying to 




figure 73. Two- 
stringed spike fid- 
dle. 



R 




figure 74. Three- figure 75. Persian 

stringed spike fiddle. long lute. 



a mixed origin of this recent form of the long lute, from the Arabo- 
Persian area of lateral pegs as well as from the Turkish area of 
rear pegs. The Arabs, indeed, call its largest variety ( anbur kabir 
turki or ‘large Turkish lute.’ The Persians, however, do not use 
the word tanbur ; they designate the instrument by the word tar 









*s> (? & 



o o o e i 



^_L G -0 



horn lyre pan-pipes fiddle 

From Bibliotheque Nationale } Paris , wm. lat. 1155 ° (11th century). 


















PSit’ 



Bowed lyre. From Bibliotheque 
Nationale y Paris , raj. /u# 
(nth century). 



Monochord. From Preus- 
sische Staatsbibliotheky Ber- 
lin } ms. theol. lat. fol. 358. 






The Near East 



257 

or ‘string,’ combined with a numerical prefix indicating the number 
of strings — the dutar has two strings, the setar three, the cartar four, 
the panctar five strings, (fig. 75) 

The long lute is interesting because of its scale. The positions of 
the stopping fingers, like the positions of fingerholes in a pipe, were 
determined according to a metrical, not a musical, rule. Henry 
George Farmer quotes a manuscript in his possession according to 
which the tanbur came “from the Sabaeans who measured the earth, 
and so it was called the ‘measured’ ” lute or tanbur al-mizani. This 
instrument was probably identical with the lute that afterwards was 
called ‘tanbur from Baghdad.’ The length of its two strings was 
divided theoretically into forty equal parts, which may have cor- 
responded to an ancient Mesopotamian standard measure. The first 
five divisions only were used in playing and were indicated by gut 
frets, so that the scale was a small series of (unequal) quartertones. 
The second string, instead of being lower, was tuned to the second 
fret of the first string — that is, less than a semitone higher. The 
range of the whole instrument did not exceed a minor third. But 
this “pagan,” that is, pre-Islamic, tuning was given up as early as 
Al-Farabi’s time (c. 900 A.D.). 

More recent was the ‘tanbur from Chorassan,’ the northeastern 
province of Persia and seat of the Abbassids. Its frets were musically 
arranged in order to produce an enharmonic seventeen-tone scale. 

A European offshoot of the sitar-tanbur, the colascione , was par- 
ticularly played in Italy in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
In this instrument a long neck was combined with the body and the 
lateral pegs of the usual European lute; most colascioni had gut 
frets and two or three gut or wire strings in ( E ) A d. 

THE TRAPEZOIDAL ZITHER was first depicted by the 
Syrian lexicographer, Bar Bahlul, at about 963 A.D.; it then had 
ten strings. He called it qithoroy from Greek kithara. But about 
the same time, its classical name qanun> from Greek kanon , appears 
in one of the oldest stories of The Arabian Nights , the tale of Ali 
ibn Bakkar and Shams al-Nahar (hundred and sixty-ninth night), 
which is ascribed to the tenth century. An epithet to its name, tnifri, 
indicates Masr or Egypt as its home. According to a Persian treatise 
of the fourteenth century, the qanun then had sixty-four strings 
arranged in sets of three. 

In its present form, the qanun is a flat box the shape of whose 
face is a trapezoid. The twenty-six triple gut strings, fastened at the 




258 The History of Musical Instruments 

lower rectangular end of the box, run parallel to the parallel sides 
of the box and over the end of the opposite, oblique end, where 
they are tuned by wooden pegs inserted in the side j the soundboard 
is half of wood, half of skin. Within the range c'-g'", the tuning, 
though diatonic, changes according to the tonality of the piece. The 
strings are plucked with wire plectra ; the right hand plays the 
melody and the left hand doubles it in the lower octave, except for 
those passages in which it stops a string to raise its pitch by a minor 
or major second. 

Through Spain the qanun came early to Europe, and up to the 
fifteenth century it preserved its form, its oriental decoration and 
its name; the Spaniards called it caho, the Germans kanon. A 
smaller variety was called a ‘half qanun,’ meo canno in Spanish, 
micanon in French, and, with a curious popular etymology, medi- 
cinale in late Latin. 

We add here an instrument mugni. A Persian treatise on music, 
the Kanz al-tufyaf, dating from the middle of the fourteenth century, 
attributes its invention to Safi al-Din (d. 1294) and describes it as 
a zither in lute form: a large bulging body with a wide, flat neck 
and thirty-nine open strings arranged as in the qanun and passing 
over a diagonally placed bridge. The name is preserved as mughnl 
in Georgia. A similar instrument still exists in Ukraine as torbany 
a lute with two pegboxes one above the other in the manner of a 
theorboe (see Chapter 16) with thirty or thirty-one open gut strings. 

THE DULCIMER is a Persian and Iraqian instrument, the 
name of which, santir , is derived from Greek fsalterion. It usually 
has a shallow chestnut box in the form of a symmetrical trapezoid, 
and eighteen quadruple brass strings tuned by pegs inserted in the 
side of the box. The player strikes them with two very light sticks 
which end in a broad blade. 

The migration of the dulcimer was strange enough. The Arabs 
carried it through North Africa, where it still is played by Jews, 
and from North Africa to Spain. There, its earliest evidence is a 
relief from 1184 on the porch of the cathedral Santiago de Com- 
postela. Later on it passed through the continent and became a 
popular instrument of the southeast of Europe. In about 1850 this 
“Frankish dulcimer” was found side by side in Turkey with the 
genuine Turkish dulcimer of a similar construction which had come 
directly from Persia. The most important remainder of this group 
is the cimbalom of the Hungarian gypsies. 




The Near East 



259 

Eastward the dulcimer migrated in about 1800 to China, where 
it still is called the foreign zither {yang ch ( in) y and thence to the 
Japanese, Mongols and Buriats. In Korea a native tradition asserts, 
however, that the instrument was introduced as early as about 1725. 

THE ANGULAR HARP had come from Iran to the Near 
East at a remote time and was still specifically Persian in the middle 
ages. Three types are depicted on Sasanian reliefs at Taq-i Bustan 
(c. 600 A.D.). One type is the final evidence of the horizontal harp 
that we have followed from Babylonian reliefs to the sabka of the 
Book of Daniel, and then to a specimen excavated from a Sarmatian 
tomb in Crimea. Its body is comparatively wide in the form of a 
modern violin case, and the string-fastening stick erected at its 
outer end is as long as the body. 

The second type depicted in Taq-i Bustan is the vertical angular 
harp with the body growing larger at the top that was used in As- 
syria and Egypt. This, too, is the last form of an archaic instrument. 

The third type, also vertical, is the first evidence of the modern 
Persian harp, depicted on innumerable medieval miniatures, and 
used until recently. The body, often gilded and inlaid, tapered and 
curved forward at the upper end to form a hook or a scroll. The 
strings were attached at the lower end to a horizontal bar without 
pegs, and beyond this bar the body projected downward to form 
a curled tail upon which the instrument rested while the player 
knelt on the floor. The number of strings varied from thirteen to 
forty. They occasionally were arranged in pairs or even in groups 
of three. The fingers of both hands plucked, and on one miniature 
we distinguish a plucking device on the thumbs. 

The Arabian colony at Al-Hira, near Babylon, obtained this harp 
from the Persians and in the last centuries before Islam introduced 
it to Arabia. The Arabs kept it for many centuries under its Persian 
name lank , which in Arabic was spelled either gank or $ang y as the 
sound and letter 1 (English ch ) does not exist in this language. The 
instrument was still used in 1554 in Arabic-speaking countries, when 
a French traveler, Pierre Belon, saw it in the hands of Egyptian 
women and emphasized the beauty of its sound, “which was scarcely 
less harmonious” than the tone of a European harp. 

Still, the harp was nearly the only instrument of the Near East 
that did not enter Europe during the middle ages. 




H- Europe 



INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCED BEFORE 
THE YEAR IOOO 

I NVESTIGATION of medieval instruments is dependent 
principally on the interpretation of contemporary art works. 
The contribution of literary sources is comparatively small. 
Except for the fragment of an ivory harp in the Louvre and a few 
ivory horns, no instrument has been preserved. 

Nearly all the musical instruments of medieval Europe came 
from Asia, either from the southeast through Byzantium, or from 
the Islamic empire through North Africa or from the northeast 
along the Baltic coast. The direct heritage from Greece and Rome 
seems to have been rather insignificant, and the lyre is the only 
instrument that might possibly be considered European in origin. 

Before discussing the instruments of medieval Europe, two gen- 
eral statements can be made. First, all European stringed instru- 
ments up to about iooo A.D. had rear pegs. This kind of peg is 
found not only in medieval Europe including Spain, but also in 
southwestern Asia among the Byzantines, Caucasians, Turks and 
Kirghizes. These instruments on which rear pegs are found are 
sharply distinct from the instruments with lateral pegs of the Arabo- 
Persian district. 

Second, within Europe we distinguish between a southern zone, 
in which the stringed instruments (other than the harp) took the 
form of ‘lutes,’ that is, with necks, and a central and northern zone, 
in which they took the form of ‘lyres,’ that is, of a two-armed body 
with a crossbar at the top. These two zones point to a twofold origin 

260 





i6i 



Europe 

of early medieval instruments, the first from an uncertain source 
and feeding the north of Europe, the second feeding southern 
Europe and probably coming from that area of southwestern Asia 
in which we find rear pegs. In a central zone of Europe, such as 
France, both lutes and lyres are found side by side. 

THE HARP. The question, often asked and never satisfactorily 
answered, of what kinds of stringed instruments Central and North 
Europe had in antiquity and in the early middle ages, depends on 
the interpretation of a few philological and pictorial sources. 

The philological sources begin with Diodorus Siculus, a Roman 
historian of the first century B.C., who described the instrument 
used by Celtic bards as similar to, though not identical with, the 
Roman lyre. Five hundred years later, another Roman historian, 
Ammianus Marcellinus, who lived approximately between 330 and 
400 A.D., again stated that the Celtic bards sang to “the sweet 
notes of the lyre.” While Ammianus did not differentiate between 
the Celtic and the Roman instrument, the older writer expressly 
emphasized that they were not identical. Unfortunately, he failed 
to specify the difference. 

Two hundred years after Ammianus, the bishop of Poitiers, 
Venantius Fortunatus, wrote, in a poem, 

Romanusque lyra f laud at tibi y Barbarus harfa y 
Graeeus achilliaca y chrotta Bntanna canat. 

Of these four instruments, the Roman lyre is the only one that can be 
identified with certainty. All music historians have supposed that 
achilliaca referred to Achilles’s lyre mentioned by Homer in the 
tenth book of the Iliad. But why should Venantius have called the 
instrument after a hero who had had no more in common with the 
lyre than any other Greek in one or two millenniums? It would be 
more convincing to think of e chelys y a Greek name of the lyre, 
which the bishop, not knowing Greek, changed into something 
vaguely familiar. Whatever the correct etymology, achilliaca prob- 
ably meant lyre. 

Two terms are left to be identified, chrotta and harpa. As the 
word harpa suggested a harp in our sense, the term chrotta y ob- 
viously designating some other instrument, was identified with some 
kind of lyre. Both suppositions were incorrect. The term harpa did 
not designate a harp in our sense j it will be discussed below. And 
chrotta did not indicate a lyre. 




262 The History of Musical Instruments 

Chrotta y the Latin equivalent of Irish crot or emit and a con- 
tinental rotta , can only be identified by examining the qualities at- 
tributed to it by medieval authors from the eighth to the fourteenth 
centuries in England, France, Germany and Spain. An abbot, Cuth- 
bert (eighth century), speaks of the cithara that “we” call rotta; 
Notker Labeo in St. Gall (tenth century) has seven strings on his 
rotte; the Bavarian poem Ruodlieb (eleventh century) credits King 
David with the invention of the fsalterium triangulum y i.e. y rotta; 
a copyist of Notker Balbulus (twelfth century) complains that the 
jugglers had taken possession of the ancient ten-stringed 'psalterium y 
changed its mystic triangular shape, increased the number of strings 
and called it by the barbarian name rotta; the same writer says that 
the saltirsanch is now called rotta in German j the troubadour Gi- 
rauz de Calanson (twelfth century) considers seventeen strings an 
appropriate number for the rotta j the poet Gottfried von Strass- 
burg, in his Tristan (thirteenth century), describes both a “small” 
rotta suspended from the player’s neck, and another one large 
enough to conceal a little dog in its body} finally, Juan Ruiz, in his 
poem El libro de buen amor (fourteenth century), describes a rota 
towering over the orchestra “higher than a rock.” 

To sum up, the rotta was now small, now very large } it had 
seven, sometimes more than ten, and even as many as seventeen 
strings } the rotta originated from a triangular fsalterium. These 
qualities point to the harp} not one indicates a lyre. The harfa of 
the Barbarians, in Venantius’s poem, must have been something 
different. The term will be discussed in the next section. 

The oldest pictorial evidences of Irish instruments are some re- 
liefs on stone crosses of the eighth and ninth centuries. It has been 
questioned whether these archaic implements were lyres or harps. 
After careful examination, the author is inclined to think they were 
harps. The rude and eroded reliefs are not clear, but a few significant 
facts are evident} all these instruments have distinct frames, such 
as harps with bodies, necks and pillars} all of them are asymmetric 
in the manner of harps} one, on the Castledermot North Cross, has 
exactly the form of an instrument depicted in the twelfth century 
on a miniature of a psalter in St. John’s College, Cambridge, which 
is clearly a harp } some are larger than the usual lyres. The structural 
criteria are backed by the manner of holding and plucking the in- 
struments. 

The conclusion from pictorial and literary sources that the crot 
of ancient Britain and Ireland was a harp, not a lyre, is confirmed by 




Europe 263 

a famous manuscript of the twelfth century, which juxtaposes the 
pictures of a harp and a lyre, calling the harp cythara anglica , and 
the lyre cythara teutonica. Ever since, the harp has been considered 
the national instrument of both Britain and Ireland. The Leges 
W allicae , or Laws of Wales , said three things were necessary to a 
man in his home: a virtuous wife, a cushion on his chair and a well- 
tuned harp. In the thirteenth century, harpeors in France had come 
from Ingleterre , and in the fourteenth century, Dante traced the 
harp to the Irish in his Elvina Commedia. 

It is with good reason that the harp is the heraldic symbol of 
Ireland. 

Nevertheless, it was known on the continent as early as the ninth 
century. The Utrecht Psalter, painted at about 832 in France, de- 
picts it several times. 

The ancient European instrument was what we call a vertical 
angular harp, which was like the eastern harps of this type except 
that it was held upside down, so that the stick (or neck) was on 
the top and tuning pegs were inserted in it. It also had a front pillar , 
that is, a stick squeezed between the end of the body and the end 
of the neck, forming the third side of the triangle, to counteract the 
tension of the strings, (pi. XIV c) 

The European harp was not without precedents. Both the tuning 
pegs and the inverted position of the stringholder existed in the 
Syrian harp of the early middle ages, and we know that at that. time 
an active Syrian trade carried oriental goods to West and Northwest 
Europe. Thus, the harp was probably not indigenous in the Occident, 
though it is not yet possible to say from what country the Europeans 
obtained it. If Ireland was one of the first countries of Europe to 
adopt it, it is easily conceivable that from there it spread over the 
continent; Irish minstrels swarmed over Europe in the early middle 
ages. 

The older harp had wire strings tuned by means of a key like that 
of modern pianos. The Middle High German name of this key, 
plectrun, must not induce readers of ancient texts to believe that 
the harp was plucked with a plectron. In size harps differed greatly. 
Some were small enough to be carried suspended on a thong ; others 
were too large to be portable. Some had as few as seven strings, as 
testified by an old poem that compares them with the seven planets. 
The harp that the composer Guillaume de Machault describes in 
the fourteenth century had twenty-five strings. Such a wide range 
tempts one to connect with this statement a verse of Guillaume de 




264 The History of Musical Instruments 

Machault’s contemporary, the poet Eustache Deschamps: La harfe 
tout bassement va } and to translate it by “the harp goes down very 
low.” But this interpretation would be open to question. In the last 
centuries of the middle ages the French distinguished between in- 
struments has et hauls , which however did not mean ‘low and high’ 
instruments j the meaning was instruments coys ou qui font grant 
noise , ‘soft instruments and those which make great noise/ that is, 
instruments intended to be played indoors and outdoors. 

Of all indoor instruments, the harp had the highest rank} mem- 
bers of royal families and the aristocracy played it. When it was 
played skillfully, it would destroy the jendes myght ; the evil 
spirits fled, the rivers stopped flowing and the cattle forgot to eat. 
How familiar this picture is (cf. page 159). 

The two hands played two parts on the harp. There is a Spanish 
poem of the fourteenth century, by King Alfonso XI, with the verse 
La Far fa de Don Tristan que da los funtos doblados } ‘Don Tristan’s 
harp which plays double notes,’ and this is confirmed in a French 
poem in which the poet, speaking of the strings, says: as quant es feiz 
chanter , as quantes organer y ‘he had several [strings] play the 
melody, and several the accompaniment.’ 

The later medieval development of the European harp form had 
two main stages, the first of which we shall call the romanesque harf 
and the second the gothic harf. The stout romanesque harp had a 
curving pillar, and the distinction between the three parts, body, 
neck and pillar, was emphasized by ornamental decoration. The 
slender gothic harp had an almost straight pillar, and the construc- 
tion tended to unify rather than to separate the three parts, so they 
seemed to be made of one piece of wood. The transition from the first 
type to the second took place as late as about 1430. (fig. 76, pis. XVI 
b, XVIII b) 

The English name harf and its Germanic and Romanic relatives 
probably go back to an Indo-European root meaning ‘to pluck or 
pick.’ The Latin equivalent is carfere y from which ‘harvest,’ the 
picking season, is also derived. 

LYRES in northern and central Europe have for years con- 
stituted a puzzle that has been even further confused by speculative 
theories. If a solution is possible, it must be based upon sober facts 
rather than on preconceived ideas. 

The district of the lyre reached northward to England, southward 
to what was later called France and Germany, and eastward to 




Europe 



265 




Scandinavia, Finland and Esthonia. The southern boundary is 
marked by a lyre excavated from the tomb of an Alemannic war- 
rior, which may belong in the middle of the first millennium A.D. j 
in Wales, lyres were played up until the eighteenth century, and in 
Finland and Esthonia they are still in popular use. 

Lyres, like other medieval stringed instruments, varied in dif- 
ferent parts of Europe and in different centuries. Moreover, the 
almost exclusive sources of information are art works, and especially 




266 



The History of Musical Instruments 



illuminated manuscripts, some of which were copied and recopied 
from earlier models, so that the data they furnish are often impos- 
sible to place exactly. It is significant that among the many students 
of musical instruments nobody has succeeded in publishing an ex- 
haustive monograph on the stringed instruments of the middle ages. 

In order to attempt a classification of lyres we have to look for 
the following characteristics. First, whether the right hand plucks 
or bows the strings $ second, the action of the left hand, which may 
be either deadening (or plucking) the strings from the back, or 
grasping the lyre over the top, or reaching through the strings from 
the back to stop them j and third, whether the sides of the instrument 
are parallel or waisted. 

According to these characteristics, we can divide lyres into four 
main types: 



1 . Plucked strings 
deadened from the back 
parallel sides 

5—6 strings 

Recorded in Anglo-Saxon 
manuscripts of the seventh 
and eighth centuries 

2. Plucked strings 
grasped over the top 
waisted outline 
4-6 strings 

Recorded in French manu- 
scripts of the ninth and tenth 
centuries 



3. Bowed strings 

stopped by reaching through the 
strings 
parallel sides 
3—6 strings 

Recorded in manuscripts of 
the twelfth century and still 
used today in Esthoma and 
Finland 

4. Bowed strings 
grasped over the top 
waisted outline 
3—6 strings 

Recorded on art works from 
the eleventh to the thirteenth 
century 



An intermediate group between the second and third type, which 
are bowed, stopped by reaching through the strings, and waisted in 
outline, with three to five strings, are pictured in some French 
manuscripts of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 

Hence we obtain the following historical aspect: 

Lyres were plucked before IOOO A.D.j after that they were 
bowed, (pi. XV a, b) 

The strings were deadened or plucked from the back by the out- 
spread left hand, in the antique manner, up to the eighth century. 
The instrument was grasped over the top until the thirteenth cen- 
tury j beginning in the twelfth century and continuing up to this 




Europe 267 

day the left hand has stopped the strings by reaching through them. 

The first group, plucked, deadened and polychordic, may have 
been related to the Greek and Roman lyre. This would be easy to 
explain, since the minstrels who, in the early centuries A.D., wan- 
dered from the shores of the Mediterranean to the northern parts 
of Europe must have kept the two places in frequent communica- 
tion. In one miniature, in an Anglo-Saxon manuscript of the early 
eighth century (British Museum Vesp. A i), the player even uses a 
broad plectron as did the Greeks and Romans. 

Yet, most northern lyres differ in one important point from the 
ancient lyre: arms, and usually the crossbar, are not added, but are 
cut from the same piece of wood as the body so that the instrument 
is all of one piece. Besides, the antique devices for securing tension 
are replaced by frontal or rear pegs. 

The separate crossbar, made from a different piece of wood, is 
sometimes pictured in the early middle ages; some of the lyres, rep- 
resented, for example, in the famous psalter of the ninth century in 
the library of the university at Utrecht, have the curved outline of 
the antique lyre and a separate crossbar. But this psalter can be 
traced back to fifth century sources, and it probably mingles antique 
and contemporary features. The Alemannic lyre from the middle 
of the first millennium that we referred to, has a crossbar braced be- 
tween the tops of the two arms. But we do not know the origin of 
the early northern lyres and cannot determine whether their rela- 
tion to the Greek and Roman lyres was direct or indirect. 

It is tempting to compare the European lyres with the only type 
of lyre still known in Asia today, particularly as its players, Ostyaks 
and Voguls on the West Siberian river Ob, are Finnish peoples 
related to the European Finns who use a bowed lyre. The instru- 
ment has five strings and is diatonically tuned, generally in a major, 
occasionally in a minor, pentachord. Both hands play on the front 
of the instrument ; the melody is plucked by the left hand while 
the right hand plays an accompaniment on two high strings. No 
plectron is used; but sometimes the nails of the right hand scratch 
across the strings as did the Greek plectron. 

So the Siberian lyre is a vestigial instrument rather than a proto- 
type. While the scratching nails are remainders of a lost plectron 
technique, the two hands playing on the front side of the lying in- 
strument indicate complete departure from the lyre. The accom- 
paniment on two high strings is characteristic of the classical manner 
of playing the Indian vina, and the modern names of the Siberian 




268 The History of Musical Instruments 

lyre go back to Sumerian and Babylonian words; Ostyakish nares- 
yufy ) or ‘musical wood,’ has come from Sumerian nar y ‘musician,’ 
and Vogulish sangkultap y or ‘playing,’ from Babylonian zaqqal y 
or ‘stringed instrument.’ Both these indications point to a southerly 
direction. 

The lyre referred to above, which is preserved in the Berlin 
Ethnographical Museum, excavated from the tomb of an Aleman- 
nic warrior who probably lived about 500 A.D., is difficult to classify. 
This instrument has a slender form resembling a bootjack, although 
tapering toward a rounded point at the lower end, a shallow resona- 
tor, a separate crossbar, a bridge and a stringholding cord that en- 
circles the lower end. These features are West Asiatic rather than 
North European ; but, as we do not know how the Alemannic lyre 
was held and played, we cannot determine the origin of this single 
piece. 

Two types of bowed lyres have survived the middle ages. The 
first one is the crwth of Wales, the name of which corresponded to 
Irish crot or emit. In its last, eighteenth century form, it was in- 
fluenced by the violin. Body, arms and crossbar were one piece ; the 
outline was nearly rectangular, but tapered slightly toward the top; 
the back was bulging. A narrow fingerboard was wedged longitudi- 
nally between the crossbar and the body, partitioning this space into 
two parts. Four strings were stretched over it and two drones were 
added on one side. They were tuned in octave pairs, g-g', c”-c' y 
d'-d” y or in a similar way. The most peculiar, indeed unique, feature 
in this lyre was the bridge: it had two feet, a short one that rested 
on the soundboard and a longer one that passed through one of the 
small circular soundholes and rested on the back of the body, thus 
serving also as a soundpost transmitting the vibrations to the back. 

The second type, still in existence today, is the bowed lyre of 
Finland and Esthonia, a roughly carved instrument with three or 
four horsehair strings stopped by the fingernails, on which Otto 
Andersson has written a copious monograph. 

This archaic lyre is called harpa in Swedish, just as the instru- 
ment of the “Barbarians” in Venantius Fortunatus’s poem. The 
identity of name corroborates our conclusion that in the early mid- 
dle ages the leading instrument in the northwest was the harp, and 
in Germanic countries the lyre. 

THE MONOCHORD. The three centuries from 800 to 1 100, 
from Charlemagne to the first crusades, developed an ever-growing 




Europe 269 

tendency towards polyphony, which finally gave European music 
its distinctive feature. Concentus concorditer dissonans , as the Irish- 
man Johannes Scotus Erigena called it about 867, or concordance 
and dissonance, demanded exactitude of pitch and intervals. Gre- 
gorian plain chant, folksong, jugglers’ melodies — homophonic as 
they were — had not required any mathematically regulated scale. 
It did not matter whether their tones and semitones varied a little 
in size. But when two or three parts were combined in polyphonic 
harmony, music could not exist without rule and system. Conse- 
quently, the essential problem of medieval music became the stand- 
ardization of a scale of tones and semitones. Medieval men felt 
no confidence in their senses ; the musical ear proved to be unsuf- 
ficiently reliable. Scholarly procedure did not involve investigation 
and experiment, but consisted in finding a classical authority and 
adopting his conclusions to contemporary problems. Certainly, from 
the Greek Aristoxenos the medieval musicians should have learned 
to respect a musical ear, but on account of his reliance on sensory 
impressions he was rejected by the monks; an anonymous writer, 
probably of the eleventh century, naively said: Boetius never would 
have agreed with Aristoxenos. . . . 

Boetius, King Thcodoric’s unfortunate chancellor, was inevitably 
referred to in musical matters. Indeed, his five books, De Musica, 
written about 500 A.D., in which he undertook to make a summary 
and condensation of the intricate Greek and Roman theory, \frere 
the supreme authority to medieval musicians. 

In this classic work the monks found the description of an im- 
plement consisting of a string running over a long and narrow, 
calibrated soundbox, which gave the various intervals based on 
mathematical calculation. Medieval treatises on this monockord, or 
‘one-string,’ explaining the method of basing the scale upon mathe- 
matical divisions, do not occur earlier than the tenth century. The in- 
strument, at that time, was a long box with a calibrated ruler and a 
string stretched above; a shiftable bridge shortened the string at the 
points indicated by letters of the alphabet. One of the tractates, 
Odo’s Dialogue (tenth century), adds: “Since our singers did not 
know the right way, they were troubled all their lives. Man sings 
to the best of his ability; but the string is divided by scholars with 
such skill that it cannot lie.” 

The scholars, however, though agreeing with each other as to 
octaves, fifths and fourths, could not decide on a standard for thirds 
and seconds. Greek mathematical intricacy did not concern medieval 




270 The History of Musical Instruments 

musicians, who were entirely indifferent to the Hellenic tonal gen- 
ders or gene with the subtleties of their tiny intervals, while the 
ancients had been interested in a multitude of melodic thirds rather 
than in a standard third for harmonic consonance. As the monks 
could not find a standard for the minor intervals in Greek theory, 
they were forced to determine them by the ear rather than by cal- 
culation. This fact is clearly represented on an interesting miniature 
in Codex latinus 2599 in the Munich State Library, which was made 
in the thirteenth century in a German monastery, depicting a man 
with a monochord and a harpist with his instrument. It would seem 
probable that the harpist, having no fixed accordatura, would tune 
the harp to the monochord. But he does not. As the left hand holds 
the crossbar, he is neither playing nor tuning ; the key is hanging 
down. Instead, he is plucking a string in order that the monochordist 
may calibrate his instrument accordingly. The monochordist short- 
ens his string till the testing finger finds the desired spot \ there the 
knife, held in readiness, scratches a mark in the wood. This place is 
at one sixteenth of the entire length j the demanded interval, there- 
fore, must be the minor second of the ground-tone, the most un- 
certain of medieval intervals. 

When did the testing instrument turn into a playing one? We do 
not know exactly j but we know that the actual monochord with only 
one string and without keys was used as a musical instrument before 
1 100. On a miniature in a codex of about 1 100, at St. John’s College 
in Cambridge, the monochord is played among the instruments 
accompanying King David, and in a psalter from the monastery at 
Werden on Ruhr the monochord is played together with a bowed 
lyre and a zither. One might think that in these illustrations the 
musicians were tuning their instruments according to the standard 
pitch of the monochord. But on the second of the above-mentioned 
miniatures two dancing jugglers indicate that the scene represents 
an actual performance, (pi. XV c) 

The musical effectiveness of the monochord was certainly im- 
proved and facilitated by using more than one string. The history 
of the polychordic monochord needs some correction. No evidence 
of it can be found before the fourteenth century. The well-known 
passage in the treatise of Theoger of Metz, in the eleventh century, 
indicated that the monochord antiquitus constabat octo chordis> 
that is, consisted of eight strings in antiquity j it does not refer to an 
instrument of Theoger’s time. In the fourteenth century the Eng- 
lishman Simon Tunstede (d. 1369) proposed two strings, and Jo- 




Europe 271 

hannes de Muris four strings. Another monochord also mentioned 
by de Muris, with nineteen or more strings, cannot have been a 
monochord as described above j it must already have been a clavi- 
chord, which at first was also called a monochord. 

THE HURDY-GURDY was a kind of mechanical fiddle in 
which, instead of a bow, a revolving wheel, concealed inside and 
turning by a handle, rubbed the strings, and a set of stopping rods 
were substituted for the touching fingers. We do not know its exact 
age. But the Abbot Odo de Cluny, who died in 942, devoted a study 
to this instrument entitled Quomodo organistrum construatur y 
‘How the hurdy-gurdy should be made’ — in other words, how the 
rods were to be placed correctly in relation to the string to produce 
the eight notes C D E F G A B\) Bt |. Thus, we have evidence 
of the scholastic name and of the monastic use of this instrument in 
the beginning of the tenth century. It certainly was used to guide 
and support the conventuals. 

Pictures of hurdy-gurdies do not occur earlier than the twelfth 
century. At that time the instrument was fiddle-shaped and about 
five or six feet long, and was held and played by two sitting men; 
one stopped the rods and one turned the crank. It had three strings, 
probably in unison, which were stopped and sounded simultane- 
ously. The device that we call stopping rods were small pieces of 
wood which projected at one side of the instrument like keys. At 
the other end each rod had a small ‘bit,’ which, when the key was 
turned like a latch key, touched the strings, thus stopping them. 
This detail clearly shows the influence of the monochord. 

This instrument, five to six feet in length, with three strings which 
had to be played all together, producing one open and eight stopped 
notes, would have been impossible to hold and play with the hands 
like a fiddle. For many centuries the method of playing the fiddle 
was in the first position only — that is, the fingers were pressed down 
to produce the first four diatonic notes next to the scroll and then 
passed over to the neighboring string to produce the following notes 
without shifting the hand along the fingerboard. Since the hurdy- 
gurdy had only one (double or triple) string for the melody, its 
player would have been forced to stop it beyond the reach of his 
hand in the second, third and fourth positions. Besides, the stopping 
positions were even wider apart in such a bass instrument than those 
to which players were accustomed. Therefore, the fingers were re- 
placed by the artificial contrivance of rods. Bowing, too, would have 




272 The History of Musical Instruments 

been extremely difficult. The hurdy-gurdy lay horizontally across 
the players’ laps; otherwise, it would have been impossible to handle 
the stopping rods. But in this position the bow could not conven- 
iently be moved to and fro. 

The fiddle-shaped body and the rear or frontal pegs on the earli- 
est pictures of hurdy-gurdies seem to testify that the instrument was 
derived from the fiddle. On the other hand, there is no evidence that 
the fiddle or any other bowed instrument came to western Europe 
before the first hurdy-gurdy was constructed. The riddle is un- 
answered. 

During the thirteenth century the hurdy-gurdy changed com- 
pletely. Possibly it was the victorious career of the organ which 
expelled the clumsy hurdy-gurdy from church and school. Being 
then an ordinary instrument among other instruments, it became 
popular because it was so easy to work. It was made small enough 
to be portable and no longer required the second player. At the 
same time it had to get rid of the unwieldy rotating rods. They were 
replaced by devices with a tooth for each string that could be pushed 
in so that the teeth stopped the strings laterally, just as the early 
fiddles were stopped laterally. When the finger was removed, the 
stop fell back both by its own weight and by the elasticity of the 
string. 

The hurdy-gurdy then was no longer called organistrum , but 
sym'phonia in Latin (or rather Greek), chifonie in French and cin- 
fonia in Spanish. 

In the fifteenth century the hurdy-gurdy lost its position in regu- 
lar music. But as paintings of the early sixteenth century depict it 
in the hands of angels, it cannot have passed entirely into disrepute; 
it rather was considered archaic. By the seventeenth century it had 
become exclusively a folk instrument, called leier in German and 
viele (a roue) in French. 

As a folk instrument, the hurdy-gurdy began to resemble the 
bagpipe ; besides the two unison strings for the melody enclosed in 
a box, it adopted two, three or four drones outside the box, all of 
which strings were reached by the wheel. Their classic tuning was g f 
for the melody strings and, for the drones, either c g c? y or G g <T. 
Sometimes sympathetic strings in cf ef g' or a cf e' g' were added, 
(pi. XIII a) 

In modern times the name hurdy-gurdy has been given to the 
street organ, on account of the fact that this instrument, too, is 
played by turning a crank. The Germans also have given to the 




Flemish master ( c . 15/ o) in the Pina - 
kothek y Miinchen } with portative y 
lute y harp and fiddle . 




Van Eyck y altar in Ghent ( c . 7425), 
zt’iV/z orgariy harp and fiddle . 





Europe 273 

street organ their name for hurdy-gurdy: they call it Leierkasten 
after Drehleier. Schubert’s famous lied, Der Leiermann y refers to a 
stringed hurdy-gurdy, not to a modern street organ. 

LUTES, in the early middle ages, were of two kinds. The first 
one was a long lute. It is chiefly depicted in the famous psalter in 
the library of the University at Utrecht in Holland, which was writ- 
ten and painted about 832 in Champagne, but which represents an 
earlier stage. Its painter gives the lute a slender neck two or three 
times as long as the body, a pegdisk with two or three rear pegs and 
six frets. The body, looked at from the front, has shoulders which 
are either straight as in a spade, or concave, or curving over in the 
shape of tulip petals. 

The closest relative of this lute is the oval dombrd of the modern 
Kirghizes, which again is a close relative of the Russian triangular 
balalaika. The dombra has the long neck with six frets, the pegdisk 
with two rear pegs, and it also is played with the bare fingers. 

Another manuscript of the ninth century, the Golden Psalter of 
St. Gall, depicts King David with a very similar instrument. The 
broad neck is three times as long as the body, the pegdisk (depicted 
without pegs) is circular, and there are three strings. Although on 
the famous picture of King David with his musicians the instru- 
ment is almost hidden behind the king’s left thigh, its nearly circu- 
lar body is clearly shown on another miniature of the same codex 
representing the setting down of the Ark of the Covenant. Both 
paintings depict a long, hooked plectron. 

Instead of the long lute, the tenth century had an unusual short 
lute. A German psalter of that time, the Biblia folio 23 of the 
Stuttgart State Library, which Princeton University has published 
in a marvellous facsimile, has ten different pictures of the same 
curious stringed instrument. It is a heavy lute, obviously carved out 
of one piece of wood; the narrow body is rectilinear with parallel 
sides and sloping shoulders, a pear-shaped pegbox, rear pegs in a 
semicircular arrangement, a stringholder projecting from the lower 
end and an open bridge (i. e., a frame only). Generally, there are 
five pegs and five strings ; once, five strings and seven pegs; once, 
five pegs and four strings; once, four pegs and four strings; and 
twice, six pegs and six strings. The entire length is approximately 
five feet. The player holds the instrument on edge in a horizontal 
position, leaning the lower end on his right forearm; sometimes a 
supporting stick bears the weight. The left hand shortens the string 




274 The History of Musical Instruments 

in the modern fashion with the finger tips j the right hand plucks 
them with a big, hooked plectron. In one case, the instrument is still 
larger and has six strings and pegs; the sitting player holds it up- 
right. In all ten miniatures the Latin text calls this instrument by 
the (Biblical) term cythara. 

The Dashkov Museum in Moscow displays a similar, though 
much smaller, Turkestanic instrument probably still in use today, 
with the same narrow body, the sloping shoulders, a circular pegbox 
and rear pegs; but it only has two strings. 

The best source on early medieval lutes are miniatures in Spanish 
manuscripts of the tenth and eleventh centuries. There we distin- 
guish two kinds of lutes, one of which is definitely a short lute while 
the other cannot yet be classified. The latter has a narrow, elliptic 
body and a distinct neck of equal length. The short lute is narrow, 
pear-shaped and tapers to the upper end without a distinct neck. 
Both are given the same unusual head, a short slender crosspiece, 
forming a T or an L with the neck, with three or four pegs sticking 
out of it. Such a contrivance does not, and cannot, exist in reality; 
it must be the embarrassed expedient of artists incapable of drawing 
in perspective a bent-back pegbox, or else the result of a painter copy- 
ing paintings instead of the object itself. This is quite obvious in one 
of the miniatures, fol. 87 r of the Beatus Commentarius in Afocalyf- 
sim y Ashburnham Yates-Thompson Morgan 644. 

Thus Spain, under south oriental influence, had a lute with lateral 
pegs, as we would expect, instead of the lute with rear pegs influ- 
enced by the northern Orient. 

FIDDLES. The word fiddle is closely related to the Italian word 
viola. The derivation usually given by lexicographers to either word 
is from vitulari, a vulgar Latin word meaning ‘to skip as a calf does/ 
the to-and-fro motion of the bow supposedly resembling the skip- 
ping of a calf. It is a foolish comparison. Moreover, the old Nordic 
word fidlu did not at first designate a bowed instrument; the epics 
before 1 200 call the player fidlu-slcettiy ‘fiddle striker/ The accom- 
panying verb draga , ‘to draw/ [the bow] was not used earlier than 
1 200. And in the south of Europe the old meaning of a nonbowed 
instrument has been preserved ; viola in Italian and the correspond- 
ing Spanish form, vihuela, have designated guitarlike instruments 
as well as fiddles. 

The author has suggested a western Asiatic origin of the word: 
Ossetic fandir (related with pandur ), Tawgy feandir } Jenissei dia- 




Europe 275 

lect of Samojedic, jedilo , Old Nordic fidlu , Anglo-Saxon fidele . 
Later on, the word lost its dental between the two vowels and be- 
came jele in Norwegian, v'tele in Old French and viola in Italian. 

The first evidence of a bowed instrument is found in Spanish 
manuscripts of the tenth and eleventh centuries. In the tenth century 
the instrument was tall, about a man’s height, and the outline re- 
sembled a bottle with a cork; the lower end was cut square and the 
head was a round disk which probably contained three rear pegs. 
The bow was semicircular. Once more we find that similar instru- 
ments exist in the northern Near East; bottle-shaped fiddles are 
still used in Georgia, Caucasus and the neighboring districts, as 
panduri or jandur. 

A second form of bowed instrument came from the Byzantine 




figure 77. Caucasian 
fiddle. 



Empire and is still known as kamanga rumi , or ‘Byzantine fiddle,’ 
in the Near East, and as lira in Greece, Bulgaria and Jugoslavia. It 
is pear-shaped with a shallow, slightly bulging body, without a dis- 
tinct neck, ending in a disk or box with three rear pegs. The gut 
strings are tuned to 4-1-5, the longer, middle one producing a per- 
manent drone, while the outer strings are generally touched with 
the fingernails instead of the finger tips, and are played in harmonics 
only. Therefore, the instrument does not need a nut between the 
neck and the pegdisk, as do modern instruments with a fingerboard, 
(fig. 77 , P l. XIII b) 

The first evidence of the Byzantine lira is in a Persian literary 
source of the ninth century. Byzantium may have exported it to 
western Europe at that time, along with many other kinds of goods. 




276 The History of Musical Instruments 

It appeared again in Spanish manuscripts of the tenth or eleventh 
century. The name itself was preserved a long timej in two German 
manuscripts of the twelfth century the instrument was entitled lyra ; 
in Italy fiddles were called lira da braccio and lira da gamba as late 
as the seventeenth century, and in the same epoch England had a 
lyro-viol; the German derivative, leier } is still the name of the 
hurdy-gurdy. 

The Byzantine lira, under the names of fiddle , viele , viola , be- 
came the principal bowed instrument of Europe in the middle ages, 
and long after historical evidences of the origin of the European 
viola had been lost, the Flemish musician, Johannes Tinctoris, had 
a vague idea of the truth when he wrote in 1484: “The viol, as they 
say, was invented by the Greeks.” 

The first illustrations of European fiddles, dating from the tenth 
and eleventh centuries, show the number of strings varying between 
one, three, four and five. One string may have been an artist’s ab- 
breviation ; three is still the number of the oriental lira. Five strings 
became the classic number of the medieval fiddle, and it is important 
to know that the Persian source of the ninth century mentioned 
above already had given five strings to the oriental lira. 

The tuning of these five strings in the Occident is mentioned 
by only one author, Hieronymus de Moravia, a Dominican who 
lived at Paris about 1250 A.D. According to his statement, there 
were three different accordaturas by octaves, fifths and fourths: 

dG gd'd' 
dG gd' g' 

G c g d f 

The first d in the first accordatura, on one side of the fingerboard, 
was a drone which was plucked with the thumb, as shown on several 
paintings of the epoch. This accordatura is nothing else than the 
original three strings, two of which are duplicated, one in the octave, 
and one in unison. The oriental drone is kept but taken from the 
middle in order to make a droneless playing possible. In the follow- 
ing accordatura the fifth string is separated from the fourth. In the 
last one the drone is dropped and all four strings are on the way to a 
modern tuning j if either the lowest string were tuned to F } or the 
three upper strings raised by a tone each, this would be the exact 
tuning of a tenor violin in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 

Still, drones were preserved on many fiddles. Some art works of 
the fourteenth century clearly show a drone string stretched beside 




Europe 277 

the fingerboard and plucked with the finger, and the next chapter 
will speak of the two plucked drones on the lira da braccio in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, (pis. XVII c, XIX a) 

The shape of the fiddle underwent decisive alterations in the 
middle ages. The small bulging body, tapering to the pegbox, be- 
came larger j later, it was replaced by a flat oval box with side walls 
which at first were one piece with the back, but which were made 
separate by about 1300. The neck became distinct from the body to 
facilitate fingering. As early as the twelfth century fiddles were 
waisted to allow more freedom of bowing ; still, we find unwaisted 
specimens up to the fifteenth century. There was no direct line of 
evolution j all forms were intermingled, (pis. XIV b, XVI a, XVII 
a, b, XVIII b) 

At the beginning, the oriental fiddles certainly were played in 
oriental position with the fiddle pointing down like a cello and the 
bow held with the palm upward in ‘supination,’ as physiologists 
would say, the thumb being above and the fingers beneath. But in 
Europe, almost from the beginning, the position was changed j the 
fiddle was shouldered like a modern violin, and the bow was held 
in ‘pronation’ with the palm downward, the fingers above and the 
thumb below. If the fiddle was too large to allow shouldering, it was 
held across the chest. Only in a few instances was the oriental fashion 
preserved. 

I think it is not possible to explain this rather sudden change by 
a different way of fingering. I rather believe that it was connected 
with a general contrast between doing work in the two civilizations. 
In a (German) paper on “Rotary Motion” H. T. Horwitz makes 
the following important statement: “In certain actions, as sawing, 
planing, filing, the power stroke, in Europe, is pushing, that is, away 
from the body, while the return stroke is pulling. The reverse is true 
in most regions of Asia j the power stroke is pulling, toward the body, 
and the returning stroke is pushing, away from the body.” At first 
sight, the words “pushing” and “pulling” seem to contradict the 
experience found with bowing in Europe and Asia. But the essential 
point is: towards and away from the body, which, in the case of a 
working line parallel to the body, inversely involves pulling for the 
inward and pushing for the outward movement. So far, nothing 
certain can be said on the connection between bowing and general 
working motion, but the question is worth investigating. 

Besides the fiddle, the middle ages had a second bowed instru- 
ment, the rubebe or rebec, derived from the Arabian rabab and trace- 




278 The History of Musical Instruments 

able to the eleventh century. The old oriental form was preserved 
till the fourteenth century. But a European variety was made at 
that time, as Juan de Ruiz, in his poem El libro de buen amor t 
mentions a second rabe beside the rabe morisco or Moorish rebec. 
The European rebec had the sickle-shaped pegbox of the mandola 
and a soundboard made either of wood, or of wood and metal. The 





figure 80. Rebec. 



upper part of the soundboard, with the fingerboard, was raised above 
the level of the lower part. (fig. 79) 

The rebec gradually deteriorated until, in the seventeenth cen- 
tury, it was reduced to a small narrow kit or 'pochette to be carried 
in the flap pockets of dancing masters, (fig. 80) 

IDIOPHONES. Except for the chime, medieval idiophones 
served practical purposes rather than musical ones. Clappers or 
‘bones’ were carried by lepers as a warning} a wooden board, like 
the one used as semanterion or ‘sign giver’ in oriental churches, was 




Europe 279 

suspended on two chains from the castle gate to be struck with a 
hammer when a stranger wished to enter. 

Jingles attached to the dosing have already been mentioned. The 
epics of the later middle ages cannot describe often enough the 
schellen jingling on the hems or belts of their heroes. These jingles 
were seriously worn as amulets, not simply as the latest whim of 
fashion as has sometimes been asserted. Because they had the magic 
power of amulets, their use was customary in battle, tournament and 
duel. The delicate, tinkling sound of the jingle is admirably ex- 
pressed by its names; Italian bubbolo y French grelot and German 
schlotter are derived from verbs which mean ‘tremble.’ 

Bells were of two kinds — cup-shaped and shallow, struck from 
the outside with a hammer, and more or less conical and deep with 
a clapper. 

The bell with a clapper was shaped like a beehive, similar to 
Chinese bells; it was small and thin with a weak, whimpering tone. 
The modern tulip form was introduced about 1200. A certain quan- 
tity of the early bells are preserved; the oldest dates seem to be 
1098 from Drohndorf in Germany, 1106 from Pisa, 1202 from 
Fontenailles in Normandy. From that time on, the size increased 
continuously up to the fifteenth century. 

The shallow, cup-shaped bell without a clapper, called cymbalum 
in medieval Latin, and •zirnbel in Middle High German, had a 
much thicker wall, like its Asiatic relatives; it consequently had a 
more musical tone; it could be played both loudly and softly and 
was able to be tuned to a definite pitch. 

Differently tuned cymbala y therefore, were often united to form 
sets, as they were in East Asia and in India in two different forms — 
the suspended and the standing bell chime. The Chinese suspended 
chime has been discussed in the first Chinese chapter; the Malay 
Archipelago and India have sets of open porcelain or metal cups 
arranged on the floor. This kind of chime was also known in Greek 
antiquity. Suidas, a well-informed Byzantine lexicographer of the 
ninth century A.D., relates that a certain Diocles (but probably not, 
as Suidas thinks, the poet) was said to have invented a chime of 
metallic and earthenware bowls which were struck with a wooden 
stick. A Greek alchemistic tractate of that time (c. 800 A.D.) men- 
tions a metal chime as well. Such an instrument is already depicted 
in a Greek manuscript of the fourth century A.D. 

The most important illustrated book of that time, the so-called 
Viennese Genesis , shows the picture of Pharaoh’s meal to the ac- 




280 The History of Musical Instruments 

companiment of an oboe player and a woman beating with two 
slender sticks on four gray metal cups arranged in a row on a stand. 

As early as the ninth century, perhaps earlier, western monks 
cast bell chimes tuned to the major key, composed of bronze calottes, 
which were suspended from a stand and struck with mallets. Such 
chimes were relatively often depicted in medieval miniatures j but 
most of the pictures mistakenly illustrate the words from Psalm 150, 
Laudate eum cum cymbalis , with chimes because of the identity of 
the names, which gives a false importance to chimes in the middle 
ages. That it had a sufficiently important place, however, is indicated 
by several medieval treatises relating the great difficulties of the 
monks in finding the necessary proportions appropriate to the vari- 
ous notes. 

HORNS AND TRUMPETS. Deerhorns of warriors, hunters 
and watchmen, and even their bronze copies of all sizes, may have 
been made without foreign influence. The straight and hooked 
trumpets pictured in contemporaneous miniatures, on the contrary, 
must be considered a heritage from classic antiquity. Roman gar- 
risons were spread over Europe for many centuries ; they must have 
influenced the design of military instruments. So it is not surprising 
to meet the Roman lituus in the Bible of Charles the Bald, Codex 
latinus 1, of the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, (pi. XIV a) 

A new form of horn traveled westward from Byzantium in the 
tenth century and was in use for about two hundred years j it was 
short and thick, carved from the tusk of an elephant and, therefore, 
called oli'phant. It has close parallels in modern Africa, and, as 
Byzantium had no elephants, Africa may have been the home of 
these beautiful instruments. But, unlike the cross-blown horns in 
Africa, European oliphants were end-blown. Ivory horns were 
royal instruments in both places j they were the insignia of kings 
and chieftains in Africa and the exclusive and precious possession of 
princes and knights in Europe. 

A straight metal trumpet without a bell, obviously a degenerated 
Roman tuba, is depicted as early as the eighth century in Irish minia- 
tures. It became slimmer and longer, and acquired a rather large bell 
soon after 1000. This improvement was due to the influence of Ara- 
bian trumpets which the Christian armies met in Spain, in southern 
Italy and in the Holy Land. Not only the shape was influenced j 
poets of that time spoke of trumpets “blown in the manner of the 
heathens” or even of cors sarrazinois. While the Spaniards adopted 




Europe 28 1 

the Arabic name al nafir (pronounced anna fir), transforming it into 
anafil, the French called the new trumpet by a name of their own, 
buisine , which was derived from the Latin buccina. 

In Europe the trumpets preserved the old social privileges they 
had had in the Orient. The right of maintaining trumpeters was re- 
stricted to the high nobility and, in later times, also to the cavalry 
(originally formed of noblemen), and to the Free Cities of the Ger- 
man Empire. Therefore, a standard with the seignorial arms was 
nearly always suspended from the trumpet. 

The trumpet evolved in two sizes. In 1240, Emperor Frederick 
II, residing at Arezzo in Italy, had four silver tubae and one tubecta 
made to order. This diminutive word was probably a formal ver- 
sion of a vernacular term trombetta y which some decades later oc- 
curred in Dante’s poem. While the smaller size became a trumpet , 
the larger size kept the old name buisine in French, or bustne in 
Middle High German. But the names of musical instruments are 
generally selected and transformed according to the sound of the 
instrument ; those with a light sound will be given a name with a 
light, rather than a dark, vowel. The word busme } applied to the 
large size only, was subjected to what philologists call an assimila- 
tion of the second vowel by the first one; the result was the term 
busune at the end of the middle ages and its modern German form, 
posaune , after the sixteenth century. 

BAGPIPES, a combination of a skin bag as a flexible windchest, 
supplied either by human breath or by bellows, and one or more 
reed pipes, were discussed in the Greek and Roman chapter and 
touched upon in the second Indian chapter. Their further history 
belongs in the medieval Occident, as bagpipes then were spread all 
over Europe, sometimes as folk instruments, sometimes as military 
instruments. As folk instruments, they still are used in all parts of 
Europe; as military instruments, they have survived in Scotland 
and Ireland. 

The first medieval mention of bagpipes is in a spurious letter of 
St. Jerome to Dardanus, which can be traced back to the ninth cen- 
tury: “The chorus is a simple skin with two brazen pipes, and one 
[the player] inspires through the first one, and it emits the sound 
through the second.” Is not the much contested name chorus simply 
derived from chorion , ‘hide’? 

Up to the fourteenth century bagpipes had no additional drone; 
but it was certainly overhasty to assert that the earlier bagpipes had 




282 The History of Musical Instruments 

no drone at all. A great number of types have preserved the oriental 
form of a double pipe, one serving as a melody pipe, and the other, 
lying directly alongside the first, as a drone. On some miniatures 




the playing pipe is so wide that it probably represents a double pipe. 
This double pipe is carved on English reliefs of the fifteenth century 
and still exists in the Balkans and in France. In the Balkans this 
arrangement coexists with single reeds j both pipes are cylindrical 
clarinets. Nowhere else in western or Central Europe (as far as we 
know) are clarinets used without oboes in bagpipes. In Scotland, 




Europe 283 

Ireland, Brittany and some other parts of France, the drones are 
clarinets, but the melody pipes, or chanters, are oboes. In Italy and 
parts of France both chanters and drones arc oboes. In East Europe 
bagpipes are entirely oriental; in Italy and in some parts of France 
they adopted the oboe principle of European shawms. So one dis- 
tinguishes six stages of development: 

1. clarinets only; two pipes, one chanter and one drone lying directly 
alongside one another. 

2. oboes and clarinets; the same arrangement. 

3. oboes and clarinets; the chanter separate from the drones. 

4. oboes only; one drone lying alongside the chanter, the others being sep- 
arate. 

5. oboes only; the drones separate from the chanter. 

6. oboes only; three drones separate from the chanter. 

With a few exceptions, cataloguers in museums of instruments have 
confined themselves to describing the external qualities of bagpipes, 
as the number of drones and whether there is mouth action or a 
bellows to supply the wind; but they have not examined the most 
important feature, the nature of the reeds. Thus, it is not possible, 
with the present data, to present a complete typology of bagpipes, 
(fig. 80 

Separate drones first appear on miniatures of the thirteenth cen- 
tury. A possible reason was that occidental music required a drone 
an octave below the tonic, so that the bass pipe, twice as long as the 
melody pipe, for convenience was taken away and set in another 
opening of the bag. (pi. XIII c) 

In the fifteenth century bagpipes were used in the service of 
courts and free cities; but they never lost their character as folk 
instruments, not even when the bucolic fashion at the French court 
had brought forth an aristocratic variety in the seventeenth century. 
This musette was composed of a bag wrapped in silk or velvet, a 
bellows, two slim cylindrical oboes lying close together and an oboe 
drone only six inches high, in which the bore ran up and down like 
that in a ranket, which could be shortened by small sliders, (fig. 82) 
A smaller medieval variety of the bagpipes was the bladder pipe y 
a single or double clarinet with a bladder instead of a bag. It is 
mentioned and depicted from the thirteenth to the beginning of the 
seventeenth century and apparently came from the east ; the earliest 
poetic source speaks of it in connection with the land Krain in the 




284 The History of Musical Instruments 

eastern Alps; a woodcut of 1529 represents a Turk with a bladder 
pipe; and the Chuvash in Russia have played the instrument up to 
modern times. 

THE ORGAN. It is uncertain whether in antiquity all organs 
were hydraulic, as no general conclusion can be drawn from the ety- 
mology of the word hydraulos. How unreliable terms of this kind 
are, how seldom a change in the mechanism implied a change in the 
name, may be seen again and again. Johannes de Muris, a musician 
of the fourteenth century, owned a monozhord with nineteen strings, 
and in 1400, when there were surely no more water organs, the 
accounts of one of the German municipalities refer to the town or- 
ganist as the hydraulier. 

The first incontestable evidence of a purely pneumatic organ 
is on an obelisk erected in Byzantium before the death of Emperor 
Theodorus the Great (393) ; the small organ which it shows has its 
bellows compressed by the weight of two youths standing on the 
top. Byzantium was, in fact, the earliest center of organ building in 
the middle ages. From here organs and treatises on organ building 
were exported to western Europe, to Spain, France, Germany, Eng- 
land, and eastward to the Near East and even to China. 

Organs were made in Spain as early as the middle of the fifth 
century; they are said to have been in common use in Spanish 
churches by that time. In England organs began to be built about 
700. In 757, Emperor Constantine Copronymus the Sixth sent an 
organ with pipes of lead to King Pippin the Short who had it erected 
at St. Cornelius’s in Compiegne; in 812, Byzantine envoys presented 
an organ to Charlemagne at Aix-la-Chapelle. The monk Notker, 
who wrote the life of Charlemagne, related that, when the Greek 
craftsmen arrived to assemble the organ, the Frankish workmen 
stood about and watched so carefully that afterwards they were 
able to build organs themselves. A few years after 870, when Pope 
John VIII wanted an organ and an accomplished organist, he did 
not send to Byzantium, but to the Bishopric Freising in Bavaria. 

The early history of the organ culminated in the large organ 
erected in 980 in the monastery at Winchester in England; it had 
twenty-six bellows and two keyboards (probably on opposite sides 
and requiring two players as in the organ pictured in the Utrecht 
Psalter) ; each of them consisted of twenty sliders, and each slider 
when it was pulled out connected ten pipes at once. Its noise, a con- 
temporary poem asserts, was so great that everyone stopped with 




Europe 285 

“his hand his gaping ears, being in no wise able to draw near and 
bear the sound.” 

The powerful sound of the organ was emphasized by many 
chroniclers. In the twelfth century i^Elred, abbot of Rievaulx, de- 
claims against the organ : “Why are there so many organs and chimes 
in church? To what purpose, pray, that awful roar of the bellows, 
which is more like the rumble of a thunderstorm than the sweetness 
of the voice?” And he describes the poor “crowd inside which trem- 
bling and thunderstruck wonders” at the overwhelming noise. The 
sound must indeed have been powerful in a time used to the meager 
music of a tabor and pipe or some few stringed instruments. The 
action of the primitive bellows, without any contrivances for stabiliz- 
ing the pressure, doubtless resulted in sudden starts and fadings. 
Moreover, larger organs as in Winchester, had several pipes on the 
same key, either in unison or in fifths, octaves, twelfths and double 
octaves, which sounded at once; no stop existed to disconnect some 
of them and to change volume or timbre. 

Still, contemporary authors claimed that the organ could equal 
{coaequabat) the roar of thunder, the loquacity of the lyre and the 
sweetness of the cymbala. But it is a mistake to suppose that the 
player relied on stops to produce such differences; playing alter- 
nately the lower, the middle and the higher register of the keyboard 
would have sufficed to suggest such a figure of speech, exaggerated 
in the style of medieval poetry. Still, there was a factor likely ‘to 
increase the different, indeed contrasting, effect of high and low; 
in medieval organs the width of the pipes did not change in propor- 
tion with their length, as in modern organs. Therefore the higher 
pipes, relatively too thick, had a comparatively soft timbre. 

Instead of pressure keys, the early organ had sliders, linguae — 
that is, horizontal strips of wood, the front part of which projected, 
while their rear parts interrupted the passage of the wind. When 
a strip was pulled out, the wind was free to enter the corresponding 
pipes. This arrangement is described as late as the twelfth century in 
Theophilus’s tractate on mechanics, called Schedule diversarum 
artium. The musical means were consequently limited; only a few 
organs had sliders with an automatic return to the original position 
to simplify manipulation. 

The modern arrangement dates from the thirteenth century. 
Levers supplanted the sliders; pressed down, they opened the valves 
or pallets controlling the pipes. At first, the levers themselves were 
inside; they were worked by buttons pushed down on them from on 




286 The History of Musical Instruments 

top, resembling the keyboard of a typewriter. But as early as the 
thirteenth century some organs were already given the present ar- 
rangement with the levers projecting and directly worked by the 
fingers. Organs then had a range of three octaves. Though they did 
not at first have all semitones, the organ was the first instrument to 
become entirely chromatic. A contemporaneous source expressly said 
the musica ficta — that is, melodies using semitones other than the 
two natural half-tones of the diatonic scale — was specially appropri- 
ate to the organ. At the beginning, diatonic and chromatic keys 
were arranged in one or two rows without any distinguishing color 
of the keys; but paintings of the fourteenth century already show 
white and black keys in the modern arrangement. The medieval 
history of the instrument had come to an end, and already Guil- 
laume de Machault could call the organ de tons les instruments le 
roi. (pi. XVI b) 

INSTRUMENTS INTRODUCED IN THE 
ELEVENTH AND TWELFTH 
CENTURIES 

THE PORTATIVE ORGAN. Besides the large church or- 
gans, the middle ages had a small organ for secular purposes, which 
generally was suspended from the player’s neck with the keyboard 
running outwards and easily available to the right hand, while the 
left hand worked the triangular feeder bellows on the back of the 
organ. This position of the keyboard at right angles to the player 
involved running up and down the scale with two fingers only, as 
the use of the whole hand would have necessitated a nearly impos- 
sible position of the arm. Dr. Hans Hickmann, author of a mono- 
graph on the portative organ, was the first to see that this custom 
was the explanation for the otherwise incomprehensible fact that up 
to the eighteenth century players of keyboard instruments still per- 
formed their scales with two fingers only, although the position of 
the keyboard no longer required it. 

Another important conclusion of Hickmann is that the scales of 
earlier portatives were not regularly diatonic or chromatic, but se- 
lective, omitting those notes which were unusual in the kind of 
music played on the instrument. 

Although in a portative organ the pipes are generally arranged 
in rows resembling what in larger organs are the stops — that is, sets 
of pipes differing in octave or timbre — Hickmann discovered that 




Europe 287 

no portative had stops, all the pipes belonging in one set, and that 
the arrangement in rows was merely a space-saving device. There 
were as many keys as pipes, and each key played only one pipe. 
This is confirmed by a ground plan in Henry Arnault’s manuscript; 
there the following notes are in the circles marking the diameters 
of the pipes: 

«<**/#*# 4 • • • 

bc^d^jga . . . 

Even if the portative had some control near the keyboard, a lever 
or a slide, it served to prolong certain notes as drones and not to 
work stops. 

The first portative organs are recorded in the twelfth century; the 
instrument reached its greatest use in the fifteenth, and disappeared 
in the sixteenth century, (pis. XVI a, XVIII b) 

FLUTES. The middle ages had two kinds of flutes; a French 
poet of the fourteenth century, Guillaume de Machault, called 
them flaustes traversaines and flaustes dont droit joues quand tu 
flaustes, “cross flutes and flutes that you play straight when you 
pipe.” The straight flute, usually called flageol in Old French, was 
certainly a beaked flute or recorder. Sometimes they were used in 
pairs; a text of the thirteenth century, Li contes dcs hiraus y mentions 
ftajos doubliers, and in the fourteenth century they are depicted on 
Italian paintings in the divergent position of the ancient aulos.’ 

Transverse -flutes came from Asia through Byzantium, rather 
than from Etruria or Rome. They were mentioned in a Greek 
treatise as pldgioi about 800 A.D. and depicted in Greek miniatures 
of the tenth and eleventh centuries. Their first occidental evidence 
is a miniature in the Hortus Deliciarum , the famous encyclopedia 
that the Alsatian abbess Herrad von Landsberg wrote at the end of 
the twelfth century. In this miniature the instrument is given the 
Middle High German name swegel. In the thirteenth century a 
■flauste traversaine is mentioned in France. 

The path of the cross flute westward from the Byzantine Empire 
is marked by a cross flute player on a Hungarian aquamanile of 
about 1 100 in the National Museum at Budapest; moreover, it is 
marked up to this day by a particular predilection for this instru- 
ment in the folk music of Rumania, Jugoslavia, Hungary, Bohemia, 
Austria and Switzerland. 

In the later middle ages Germany became a new center, from 
which it spread over the world. All European countries associated 




288 The History of Musical Instruments 

it with Germany: it was called German flute in English, and flauta 
alemana in Spanish. Nevertheless, in the sixteenth century the 
Frenchman Vincent Carloix wrote that it was a mistake to call the 
transverse flute a flauste d y A Uemand; for, the French played it 
better and in a more musical way than any other nation, and flute 
quartets, which were customary in France, were unknown in Ger- 
many. 

Indeed, the cross flute was mainly a military instrument in Ger- 
many. It had already been coupled with the cylindrical drum in the 
century after the Hortus Deliciarum, and more and more it had be- 
come a martial instrument. From the end of the crusades to the 
twentieth century, fife and drum were the leading infantry instru- 
ments. 

REED PIPES are first recorded in the French literature of the 
twelfth century. But the terms used for them are confused. Both 
French chalemele and German rorphife are derived from words 
meaning ‘reed’ (Latin calamus and German ror ). Consequently, 
these terms might be used not only to designate instruments having 
a reed as a mouthpiece, such as clarinets and oboes, but also flutes 
made of reed, and particularly pan-pipes ; several medieval French 
poets speak of chalemeles with seven pipes ( tuyaux ). 

Reed pipes in the strict sense of the word seem to have been oboes j 
no source, pictorial or literary, refers to a clarinet. Comparing the 
pictorial sources, we are aware of two different types of oboes. One 
of them is rather wide and must have had a loud, broad tone similar 
to that of certain folk oboes of southern Italy ( piffero ) and Spain 
( caramillo ). The other oboe, represented on art works of the Medi- 
terranean border in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, is slim and 
has a pear-shaped bell j its tone must have been more delicate. The 
contrast between the two kinds of oboes is mirrored in the poetry 
of that time. Gui de Bourgogne’s verse: u Olifans y grelles et chale- 
miaux et busines bruiants” couples the oboes with “noisy” horns and 
trumpets, and certainly refers to the loud oboe. Albrecht von Hal- 
berstadt (c. 1200) speaks of the soft oboe when he calls it “sweet” 
( suze ). It seems that the latter names, bombarde and doucine (Ital- 
ian dulzaina) t express the same contrast of timbres and instruments, 
(pi. XIII c) 

DRUMS were not used in the earlier middle ages, strange as it 
may seem. About 600 A.D., St. Isidorus of Sevilla had described, 
in his encyclopedic Etymologiae , a drum called symphonia , “a hoi- 





in Rome (c. 1480). *» the National Gallery } London ( late Kunsthistorische Museum y Vienna ( earlv 16th 

i$th century ). century). 




Europe 289 

low wood, covered with skin on either end, that the musicians strike 
with sticks from both sides. And there is a suavissimus cantus pro- 
duced by the concordia gravis et acuti” But such an oriental instru- 
ment is nowhere else described or depicted. 

There is a single evidence of a barrel drum in Europe. An English 
miniature of the twelfth century depicts a juggler disguised as a bear 
and striking with his two hands the two skins of a bulging barrel 
drum which is horizontally suspended from his neck. No such drum 
was familiar at that time in Europe ; it certainly was meant to in- 
crease the strange, exotic effect of the scene. 

But there are evidences of drums in regular use from the twelfth 
century on. The usual drum was beaten by a man who played a 
horn or a flute simultaneously — labor and pipe. It was light and 
small and buckled on the chest or the left arm. The painters gener- 
ally represented the circular skin only, often with a snare, but un- 
fortunately they did not indicate the body of the drum. At least 
we can see that it was rather shallow $ its Middle High German 
name sumber meant a grain measure. Still, there is also evidence of 
deep cylindrical drums with two skins, in which the height nearly 
equaled the diameter. The skin was struck with a stick, the form of 
which sometimes was rather curious. In the English St. Alban’s 
Psalter of the twelfth century, in Hildesheim, it was depicted as an 
ordinary stick from the end of which a needle, ending in a small 
bulb, projected at right angles so that a twisting motion of the wrist 
sufficed to strike the drum. Since such drums were used merely as 
a time-beating accompaniment they required no power. About the 
fourteenth century they became independent and larger, and were 
struck with heavier sticks. 

At the beginning of the thirteenth century we first hear of 
oriental, jingling, frame drums, which were chiefly used by girls, 
as in the Near East. Their most frequent names were temple in 
Provencal, timbre in French, and timbrel in English ; the Germans 
called it rotumbes. In modern times it is known as cembalo in Italian, 
and tambourin or tambour de basque in French. These three latter 
terms are incorrect or misleading and should be avoided. The instru- 
ment is not Basquish, a tambourin is correctly a long Provencal cylin- 
der drum with one stick, and the word cembalo connotes a nonexist- 
ent relation to clavicembalo. 

Altogether the role of drums was insignificant in the middle ages. 
Later, however, it succeeded in securing a place as a soldier’s instru- 
ment. The crusades had altered the military organization of Euro- 




290 The History of Musical Instruments 

pean countries ; the knight with his train was replaced by armies of 
mercenaries. The new infantry , like oriental soldiers, needed inspir- 
ing music and took possession of the cross fife and the drum. Here, 
time beating was more important than melody, and loudness was 
an urgent need. German epics of the fourteenth century speak of 
the grosse hersumper — that is, large army drums. This evolution 
finally led to the enormous drums of the Swiss lansquenets of the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries who, according to the Italian Paulus 
Jovius ( 1483-1553), kept pace with the beating of the drums ( justis 
passibus ad tympanorum pulsum ) . 

Those interested in the beats and rolls of the large soldiers’ drums 
may consult Thoinot Arbeau’s Orchesographie , printed in Paris in 
1588, and available both in a French and an English modern edition. 

THE TRUMSCHEIT was a curious stringed instrument, the 
origin and history of which are quite obscure. A French sculpture 
of the twelfth century shows it for the first time. There, the three- 
sided body is approximately four feet long; it is composed of three 
slender boards which taper toward the rhombic pegdisk. The single 
string runs the whole length of the instrument and is tightened by 
a rear peg; it is stopped near the upper end with the fingers of the 
left hand, while the right hand is placed on the string and is not 
holding a bow. A French painting of the fourteenth century offers 
the same picture but does not clearly show whether there are one or 
two strings. 

The instrument preserved its outer appearance in the fifteenth 
century, but the manner of playing changed. It was held in an 
oblique position, either with the lower end resting on the ground 
or else turned up the other way with the lower end in the air. A 
second string was added, either the same length or only half the 
length. The strings were not stopped, but lightly touched to pro- 
duce harmonic notes; a short bow played above the touching fingers 
near the upper end. (pi. XVIII a, fig. 83) 

The sixteenth century replaced the disk with rear pegs by a box 
with lateral pegs. 

The instrument had by that time acquired its most peculiar fea- 
ture, an unsymmetrical bridge with two dissimilar legs. One was a 
short, vertical supporting leg, leading the vibrations to the sound- 
board in the usual way, and the other was a free leg which ran 
diagonally sideways to the soundboard, drumming on it and pro- 
ducing an actual wood-on-wood sound. The only name the instru- 




Europe 



291 



I 

:: 

J ~° I 

\ figure 83. Trumschcit. 

ment had before 1600, German trumscheit y or ‘drum log,’ was due 
to this drumming effect. 

The drumming bridge also gave the strings a penetrating, almost 
brassy timbre, which made the instrument all the more reminiscent 
of a trumpet, as the scale of the trumscheit was composed of the same 




292 The History of Musical Instruments 

harmonics that formed the scale of a trumpet. Hence, a new group 
of names began to be applied to it after 1 600, such as trumpet marine , 
comparing the instrument to a trumpet. The attribute, marine y is 
responsible for the most whimsical suggestions. One of them says 
that the trumscheit was used as a signal instrument at sea \ it would 
be difficult to find a less appropriate object for this purpose. Another 
explanation makes mariana , ‘Mary’s,’ out of marina and hints that 
nuns used the trumscheit in the convents to replace the masculine 
trumpet. No convincing interpretation has been suggested. 

The instrument had no importance for art music in modern times \ 
as early as 151 1, Sebastian Virdung, in his Musica getutschty called 
it onniitZy ‘useless.’ We should mention, however, a kind of after- 
growth in France during the eighteenth century. At that time the 
trumpet marine was given a set of sympathetic strings inside the box, 
and in this case was called trompette marine organisee. 

ZITHERS. Both types of Near Eastern zithers came to Europe, 
the plucked Egyptian qanun and the struck Asiatic dulcimer santir. 
This word was derived from Greek psalterion , as was also the medie- 
val term 'psaltery ; but the term ‘psaltery’ was usually given to the 
plucked, not the struck, zither. The first evidence of a psaltery is 
on a relief of the church, Santiago de Compostela, in northwestern 
Spain, carved in 1184; but representations are rare before the four- 
teenth century. 

It is not easy to distinguish between plucked psalteries and struck 
dulcimers on early reliefs. After 1300, however, dulcimers seem to 
have prevailed in the north, and psalteries in the south. The German 
Praetorius defined the psaltery as a kind of dulcimer plucked with 
the fingers, indicating that the dulcimer, but not the psaltery, was 
known in Germany. The Italians, on the contrary, called the dulci- 
mer salterio tedesco y a ‘German psaltery’ j they were familiar with 
the psaltery, but not with the dulcimer. Probably the plucked psal- 
tery was introduced through South Europe, and the struck dulcimer 
via Byzantium through East Europe, which would account for their 
distribution, (pi. XVIII a) 

Usually these instruments had the general shape of a symmetric 
trapezoid, with the nonparallel sides either straight or curved in- 
ward. But in many cases they were half -zithers (Spanish medio cano y 
French micanon , etc.), so called because their shape was one half 
a symmetric trapezoid, thus forming a rectangular trapezoid. If the 
slanting side was curved, the half-zither had the wing form that 




Europe 293 

the harpsichord and the grand piano have preserved. Sometimes 
the wing form was indicated by the French word ele: the much- 
discussed term, in its latinized form ala, is unequivocally defined 
by Paulirinus (c. 1460) as either a triangular instrument ( ala In- 
tegra) or a semitriangular instrument ( media ala) with upward 
running wire strings that are plucked with a plectron ( penna ). Not 
many players, he says, know how to play the entire ala; more musi- 
cians play the media. As half a triangle is a triangle as well, the 
triangular shape that Paulirinus attributes to the ala must not be 
taken too literally. 

The stringing of these instruments never had fixed rules. One 
modern method for the dulcimer indicates wire strings stretched 
over two bridges, from two to four in unison for each of the thirty- 
two notes. These sets are arranged in three rows, the first compris- 
ing the notes from g to b ' diatonically, the second from g 7 to c :i dia- 
tonically, the third from d 2 to g 3 , this latter series being diatonic as 
well, but having /#' and j$" instead of the natural notes. 

The most evolved form, sometimes provided with a damper 
pedal, is the Hungarian cimbalom. Some of its strings are divided 
into three parts by two bridges, some into two parts by one bridge, 
some are undivided. The lower register, chromatic from D or E to 
B , has three strings to each note; the middle register, from c to /, 
has four strings to each note; the high register, from / to e 3 , has 
five strings to each note. 

The oriental lute, ‘ ud, was brought to Europe at about the same 
time as the zithers. But we postpone its discussion till the next 
chapter, as it reached the climax of its development only between 
1400 and 1600. 




FOURTH PART 



The Modern Occident 




i5- The Renaissance 

{1400-1600) 



T HE most outstanding development in the history of music 
between 1400 and 1600 is the emancipation of instru- 
mental from vocal music. Before 1400, players generally 
accompanied singing; after that time they slowly began to make 
themselves independent, at first by taking over dancing songs and 
adapting them to the particular technique of their instruments. 
Gradually, instruments took possession of all kinds of vocal forms, 
not restricting themselves to dance music; motets and madrigals 
were performed on instruments, and as late as the seventeenth cen- 
tury printed collections of pieces bore the subtitle, “to be sung or 
played.” Along with the vocal style of these amphibious composi- 
tions, however, styles characteristic of certain instruments began to 
be developed. Keyboard instruments had evolved into polyphonic 
and chord instruments as early as the fourteenth century, and the 
lutes may have followed in the fifteenth century. Organists and 
lutanists using music written in several parts, each intended to be 
performed by an individual musician, adapted it to the special con- 
ditions of their hands and instruments and developed a style of their 
own; indeed, they invented particular tablatures to replace the com- 
mon notation. Finally, composers created exclusively instrumental 
forms of composition entirely different from those used for voices. 
In the sixteenth century melodic instruments followed in the path 
of the polyphonic instruments. In 153 2 the German Hans Gerle 

wrote a method for the fiddles, in 1535 the Italian Sylvestro di 

297 



298 The History of Musical Instruments 

Ganassi published a method for the flute, and in 1553 the Spaniard 
Diego Ortiz for the gamba, each of them with the aim of fostering 
a true instrumental style. 

The final stage in the emancipation of instrumental music began 
in the second half of the sixteenth century when orchestration was 
first considered. Chroniclers began to enumerate in detail which 
instruments were used in playing certain compositions at certain 
occasions. The most minute indications are given in Massimo Tro- 
jano’s account of the wedding ceremonies when Duke William V 
of Bavaria married Princess Renate of Lorraine in 1 568. There we 
learn that, at table, the court orchestra performed a six part motet 
of Orlando di Lasso with five cornets and two trombones; that, 
during the seventh course, twelve musicians formed three groups — 
one of four gamba players, the second of four recorders, the third 
of a bassoon, a cross flute, a pipe and a cornet ; and many other com- 
binations. This testifies to an increasing interest in color, that is, the 
contrast and blend of timbres, as a vital part of music. Orchestration, 
which at first was at the discretion of the performers, at last became 
important enough to be indicated by the composer} about 1600, 
Giovanni Gabrieli in Venice first fixed the instrument required for 
each part in writing his scores. 

The new delight in timbre acted as a strong stimulus in making 
instruments. Never before and never since has the palette of musical 
hues been as rich as in the sixteenth century; no potentiality was 
neglected. To confine ourselves to one example: double reed instru- 
ments, today represented by the two families of oboes and bassoons, 
existed in ten complete families essentially differentiated by the 
diameters and forms of their bores. 

The new wealth of musical instruments and their increasing im- 
portance, which began to be obvious about 1400, resulted in the 
sudden emergence of popular treatises on the subject at the begin- 
ning of the sixteenth century. 

In 1511 a German priest, Sebastian Virdung, published a small 
book entitled Mvsica getutscht vnd aufigezoge, or ‘Music German- 
ized and Abstracted.’ It is written as a dialogue, the didactic form 
that the Renaissance had taken over from antiquity. A fictitious 
friend, Andreas Silvanus, is the pupil; ignorant but eager, he sup- 
plies the cues for Virdung’s lecture with his questions. The cold and 
arid tone of medieval treatises is avoided, and also Latin is replaced 
by the native idiom. Besides, the book speaks to the eyes; it is illus- 
trated by numerous woodcuts. Many of them show instruments 




The Renaissance ( 1400—1600 ) 299 

which do not belong to ‘regular music,’ but rather to the so-called 
musica irregularis , such as carnival implements, children’s toys, 
hunters’ horns, jaws’ harp, cow bell and scraped pot. Although Vir- 
dung protests against being expected to speak of so inartistic a branch 
of his subject, he mentions all these popular and folkloristic instru- 
ments. His book is popular in form though scientific in approach. 
He begins by a classification, and in this point he is remarkably mod- 
ern. His system comprises three classes: instruments blown by 
human or artificial wind} stringed instruments} and instead of the 
incorrect and unsatisfactory term “percussion” instruments, those 
die vo de metalle oder ander clingende materien werden gemacht. 
Four hundred years later, English musicologists introduced the term 
sonorous substancesy a translation of Victor-Charles Mahillon’s in- 
struments autophones and my own idio phones , unconsciously adopt- 
ing Virdung’s clingende materien. 

The reader may be surprised to find that Virdung still refers to 
Boethius. Had not the time gone by when the last musicologist of 
antiquity was still the incontestable authority on music? Virdung 
speaks of Boethius, indeed, and he speaks of Guido of Arezzo, of 
genus diatonicum and genus chromaticum } of diatessaron and quad- 
rilateral but this is just a bow to classic erudition. On Virdung’s 
pages the various genera y the semitonia , the gsolreut are illustrated 
by clear woodcuts of keyboards with white and black keys or of the 
fretted fingerboards of lutes. And Virdung does not forget that the 
strings of a lute must be carefully chosen before they produce the 
required tonos and semitonia. So he proposes the test well known by 
all violinists: stretch the string in your hand and pluck it with the 
thumb} the more you see the vibration of the string, the less good 
it is. A charming little woodcut illustrates his words. A new epoch 
begins with the matter-of-fact spirit of Virdung’s practicality, a de- 
parture that cannot be too much admired. 

It was significant of the uncertainty of those times that, in 1536, 
Othmar Nachtigall, who called himself Luscinius, took a step back- 
ward and translated Virdung’s German book into Latin as Musurgia, 
seu praxis musicae. 

In the same year, 151 1, in which Virdung had printed his work, 
Arnold Schlick, the court organist at Heidelberg, published a small 
Spiegel der Orgelmacher uh Organisten, or ‘Mirror of Organ Mak- 
ers and Players,’ the first printed monograph on the construction of 
a special instrument. 

Seventeen years after Virdung’s and Schlick’s treatises, another 




300 The History of Musical Instruments 

book on musical instruments was published by the famous Georg 
Rhaw, printer at Wittenberg. Its author was Martin Sore (1486- 
1556), a cantor at Magdeburg in Saxony, who, in the scholarly style 
of the time, called himself Martin Agricola. The book came out as 
Musica instrumentalis deudsch ; the full title, translated into Eng- 
lish, is: Musica instrumentalis in German, which comprises a 

method of learning to play on various wind instruments based on the 
art of singing, and how to play organs, harps, lutes, viols, and all 
instruments and strings according to the correct tablature.” The 
first edition was dated 1 528, the fifth and last one came out in 1545. 

Agricola’s book is based on Virdung’s treatise, but it is written in 
doggerel verse in order to be more easily memorized. For Agricola’s 
purpose is by no means scientific research $ his object is merely edu- 
cational. He says in the preface: “It must be, and in fact it is, highly 
necessary that the youths who begin to learn, be not overwhelmed 
and deterred with many superfluous words and rules, but rather 
taught by short and plain information and enticed and allured to 
study.” 

A few years after Agricola’s last edition, a Franciscan friar from 
Andalusia, Juan Bermudo, published several editions of a book en- 
titled ha declaracion de instruments (Ossuna 1549, Ossuna 1 555, 
Granada 1 555). But in spite of so promising a title, this ‘explanation’ 
is a general theory of music rather than a treatise on instruments. 

Agricola had no successor before 1618, when Praetorius published 
his fundamental work. At first sight we have the impression of a 
step backward, away from educational purposes, when we see the 
frontispiece of the new book and read the scholarly title, Syntagmatis 
Musici Michaelis Praetorii C. T omus Secundus de Organogra'phia. 
But this, too, was nothing more than a bow to humanistic education. 
The few Latin words precede a long subtitle in German which prom- 
ises the nomenclature, intonation and quality of all ancient, modern, 
barbarian, foreign, rustic, domestic, unknown and known instru- 
ments including their correct pictures, and so on. The last sentence of 
the elaborate title asserts that the book will be useful and necessary 
to organists, musicians and instrument makers, as well as to all those 
loving the Muses, and also entertaining, and pleasing to philoso- 
phers, philologists and historians. Though it is not certain whether 
this second promise has been fulfilled, the scientific and artistic part 
of the book is indeed more useful than any former book written on 
musical instruments. 

Its author was Michel Schulz or, in scholarly Latin, Michael 




The Renaissance (1400—1600) 301 

Praetorius (1571-1621) from Creuzburg (hence C.), who had 
studied in Venice with Giovanni Gabrieli. He was Kapellmeister to 
the Brunswick court at Wolfenbiittel and one of the most fertile 
German composers at the beginning of the seventeenth century. The 
Organographia is the second of three volumes that treat exhaustively 
of all branches of music: volume I, the theory} volume II, the 
instruments} volume III, the practice. 

The attitude of Praetorius is entirely different from that of Vir- 
dung and Agricola. In the preface he apologizes for having written 
this book in popularized form: please, do not believe that I wish to 
make music too vulgar and to put it at the disposal of bunglers and 
duffers by employing our German mother tongue. After all, music 
is no Rosicrucian mystery} most organ and instrument makers and 
players do not understand Latin, and it would be difficult to trans- 
late the innumerable technical terms into Latin. Praetorius wrote 
for musicians and makers, not for beginners. 

Two parts, therefore, are particularly new and interesting. The 
first is a tabella universalis, a table showing the compass of all wind 
and stringed instruments. The second is a Theatrum Instrumen- 
torum seu Sciagraphia, a woodcut supplement published two years 
later in 1620. In this the instruments in all their sizes and kinds are 
depicted on an exact scale} each page has a reduced scale in Bruns- 
wick feet, which can be compared with a foot in actual size cut on 
the first page. 

Comprehensive and reliable, the Syntagma is the standard refer- 
ence book on sixteenth century instruments. 

The last treatise to be mentioned is the section on instruments in 
the gigantic Harmonie Universelle published in 1636 and 1637 by 
Father Marin Mersenne, a friend of the philosopher Descartes. The 
title is French and so is the text. But this does not mean vulgariza- 
tion. “I know,” he writes in his preface, “that you do not follow the 
opinion of some ancient who said that science is profaned when re- 
duced to practice and use. . . .” Harmonie U niverselle is the work 
of a scientist, a mathematician, a physicist. There are no chapters, 
but propositions and corollaires, just as in mathematical treatises. 
The chief concern is the construction of instruments rather than 
their outer shape. Detailed tables indicate the gauges of wire and 
gut strings} the exact thickness of a good soundboard and the best 
position of its ribs are discussed } and all items are thoroughly illus- 
trated by excellent engravings and woodcuts. But this book, as well 
as its Latin counterpart, Harmonicorum libri (1635 and 1636), 




302 The History of Musical Instruments 

correctly belongs in a later chapter, both in its date and in its attitude. 

From these books one gathers an idea of the quantity and im- 
portance of musical instruments in the sixteenth century. Still, this 
picture is incomplete. The Renaissance, in its natural disposition to 
visual enjoyment, took a fancy to instruments as objects in them- 
selves. A viol was more than an acoustical machine to the men of 
that epoch. Without hearing its sound they were delighted by the 
elegance of its curves, by the harmony of its proportions, by the 
bright transparence of its varnish j they would have been disgusted 
to listen to a voice of perfect beauty produced by an ugly piece of 
wood. Sabba da Castiglione was a true man of his time when, writ- 
ing on instruments that “much delight the ears and animate the 
spirits,” he added, “They also greatly please the eye.” This idea is 
crystallized in a motto painted on one of the oldest preserved harpsi- 
chords, made in 1560 by Vitus de Trasuntinis: Rendo lieti in vn 
tempo gli occhi el core } “I give pleasure at once to the eyes and to 
the heart.” 

At that time the violin and most other instruments were given 
their classical shapes. Moreover, many instruments of that time were 
carefully joined, turned, carved and inlaid ; precious material was 
used — exotic woods, ivory, tortoise shell, nacre, gems; harpsichords 
and spinets were decorated by first-rate painters. Marvelous speci- 
mens are preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London 
and in the Kunsthistorische Museum, Vienna. 

Instruments were again and again depicted in art works by paint- 
ers and sculptors, and when Albrecht Durer wrote his treatise on 
perspective, he chose a lute as the object of his demonstration. The 
beauty of musical instruments has never been so much appreciated 
before or since. 

For the same reason instruments were collected by art lovers and 
preserved in special museums. Count Raymond Fugger in Augs- 
burg, for example, had, in 1566, a musiccammer with about four 
hundred costly instruments, among which there were more than a 
hundred and forty lutes and a hundred and eleven flutes. 

Inventories of such collections, or of the instruments owned for 
practical purposes by court orchestras, are highly significant. Dead 
and dusty as such enumerations might appear, they give us more 
information than any treatise. 

King Henry VIII of England left, in 1547, a collection of three 
hundred and eighty-one instruments: 




303 



The Renaissance ( 1 400-1600 ) 



78 cross flutes 
77 recorders 
30 shawms 
28 organs 
25 cromornes 
21 horns 
5 cornets 

3 combinations of organ and virginal. 



5 bagpipes 
32 virginals 
26 lutes 
25 viols 
21 guitars 
2 clavichords 



This makes a total of 272 wind instruments (72 % ) and 109 stringed 
instruments (28%). 

In 1582 the orchestra of the Berlin court possessed: 



24 flutes 
17 reed pipes 
9 cornets 
7 organs 



3 trombones 
7 viols 

4 virginals 
1 harp 



or sixty wind instruments (85%) and twelve stringed instruments 
( 15 %). 

The famous collection of the Dukes of Tyrol at the castle of 
Ambras near Innsbruck, preserved to this day and recently taken 
to Vienna to form the nucleus of the musical gallery in the Kunst- 
historische Museum, comprised more than one hundred and eighty- 
six wind instruments (79%) and only fifty stringed instruments 
(21%). 

We see that, in contrast to the following centuries, there was a 
strong prevalence of wind instruments. We also see that there was 
a surprising number of seemingly identical instruments. Musical 
instruments between 1400 and 1600 were made in families or con- 
sorts. They were often played in homogeneous groups, all parts of 
a composition being performed by instruments of the same family, 
gambas or trombones or recorders. This involved making all in- 
struments in several sizes, which, when not used, were kept together 
in one case and therefore formed a chest. 

In the fifteenth century three sizes sufficed, as most compositions 
had three parts only. The number of parts was greatly increased 
during the sixteenth century. In consequence, the lower limit of 
medieval music, G, did not allow a sufficient range, and the makers 
faced the difficult problem of constructing basses and contrabasses. 
Consorts became so large that Praetorius could record ein Accor t 




304 The History of Musical Instruments 

oder Stimmwerk of eight recorders, from a gar klein exilent to a 
Grofi Bass. 

THE ORGAN, the truest mirror of the new attitude towards 
musical instruments, may suitably be the first to be described in this 
chapter. The slow pace at which it had evolved in the earlier middle 
ages became tremendously accelerated between the years 1400 and 
1600, possibly owing to the polyphonic playing on keyboard instru- 
ments that we can trace back to the fourteenth century. In 1441, the 
largest pipe at Salem in Southwest Germany was four spans wide 
(or ten inches in diameter), and twenty-eight feet highj its tone 
must have been underneath the lowest string of the modern piano. 
Ten years later the organ of the chapel in the castle at Blois in 
France had pipes wide enough to let a man crawl through. This 
organ, as well as the organ in the cathedral at Barcelona which was 
made at the same time, had no less than fourteen hundred pipes ; 
even earlier, in 1429, the cathedral at Amiens in France had twenty- 
five hundred pipes. 

An organ with two manuals (or hand keyboards) existed already 
in 1386 at Rouen in Normandy. The rule was from thirty-five to 
forty-seven keys in one manual, starting on /, B> F } or B 1 . From 
the fifteenth century on both manuals could be coupled to be 
played together. The coupling device connected the two manuals so 
that pressure on a key in one board acted upon the corresponding 
key in the other board as well. 

The *pedal keyboard, too, seems to have been invented in the 
fourteenth century, either in Flanders or in Germany. At the same 
time, the pipe work underwent a decisive change. 

In the middle ages large organs had had several pipes on each 
key in order to enrich the timbre. Sometimes as many as twenty 
pipes answered the pressure of a keyj these were tuned in unison 
(8 foot), in the octave (4 foot), twelfth (2% foot), double octave 
(2 foot) and so on. The pipes were arranged in cross-rows, one row 
comprising all octave, all twelfth, or all double octave pipes. (Organ 
builders designate the pitch of a set of pipes by the length in feet of 
the pipe answering the great C keyj 8' is normal, that means, the 
answering note is C; 4' is an octave higher, the answering note being 
small cf ; 1 6' an octave lower, the answering note being C 1 .) The 
medieval organ was, in modern terminology, a mixture or furniture. 
Like the mixtures in our organs, the medieval organ invariably 
sounded as a compound which, when several chords were played, 




Hans Mending , Altar for Najera , Museum in Antwerp ( late 15th century ), with 
zither , trumscheit, lute , trumpets , ohoe } portative , harp and fiddle. 



PLATE XVIII. 





The Renaissance (1400—1600) 30 5 

formed dissonances and frictions and gave the organ a jangling 
sound. 

Apparently at the end of the fourteenth century, solo stops began 
to be added — that is, rows of pipes, each row imitating the timbre of 
a certain wind instrument and contrasting with the neutral color of 
the ■principals or diapasons which composed the mixture. The origi- 
nal compound part of the organ was then called by the names that 
we often find in ancient organ music, plein jeu in French, and organo 
lleno in Spanish. It became necessary, with the addition of solo stops, 
to devise a contrivance connecting or disconnecting at will now one 
of the solo stops, now the old compound. It consisted in a slider pro- 
jecting from the case which, when pulled out, admitted the wind to 
one complete row of pipes. Such a contrivance was called a stop in 
English, and the same name was also given to the row of pipes that 
it connected. 

The first solo stop was the flute, which is wider or, as organ build- 
ers say, has a larger scale (diameter in relation to height) than the 
principals. As late as 1513 the organ of Saint-Sauveur at Aix-en- 
Provence, a very old-fashioned organ for its time, had only a single 
flute stop contrasted to a plein jeu of principal, octave, double octave, 
nineteenth and triple octave. 

The great change in organ building at the time of the introduc- 
tion of solo stops was due to a change in the style of music and in 
the role that the organ played in it. The new polyphony introduced 
by Okeghem and culminating in Palestrina needed more transpar- 
ence. Solo stops had to be inserted to counterbalance the compound 
stops with their antipolyphonic fifths and even thirds. It was these 
new stops that gave the organ the quality which today seems to be 
its distinctive feature: the contrast and mixture of different timbres. 
As late as 15 1 1, Arnold Schlick writes: “It is good to have the stops 
isolated, so that the organist may use them one after another, as he 
likes.” (Auch ist gut die register all ab zu ziehen, das der organist 
gleich register allein eins nach dem andern horn mag lassen , wie ym 
oder andern geliept .) “Besides it is rather pleasant to hear two stops 
together, as cymbals with diapasons.” (Dan fast lustig zu horn etvoan 
zvoey register zu sammen, als die zymmeln zii den principaln.) This 
combination and contrast of timbres which today we take for granted 
was a new discovery of the sixteenth century. 

Two years before, in 15 11, Arnold Schlick had published a plan 
of viij. oder ix gut register, “of eight or nine good stops which would 
delight the ear, if well combined and alternated”: 




306 The History of Musical Instruments 



Manual 


Pedal 


Diapason 8' 


Diapason 


Octave 4' 


Octave 


Gemshorn 4' 


Trumpet or Trombone 


Cymbal 

Hintersatz 


Hintersatz 


Reed stop 

Xylophone 

(Flute) 





Hintersatz or ‘rear set/ as opposed to prestant or ‘front set/ was a 
furniture with sixteen or eighteen pipes on each key, which was 
penetrating but not too strident. 

While, as late as 1475, the organ of the Dom at Bamberg had 
been given a compass from A to /" only, Schlick’s organ had twenty- 
four keys from F to a " in the manual, and twelve keys from F to cf 
in the pedal, plus the semitonia. This must not be taken too literally, 
however. The organists distinguished between large and small 
organs. ‘Large’ organs were tuned a fifth lower. As Schlick says 
that the F pipe was six and a half Rhenish feet long (or 2041 milli- 
meters), the corresponding a ' pipe must have produced either 337 
vibrations in a large organ, or 504 vibrations in a small organ. In 
the Halberstadt Dom organ, built in 1361, a' had 506 vibrations. 
Compared with modern pitch, ct corresponded to a note between 
e? and f in a large organ, and between b' and c" > in a small organ. 
As organs were not equal-tempered (although Schlick attempted to 
make them so), the organists could not transpose at will according 
to the individual voices they had to accompany j ‘large’ and ‘small’ 
keyboards allowed them at least to transpose according to the gen- 
eral ranges of the singers’ voices. 

Flemish and German organ builders were the first to pass from 
the simple liturgical mixture organ to the new organ with solo stops. 
At the end of the fifteenth century they introduced stopped diapasons 
(the pipes having the upper ends closed by caps so that their timbre 
was soft and hollow), tapering pipes such as Gemshorn , reed stops 
(the French trompes of that time were flue pipes in spite of their 
name), the pulsating Tremulant (Hagenau 1491) and the pedal 
keyboard with stops of its own ( 1 390-1 400). The rich and sonorous 
pedal and the penetrating furnitures and cymbals constituted the 
main departures from the French organ of that time. (figs. 84, 85) 

Spanish organs also had only flue stops j the pedal, which in most 
cases had no more than seven or eight keys in diatonic succession, was 




The Renaissance ( 1400-1600 ) 



307 



\ 





figure 84. Wooden flue-pipe. 

R body, a foot, b cap, c block, 
d flue, e toplip, / mouth, k wind 
way. 




figure 85. Reed pipe. 

a tuning spring, b block, c wedge, 
d vibrating tongue, c weight, f boot 
or socket, g shank, h shalet, i sec- 
tion of a reed. 



generally neglected. English and Italian organs remained in a fif- 
teenth century style. They usually had no solo stop except for a 
flute and were entirely built on the basis of principal and mixture. 
Italians did not even care for inventing special names $ they used 
principals — wider in size and softer in tone than the German ones — 
and above them, octave and fifth stops that they called 8a, 12a, 15a, 
19a, 22a, 26a, 29a, 33a and 36a — that is, in our terminology, 8', 
5%', 4', 2%', 2', lYa', T, Registers with stopped pipes were 

not used, and reeds only rarely. 




308 The History of Musical Instruments 

All countries liked foolish contrivances, though serious organists 
disapproved of them. Bells and jingles on rotating wheels were the 
most acceptable of these humorous stops. As Zymbelstern in Ger- 
man and cascabeles in Spanish, they were used up to the nineteenth 
century. The organ at the Dom in Magdeburg, built in 1604, had no 
less than forty-two carved Figuren, such as a crowing cock, twelve 
of which moved by machines. In an organ erected at about 1500, so 
Schlick tells us, there was the figure of a monk in the lower part of 
the organ case, falling out of a window and jumping back again. 

REGALS were small reed organs. Their pipes were shaped like 
cylindrical beaks of clarinets ; the beating reeds were made of metal. 
In the inventories of the sixteenth century they were mentioned as 
One faire of single Regalles or as A faire of double Regalles. The 
word faire is misleading since it meant simply a whole set, in this 
case a set of individual pipes forming one organ. Single and double 
referred to the contemporaneous use of doubling the letter which 
indicated a certain note when the lower limit in medieval music, 
gammarut or G, was exceeded. Thus, a Single Regal did not descend 
beyond G, whereas the Double Regal ended in the octave of double 
letters. The name regal can be traced back through English rigol 
to French rigole , or ‘trough/ on account of the shape of the pipe. 

It seems, however, that regal was not yet applied exclusively to 
the reed organ. It must also have meant what later was called a 
fositive organ. In a source like Henry VIII’s inventory of 1547, 
this latter word does not occur; except for one faire of fortatives y 
all chamber organs are designated as regals. On the other hand, one 
item of this inventory runs: One faire of single Regalles with iiii 
Stoffes of fifeSy of woode vernisshed yellowe and fainted with 
blacke anticke woorke standinge uffon a foote of wainscott the 
Bellowes lieing in the same: it hat he but one Stoffe of fifes of 
woode a Cimball of Tinne and a Re gall. 

In modern words this regal had a stop of wooden flue pipes, a 
cymbal stop of tin, which according to Praetorius was a furniture 
with two pipes on each key, and a ‘regal.’ This arrangement is cor- 
roborated by the preceding item: One faire of single Regalles with 
two Stoffes of fifes of timbre and one Stoffe of fifes of Tinne 
. . . the same hathe but one Stoffe of fifes of woode the Regall of 
f afire and hathe a Cimball. Here again a regal is a stop within a 
regal; the word meant a reed stop, as well as a chamber organ with 
different stops. 




The Renaissance (1400—1600) 309 

The origin of the regal, or reed organ, is obscure. We know it 
existed in the time of the German Emperor Maximilian I, who died 
in 1519. The engraver Conrad Weiditz has depicted the famous 
composer Paulus Hoffhaimer accompanying the Emperor’s choir 
on a special kind of regal, the pipes of which had globular resonating 
caps. A hundred years later, Michael Praetorius pictured the same 
instrument on one of the woodcuts in his Syntagma musicum and 
calls it Kopfliin-Regal; according to his words, the tone was gut und 
lieblichy ‘good and lovable.’ 

Generally, however, the sound of a regal was rather reedy and 




harsh, so that musicians in Bach’s time abandoned it because of its 
eckelhafften, ‘loathsome,’ tone as Bach’s friend, Johann Mattheson, 
said. 

The prevalent kind of regal was the Bavarian bible-regal which, 
when it was folded up and packed into the book-shaped bellows, 
looked like a large bible. (fig. 86) 

THE RECORDERS formed the leading group among the 
flutes. The German name Blockflvte expressed its nature as a beaked 
whistle flute, the upper end of which was stopped by a block or plug 
that left only a narrow flue to lead the breath towards the sharp edge 
of a mouth-hole in the side. The bore tapered toward the lower 
end, the diameters at the upper and lower end being in the ratio 5 : 3. 
Because of this shape, as well as because of the absence of a bell, 
the recorder had a pale tone which is reflected in its names, Italian 
flauto dolce y French flute douce; the English term recorder , from 
the obsolete record , ‘warble,’ compares it to a singing bird. An en- 
semble of recorders was unsurpassed in dignity and reserve. 

We do not know where the recorder originated. Its first evidence 
is in a French miniature of the eleventh century. Up to the seven- 



310 The History of Musical Instruments 

teenth century it was made in one piece and turned in a very simple 
profile ; it had one high dorsal fingerhole and seven front holes, the 
lowest of which was duplicated to accommodate either right- or left- 
handed players; the unused hole was kept stopped with wax. 

As early as the beginning of the sixteenth century the recorder 
was made in whole consorts; in King Henry’s inventory of 1547, 
one item among others quotes viii Recorders greate and smale in a 
Case couered with blacke heather and lined with clothe. That the 
family comprised already bass, if not double bass, recorders, is con- 
firmed by the following item: One greate base Recorder of woode in 
a case of woode. (fig. 87) 

It is, however, erroneous to conclude that those eight recorders, 
or even the ix Recorders of woode in a later item, all differed from 
each other. From Virdung (1511) we learn that, if a case held six 
recorders, two of them were trebles, two alto-tenors, two basses; and 
we are informed that the two instruments of each pair differed in 
pitch by one note as do our C and Bf> clarinets and, like these, were 
alternately used according to the tonality of the composition. The 
ideal consort of recorders that Michael Praetorius outlines in his 
Syntagma musicum (1618), comprises twenty-one instruments, but 
only seven sizes, each of which has two different pitches. These 
seven sizes are: 



Size 


Length 


Lowest note 


Exilent 


c. 9 in. 


f 


Treble 


c. 12 in. 


c" 


Alto 


c. 17 in. 


r 


Tenor 


c. 24 in. 


c' 


Basset 


c. 38 in. 


f 


Bass 


c. 60 in. 


B b 


Double bass 


c. 80 in. 


F 



Bass and double bass were blown through a brass crook like that 
used on a bassoon. Basset, bass and double bass had an open key for 
the lowest hole. (fig. 88) 

The o^en key } first recorded in a Netherlandish source in 1413, 
was for the purpose of closing a fingerhole too distant from the oth- 
ers. In larger instruments it was impossible to reach the lowest finger- 
hole, as the little finger was too short. Therefore, a longitudinal 
brass lever with a padded cap at its lower end was so arranged that 
the upper end of the lever was within the reach of the little finger, 
and the cap stood above the hole without covering it. When the 




jj2 The History of Musical Instruments 

finger pressed the upper end of the lever , the cap went down and 
closed the hole} when the finger was lifted, a spring drew back the 
cap and the hole was again open. A bulging wooden cylinder slipped 
on over the top of the instrument, fitting over the key to protect it. 

In the seventeenth century closed keys were used along with 
open keys, for a different purpose — that is, to add supplementary 
holes for chromatic notes without disordering the normal arrange- 
ment of holes and fingers. The padded cap at the end of a lever kept 
the hole closed} it was opened when the finger pressed the lever 
down. 

THE ONE-HANDED FLUTE, best known under its French 
and Provencal names flutet and galoubet, was a recorder with a bore 
so narrow that no fundamentals could be obtained} normal soft 
playing produced the higher octave, and overblowing the fifth above. 
Consequently, the fingerholes had to fill up the distance of only a 
fifth instead of the usual octave. Three holes sufficed — two in front 
and one behind — with cross-fingering and an occasional half-stopping 
of the open end. These few holes required only one hand. The 
player’s other hand was free to play some second instrument: either 
a drum — the small tabor in England, or the large tambour in in 
Provence — or a longitudinal zither with thick gut strings tuned to 
tonic and dominant, such as the tambourin du Bearn in South France 
and the altobasso in North Italy. Tabor and pipe, as the English call 
the one-handed drum combined with a small drum, are depicted in 
miniatures beginning in the thirteenth century} the combination of 
a one-handed flute and a drone zither is figured on Filippino Lippi’s 
fresco of the Ascension in Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome 
(1489). 

As early as the end of the fifteenth century Italian painters de- 
picted two different sizes of one-handed flutes, and at the end of the 
sixteenth century Germans and Italians also used larger basses with 
a bassoonlike crook. Michael Praetorius mentions the same three 
sizes and depicts them: 

Treble 20 in. d " 

Tenor 26 in. g' 

Bass 30 in. c' 

The one-handed flute still exists in southern France and among 
the Basques of both Spain and France. It has been revived in Eng- 
land with the renascence of the old folk dances, (fig. 89) 




The Renaissance ( 1400—1600 ) 



3 13 



FLAGEOLET, a term derived from a late Latin word, was, in 
the middle ages, a French name for certain flutes ; the poet Eustache 
Deschamps, in the fourteenth century, praised les doulx flajolez 
ressonans. The old name was revived when, about 1581, Juvigny in 
Paris constructed a small, narrow recorder with six holes — four in 
front, and two in the back for the two thumbs. The instrument is 
seldom mentioned ; yet, the great number of specimens preserved in 
museums proves its popularity. In the eighteenth century, at least, 



figure 90. Large 
English flageolet. 





figure 91. English 
double flageolet. 



it was important even in art music ; called flautino or flauto -piccolo , 
it performed the highest part in the orchestra, which later was given 
to the octave cross flute. 

After about 1750, the recorderlike beak was replaced by a nozzle 
of bone as a mouthpiece leading into a bulging chamber which en- 
closed a sponge to absorb the saliva. 

One must be careful to distinguish between this French flageolet 
and the so-called English flageolet . The latter, an amateur instru- 
ment of the first quarter of the nineteenth century, was likewise con- 
structed with a nozzle and a sponge, but had the hole arrangement 

of the recorder, (fig. 90) . 

Both the French and the English flageolet were made either as 

single or as double instruments — that is, one mouthpiece leading to 




314 The History of Musical Instruments 

two tubes to play chords. The English double flageolet had a shutter 
in order to deaden one of the tubes when required, (fig. 91 ) 

THE TRANSVERSE FLUTE was one of the few cylindrical 
instruments, as it is today, although for two hundred years beginning 
in the seventeenth century its bore was conical. Since it was made in 
one piece, it could not be tuned by being pulled out like later flutes. 
Therefore it was made in different pitches, and this may explain the 
astonishing number of transverse flutes that we find in the inven- 
tories of some court orchestras — thirty-five, for example, in Stutt- 
gart in 1576. This is the more probable as, according to Praetorius, a 
whole consort consisted only of: 

two trebles c. 20 in. long (o') 

four alto-tenors c. 30 in. long ( d ') 

two basses c. 45 in. long ( g ) 

The alto-tenor, in this set, corresponds to the normal modern flute j 
Praetorius already states that it can be used for playing a soprano 
part. 

The first mention of a complete family of transverse flutes is in 
Agricola’s Musica deudsch , while, in 1511, Virdung speaks of a 
military fife only, not of transverse flutes for artistic purposes. This 
fife is the Schzveizer Pfeiff , or ‘Swiss fife,’ that a hundred years later 
Praetorius describes as having a length of two feet and a range of 
either g' to c z or c%’ to a%”. Its bore was cylindrical, too, but narrower, 
to produce the higher notes, and the tone was much coarser. 

THE SHAWMS of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, called 
bombardes in French and fommern in German, had a bore that was 
narrow and very slightly conical and, like all reed pipes of that 
time, a double (oboe) reed. Six fingerholes formed two groups of 
three j a seventh one was provided with an open key which lay in- 
side a protective cylinder. The family comprised: 



Small discant 


c. 21 


in. long 


(n 


Discant 


c. 24 


in. long 


on 


Small alto 


c. 30 


in. long 


(g ) 


Big alto ( nicolo ) 


c. 36 


in. long 


l c ) 


Tenor 


c. 52 


in. long 


(G) 


Bass 


C.75 


in. long 


( c ) 


Double Bass 


c. 100 in. long 


(n 



In 1376, Jean Lefevre de Ressons designated the grosses bom- 
bar des as nouvelles. (pi. XVIII a, fig. 92) 




The Renaissance (j 400-1600) 315 

The bassanello was a shawm with an even narrower, slightly 
conical bore. The instrument appeared to have a bell, but it was a 
false one as the small bore continued to the end of it. There were 
six front holes and an open key for the small finger under a pro- 
tective cylinder j a brass crook held the reed. The timbre was a little 
softer than that of ordinary shawms. Bassanelli were built in three 
sizes : 



Treble c. 32 in. long ( d ) 

Alto-tenor c. 45 in. long ( G ) 

Bass c. 64 in. long (C ) 

No specimen has been preserved. 

The instrument is mentioned for the first time in 1577, when the 
estate of the deceased Archduke Karl of Austria was inventoried j the 
last evidence is in Michael Praetorius’s Syntagma of 1618-1620. In 
speaking of the instrument, Practorius affirms that its name is de- 
rived from the Venetian composer, Bassano. This is not likely. The 
first-known date in Bassano’s life is only 1585 — that is, eight years 
after the earliest mention of bassanelli outside Italy. Moreover, 
inventors’ names were rarely given to instruments before the nine- 
teenth century. 

THE BASSOON is a slightly conical double-reed instrument, 
the tube of which is bent back on itself like a hairpin, first descend- 
ing and then ascending. A brass crook containing the reed projects 
at right angles from the upper end of the tube. 

In the sixteenth century both channels were bored out of the same 
long block of wood; only a brass crook containing the reed for one 
channel, and a narrow bell for the other channel, projected at the 
top. In the seventeenth century the long, thick piece shrank to what 
is called the butt y in which the U-shaped knee is bored ; inserted into 
the butt, two separate tubes — the wing and the long joint — com- 
prised the descending and the ascending channel, exactly as in the 
modern form of the bassoon, (figs. 93, 94, 95) 

The compressed, narrow tone of the bassoon is derived from the 
prevalence of the third partial. 

The earliest reliable reference to this instrument is in an English 
private inventory from 1574, where it is called curtal. But it was 
older; for, a famous bassoon maker, Siegmund Schnitzer, died 
at Niirnberg in 1578, and in the same year Philip van Ranst, musi- 
cian to the court of Brussels, was appointed player of the new instru- 




The Renaissance (1400—1600) 317 

ment. Thus, it may have originated about the middle of the six- 
teenth century. 

At about 1600 the family consisted of the following five sizes: 

Treble c. i'3" high 

Alto c. 1 '6" high 

Tenor c. 2'3"high (G ) 

Rechter or Choristfagott c. 2'?" high (C ) 

Bass c. 4/9" high (F t ) 

Both tenor and chorist fagott were made either open or gedackt. 
But though this latter word meant ‘stopped,* they were only covered 
with a kind of sieve, which was supposed to muffle the tone without 
lowering it. 

According to Michael Praetorius, Hans Schreiber, musician to 
the electoral court in Berlin, was constructing a fagotcontra with C x 
as lowest note in 1618. “If he is successful, it will be a marvellous 
instrument never seen before.” This was the earliest double bassoon. 
(fig. 96 ) 

The bassoon had a different name in every language. The Italian 
jagotto or ‘fagot* was translated into German as fagott; the Italian 
bassone or ‘big bass’ led to English bassoon and Spanish bajon. 
Praetorius mentions that the English call the tenor bassoon a singel 
cortholy and the ordinary bassoon a doffel corthol. In usual spell- 
ing this is the British word curtall y which derives from Low German 
kortholt or ‘short wood* and signifies an instrument shortened be- 
cause of its folded tube. A last family of names comprises such terms 
as dolciany doucine y dulzian. This word occurs as early as the middle 
ages; apparently every soft-voiced instrument with a double reed 
could be given this name. 

Smaller bassoons were built as late as the early nineteenth century. 
The older scores of Joseph Haydn’s Stabat Mater (1771) demand 
(tenor) fagotti in E\) with B\) as the lowest note; Heinrich Grenser 
in Dresden made bassoons in the upper octave of the ordinary bas- 
soon about 18 io; and, by 1820, Lazarus in London had constructed 
a similar model under the name tenoroon. 

An A bassoon, a minor third under the normal bassoon, is included 
in Johann Sebastian Bach’s cantata no. 150 ( Nach dir y Herr y ver- 
langet mich). 

The sordone was a cylindrical bassoon, the channel of which ran 
down and up two or three times within the same piece of wood and 
ended in a lateral hole. The sound was soft and muffled; hence came 




The Renaissance (/^oo- 1600) 319 

the names (mostly used in the plural forms) : Italian sordoni y from 
sordo ‘deaf,’ German sordune (incorrectly sordunen) y French sour- 
dines. They were built in five sizes: 

Treble (Bb ) 

Alto (£b ) 

Tenor (C ) 

Bass 87 cm high (Z?bi ) 

Double bass 90 cm high (F 1 ) 

The instrument must have been extremely rare; the only four 
preserved specimens, two basses and two double basses, the same 
which were mentioned in an inventory of the Archdukes of Tyrol in 
1596, belong to the Kunsthistorische Museum in Vienna (no. 226- 
229). (fig. 97) 

RANKETS or rackets , from Upper German rank , ‘to and fro/ 
in French cervelas y ‘sausages/ were short, thick cylinders of solid 





figure 99. Ranket (del. C. Manger). 



wood or ivory pierced lengthwise by many cylindrical channels all 
of the same size. The channels were arranged in a circle with one in 
the center, and each was connected with one neighbor at the top and 
another one at the bottom, so that they formed a continuous cylindri- 
cal tube. A cup called firouette in French was inserted in the central 
channel, concealing the lower part of the reed and supporting the 
player’s lips. Holes involving a complicated fingering were cut in 
the walls of the cylinder. The sound was muffled and reedy. Five 
sizes were built: 



320 The History of Musical Instruments 



Treble 


V2' high 


0 ) 


Alto 


%' high 


(G) 


Tenor 


T high 


(C) 


Bass 


1 high 


(^1) 


Double bass 


1 %' high 


(Ci) 



Rankets first were mentioned in Austria in the beginning of the 
sixteenth century, and the last evidence of this kind of rankets may 
be found in Mersenne’s Harmonie Universelley 1636. 

A slightly different form was made in the seventeenth and in the 
first years of the eighteenth century. The diameters of the channels 
were unequal j the tube as a whole became conical. The narrowest 
channel formed the mouth end of the tube and was provided with 
a bassoon crook. The widest channel, which was in the center, wore 
the bell of a bassoon. Thus the term ranket-bassoon would be ap- 
propriate for this instrument, (figs. 98, 99) 

CROMORNE. Besides the double-reed instruments already dis- 
cussed, instruments existed in which the reed was concealed in a 
wooden cap put over the top of the pipe and acting as a windchest. 
The player was able to blow into it through a small opening in its 
top or side, but he could not touch the reed itself. Thus the reed, 
like the reed pipe of an organ, was set into vibration by indirect wind 
pressure, and the tone could not be modified either by the varying 
pressure of the lips or by the power of the lungs. 

The notes persisted in uniform force and quality, and overblow- 
ing into higher octaves was not possible. 

The reader met such wind caps on page 212 in combination with 
a family of oriental reed pipes, the two ends of which were covered 
with caps of ox horn, the one at the outer end serving as a bell and 
the other as a cap to conceal the reed. Members of this widely 
scattered family were found along the sea route from the Indian 
Ocean to the Atlantic. 

There were similar folk instruments in southern and western 
Europe, the history of which is not clear. Apparently wind-cap 
instruments were first introduced to art music in the fifteenth cen- 
tury. 

The cromorne was the oldest European instrument with a wind 
cap. It was a slender cylindrical oboe ending in a curve that was 
reminiscent of the folk instrument with an ox horn. This explains 
the original German name krummhorn> or ‘curved horn/ which 
was adapted to English and French as cromorne. Since the bore was 





Ham Baldung, woman with viol , 
in the Pinakothek } M iinchen. 



The Renaissance (i 400-1600) 321 

almost entirely cylindrical, the timbre was softer and darker than 
the tone of the oboe, and this was probably why the French were 
inclined to transform the name cromorne into cor morne , or ‘mourn- 
ful horn.’ As no overblowing was possible, the range was limited by 




the number of fingerholes, seven in front and one at the back. (fig. 
100) 

Five sizes were made: 

Exilent c. 1 3 inches long (c' ) 

Treble c. 1 6 inches long (g ) 

Alto c. 23 inches long ( c ) 

Tenor c. 32 inches long (G ) 

Bass c. 39 inches long (C ) 

Double bass c. 48 inches long (F x ) 





322 The History of Musical Instruments 

The term ‘krummhorn’ is first mentioned in Dresden in 1489 as 
an organ stop, indicating the prior existence of the instrument. In 
1510 the Venetian painter Carpaccio depicted an angel with a 
cromorne in his “Presentation in the Temple” (now in the Academy 
in Venice). The instrument had a lifetime of about one hundred and 
fifty years onlyj it is last mentioned in 1617, when Johann Her- 
mann Schein, the Saxon composer, published a pavan for four cro- 
mornes. (pi. XIX c) 

Curiously enough, the history of the cromorne had a postlude in 
France. About 1650 it was included in the band of the Grandes 
E curies at Versailles, and the best makers competed in manufactur- 
ing it. This, however, was no longer the slim cromorne with its soft 
sound, but a heavy outdoor instrument with a bore as much as two 
inches wide, a leather cover and a bassoon crook without a reed- 
concealing cap. Its name was tournebout ‘turned end.’ 

SCHRYARI were loud, shrill, double-reed instruments with a 
tapering bore and a reed-concealing cap ; they had seven fingerholes 
in front and two in back for the two thumbs. Praetorius describes 
and depicts three sizes: 

Treble c. 9 in. long ( g ) 

Alto-tenor c. 17 in. long ( c ) 

Bass c. 26 in. long ( F ) 

Bass and alto-tenor had two keys at the same height above the regu- 

lar fingerholes, one in the front and one in the back, to enlarge the 
range upward. Alto and tenor differed in the upper limits of their 
compasses: the first ended on /', the second on d'. No specimens have 
been preserved. 

The oldest evidence of schryari is in a 1540 inventory of the 
municipal band of Augsburg in Bavaria j the last reference to them 
is made in 1686 in an inventory of the court orchestra of Branden- 
burg-Ansbach. All mention of them is in German sources. 

There is evidence, however, that the instrument came to Germany 
from the Mediterranean. The two upper keys of the schryari were 
the characteristic feature of the Italian folk oboe calandrone. Also in 
1541 the trumpet maker Jorg Neuschel in Niirnberg wrote to 
Duke Albrecht of Prussia to offer him some schreyende ffeifien that 
he had received from Lyons and Venice with other instruments. 
These two ports point to an oriental provenance. Following this 
indication we find that there was an oboe with a tapering bore and 




The Renaissance ( 1400—1600 ) 323 

seven front-holes in Turkey in the ninth century ; also there is a 
modern Japanese oboe hichiriki which, like the treble schryari, is 
nine inches long, has a tapering bore and seven front-holes. 

The etymology of the name seems to confirm the oriental origin 
of the instrument. Praetorius lists it as schryari ( auf deutsch Schreier- 
pfeiffen). Obviously schryari was not a German word, and probably 
it is not even an Italian word adapted into German. If this had been 
the case, Praetorius, who was familiar with Italian, would have 
written it in a correct Italian spelling and form. It is more likely to 
think of an originally oriental name based on the same root, sr, that 
we have found in other names for wind instruments, masrokita and 
syrinx. 

RAUSCHPFEIFEN were a German family of oboes with a 
narrow bore, a hole in the back, seven front-holes with the lowest 
duplicated for the right or the left little finger, a small bell and a 
cap concealing the reed. The only six specimens preserved, made in 
the second half of the sixteenth century, are in the Berlin Museum 
of Musical Instruments. They form a consort of 

two trebles 42 cm long (<?') 
two tenors 54 cm long (c') 
two basses 86 cm long 

Players of rauschpfeifen were depicted in Hans Burgkmair’s en- 
graving, T riumphzug Kaiser Maximilian’s (1518). 

The German name was a High German transformation of Middle 
Low German rus , ‘reed.’ It has survived in an organ stop rausch- 
quinte , producing the twelfth and the double octave of the pressed 
key. A treble rauschpfeife was known in France in the seventeenth 
century and called hauthois du Poitou. 

THE CORNET OR ZINK. A short animal horn with a few 
fingerholes occurs in medieval Persia at a time directly after the 
dynasty of the Sassanids — that is, about 700 A.D. ; it is represented 
on a silver dish of that period. Even today shepherds use a similar 
primitive horn in Finland, Esthonia, Sweden, Norway and Jugo- 
slavia and also among the Bongo in the eastern Sudan. 

Later, in European art music, the rough horn of an animal was 
replaced by a wooden or ivory tube. This became the curved cornet , 
in French cornet a bouquin } in German Krummer Zink. Miniatures 
depict it as early as the tenth century} did it come from Byzantium? 
In the twelfth century the outside of the tube was already octagonal 




324 The History of Musical Instruments 

in cross section as in its classical form. A smaller cornet was called 
cornettino or Kleinzink. On the other hand, the sixteenth century 
had a large cornet, cornon or corno torto y in German Grosszink y in 
the shape of a stretched out S: 

cornettino ( e ') 
cornetto (0 ) 

cornone ( d ) 

The curved piece of wood of which the cornet was made was slit 
lengthwise; the two halves were hollowed and then again glued 
together and held in position with a leather coat, which often was 
nicely engraved, (figs. 101, 102) 

A less frequent type of cornet was the cornetto diritto or Gerader 
Zink y ‘straight cornet/ whose cup-shaped mouthpiece instead of be- 
ing inserted in the upper end was hollowed out of it. This cornet 
had a softer sound ; Italians, therefore, called it the cornetto muto y 
and Germans Stiller Zink. Since it was harder to blow, it did not 
survive the beginning of the seventeenth century and was not even 
mentioned by Mersenne in his Harmonie Universelle (1636). 
(fig- 103) 

The sound of both cornets was less brilliant than the tone of the 
trumpet, as the tube was short, conical, relatively wide and more 
rigid than the thin metal of brass instruments. This lack of brassy 
brilliancy or, acoustically speaking, of high harmonics, gave the cor- 
net a distinctness and precision which enabled it to support the human 
voice or to supplant it better than any other instrument. Mersenne 
tells us that good cornettists could blow eighty measures in one 
breath and adorned their melodies with all the graces in which sing- 
ers excelled. A hornlike tone was despised. 

Nevertheless “the labor of the lips is too great,” as Roger North 
( 1:653— 1734) says. The golden age of cornet playing came to an 
end when, after 1600, the thorough-bass style disposed of the old 
polyphony in which the cornet had often played the treble, and gave 
the first role to the violin. For some decades, German pieces were 
printed with the indication, “for violin or cornet,” ad libitum. But 
in Johann Gottfried Walther’s Musicalisches Lexicon y published in 
1732, the instrument was nearly forgotten; an article Cornetto is 
entirely copied from Praetorius who had written more than one hun- 
dred years before, and there is no heading Zink. Still some German 
town bands kept it during the eighteenth century, and Johann Se- 
bastian Bach had the municipal cornettists accompany the choral of 





figure 102. Tenor cornet. 



the boys in several of his cantatas. A few old-fashioned town musi- 
cians played the zink as late as the first years of the nineteenth cen- 
tury. 

An offshoot of the cornet, the serpent, will be discussed in a later 
chapter. 

THE TROMBONE is narrower and generally longer than the 
trumpet. Two parallel tubes are held several inches apart by a 
bridge. A third, U-shaped tube — the slide — connects the lower ends 
of the two parallel pieces, fitting over them for several feet, so that 




326 The History of Musical Instruments 

it can be pulled out and in without being disconnected. The end of 
the second tube turns forward, spreading to form the bell. 

By constant use of the slide, the player changes the actual length 
of the tube and alters the note as well as its overblown tones. He is 
able to play any note. 

The trombone originated from the trumpet in the fifteenth cen- 
tury, as the names indicate j trombone , in Italian, is the augmenta- 
tive form of tromba y and German posenne, the equivalent of Middle 
High German busune , is the augmentative form of busine. The 
English name sackbut is derived from a French word used in the 
fifteenth century: sacqueboute y ‘pull-push.’ 

The first pictorial evidence of a trombone is on a painting of the 
Italian Matteo di Giovanni, who died in 1495, in the National Gal- 
lery, London. 

The earlier trombone had thicker walls, and the bell expanded 
less than ours. Therefore, its sound was softer and more appropriate 
for playing in small ensembles together with stringed instruments 
or pipes. 

At the end of the sixteenth century the family of trombones com- 
prised : 

Alto : lowest natural note /, with the slide drawn out, B 
Tenor: lowest natural note B\), with the slide drawn out, E 
Bass: lowest natural note E\) y with the slide drawn out, A 

A to f felt fusaunen y ‘double trombone,’ mentioned in a Bavarian 
document of 1581, was not an octave trombone j here, as well as in 
the case of the double bassoon, double means simply descending 
beyond G, as did the ordinary bass trombone. Trombones an octave 
below the tenor trombone were not mentioned before Praetorius, 
1618. He speaks of a ‘false’ one, being merely a bass with additional 
crooks, and a real one, made “four years ago” by Hans Schreiber, 
the inventor of the contrafagotto, with a tube twice as long as the 
tube of the tenor trombone, (fig. 104) 

A treble trombone , an octave above the tenor trombone, was only 
added in the latter part of the seventeenth century, but it was as rare 
as the octave trombone. 

In the second half of the nineteenth century the alto also became 
rare and was given up, except in a few bands. On the other hand, 
new attempts towards a contrabass trombone were made in England, 
France and Germany. The successful model, proposed in 1816 by 
Gottfried Weber, was a double slide trombone. The tube was folded 




The Renaissance (i 400-1600) 



327 




figure 104. Double- 
bass trombone ( 1 6th 
century). 





figure 105. Trumpet 
( 1 6th century). 



to present a double tubing exactly the shape and size of the tenor 
trombone pulling the slide to a normal position, the player ex- 
tended four branches instead of two and lowered the tone twice as 
much. 

Again, the true bass trombone, needing a rather long arm, is 
replaced by a tenor-bass in many bands — that is, by a tenor trombone 
with a valve to throw the instrument a fourth lower. 




328 The History of Musical Instruments 

TRUMPETS. A figure on a carved choir seat in Worcester 
cathedral (c. 1400) is the earliest evidence of a trumpet folded into 
a narrow S form. The folded shape was more convenient for carry- 
ing. It was probably introduced from the Orient ; it appeared in 
England at about the same time as on Persian miniatures. Not much 
later, in the first third of the fifteenth century, the two curves of 
the S were superposed in the modern fashion. The trumpet did not 
change much after about 1500J it resembled the modern trumpet 
except for the narrower bell, the thicker metal and the heavier 
mouthpiece, which all contributed to produce a considerably softer 
tone. This must be known to understand how the trumpet could play 
a role in the chamber music of the following centuries. Besides, 
there existed mutes j Monteverdi scored them as early as 1607 in 
his Orfeo. (pi. XVIII, fig. 105) 

No player was supposed to draw all the possible notes from his 
instrument. As early as 1 5 1 1 , Sebastian Virdung’s woodcuts depict 
two different instruments, a Felttrumet and a somewhat slimmer 
Clareta — that is, a military ‘field trumpet’ and a ‘clear’ trumpet. 
This corresponds to the later distinction between the frincifal and 
the clarin trumpets, the F eldtromfeter and the Kammertromfeter. 
The Feldtrompeter were not expected to read music ; they played 
flourishes and sustained notes in the middle and lower register. The 
Kammertrompeter, on the contrary, were musicians and highly 
respected artists, who played melodies in the register in which the 
harmonics were close enough together to admit a coherent series of 
notes, that is, in the usual D pitch, from d" upward, as the scale of a 
D trumpet was: (D) dad' /}' a' ( c ") d" e" /#" g" a ", etc. They 
played exclusively in this high register, as the “noble guild” to 
which they belonged forbade the principal trumpeters from using 
the register of clarin trumpeters, and the clarin trumpeters from 
going down to the register which was the prerogative of principal 
trumpeters. The player’s lifelong restriction to the high register 
trained his lips and breath j he used an appropriate mouthpiece with 
a flat cup and a broad rim that gave good support to the overexerted 
lips. This is the “secret” that enabled the trumpeters of the Bach 
epoch to play such surprisingly high parts, up to d* y e* and even 
g 3 , in spite of the low pitch of their instruments ( D alto, a minor 
third below our F trumpets, a minor sixth below our B\> trumpets). 
But we should not forget that in those times solo parts were written 
expressly for one artist and his special skill. Modern artists, required 
to play the complete range, are not able to perform these parts in a 




The Renaissance ( 1400—1600 ) 329 

satisfactory style. Makers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries 
have tried to facilitate blowing by constructing so-called Bach trum- 
pets a third, a fifth or an octave above our B\) trumpets — that is, an 
octave, a tenth or a thirteenth above the trumpets of Bach’s time. 
Such trumpets have a poor tone without being much easier to play. 
Some outstanding swing trumpeters, however, are able to give us 
an idea of the brilliancy and ease of the high register. 

KETTLEDRUMS. The history of the modern kettledrum be- 
gan when large specimens were imported from West Asia, al- 
though the small kettledrums had been known in Europe since the 
thirteenth century. In 1457, King Ladislas Posthumus of Hungary 
sent envoys to France to solicit the hand of Princess Madeleine, 
daughter of King Charles VII, and they were accompanied by 
kettledrums. Father Benoit, describing this event, added: On n’avoit 
ni mi oncques veu des tabourins comme de gros chaudrons qu’ils 
faisoient porter sur des chevaux. “One had never before seen drums 
like big kettles, carried on horseback.” From this we know that the 
large modern kettledrums were unknown in western Europe, 
though they existed in the east of the continent. About 1500 they 
were introduced in Germany. In his Mvsica getutscht (1511), 
Virdung writes that “now with us” the name tympana is given to the 
big army kettledrums of copper, which the princes have at court. 
“These are enormous rumbling barrels. They trouble honest old 
people, the ill and the sick, the devotees in monasteries who study, 
read and pray, and I think and believe that the devil has invented 
and made them. . . .” 

Kettledrums had come to East Europe in the ancient Asiatic form, 
having laces to tighten the skin. As late as 1636, Mersenne depicts 
a Polish kettledrum of this kind. In Germany the kettledrums had 
already undergone an essential change in Virdung’s time; instead of 
laces, such as were used in Asia and eastern Europe, some screws 
round about the head raised or lowered an iron hoop stretching the 
skin. 

Germany had become a center of kettledrum playing even before 
the importation of the large instrument. As early as 1384, Duke 
Philip of Burgundy had sent one of his drummers to Germany to 
learn the art of playing. Later, the kettledrum was considered a 
specifically German instrument. 

It was a symbol of aristocracy as well. The kettledrum was the 
inseparable companion of the trumpet, and kettledrummers were 




330 The History of Musical Instruments 

included in the same “noble guild” and invested with the same 
rights as trumpeters. As late as 1683, the Scotch officer, Sir James 
Turner, states that “the Germans, Danes and Swedes permit none 
under the rank of baron to have them unless they are taken in battle 
from an enemy.” 

As symbols of wealth and nobility, kettledrummers were expected 
to show a certain extravagance. The classic monographer of the 
“Heroic and musical art of the trumpet and the kettledrum,” 
Johann Ernst Altenburg, emphasizes in 1795 “the affected figures, 
turns and movements of the body” of German kettledrummers, and 
Zedler’s gigantic Universallexikon (173 5) calls a kettledrummer 
the one “who knows how to strike the drum elegantly. This is done 
with certain movements of the body which elsewhere would be 
ridiculous.” Sometimes, to make the appearance more spectacular, 
Negroes were employed as kettledrummers. Cavalry regiments de- 
lighted in the same extravagant parading of their kettledrums, 
which they used more and more as a special privilege. As late as the 
twentieth century such a cavalry drummer would wear a full beard, 
ride on a black horse and throw up and catch the sticks while play- 
ing. When, about the middle of the sixteenth century, a German, 
Baron von Dohna, came to France, his ostentatious entrance an- 
noyed the French so much that the Duke de Guise ordered his kettle- 
drums to be dashed to pieces “to his great abashment.” 

CLAVICHORDS were stringed keyboard instruments of a 
simple construction. In a small, shallow box without a stand or legs, 
the strings were stretched from the tuning pegs at the right end 
around the hitch pins inserted in the left end. A plank of hard wood 
(wrest flank) into which the tuning pegs were screwed, was squeezed 
into the right end of the box; a small soundboard made of tender 
fir wood was supported by the wrest plank at the right end, but 
extended leftward beyond it to the position of the highest key. There 
were one or more bridges on the soundboard. A vertical metal 
tangent on the rear end of each key gently touched the correspond- 
ing string and produced a remarkably soft, indeed meager, tone. 
While in the modern piano, the hammer, falling back after the 
strike, releases the string and causes a vibration belly at the point of 
contact, the tangent of the clavichord did not fall back and set the 
string free unless the key was released and therefore caused a vibra- 
tion node at the point of contact. The superfluous section of the 
string, at the left of the point of contact, was deadened by a strip of 




The Renaissance ( 1400-1600 ) 331 

felt woven between the strings j the vibrating section was bounded 
by the bridge on the soundboard at the right, and the point of con- 
tact of the tangent at the left. As the length of the vibrating section 
did not depend on the whole length of the string, but on the distance 
between the bridge and the stopping tangent, several neighboring 
tangents could use the same string to produce different notes. Thus, 
the clavichord had fewer strings than keys. One of the oldest sources, 
Henry Arnault’s treatise, gives the clavichord nine double strings 
and thirty-five keys — that is, with an average of four notes to each 
string, (pi. XXI a) 

The clavichord evolved from the polychordic monochord (cf. 
page 271). The link between them is missing. But we can easily 
reconstruct it. Such a polychord needed the strings tuned a third 
apart, as the third was the smallest consonance of that time. The 
intermediate notes could be produced in the usual manner by shift- 
ing the stopping bridge. It would have been difficult, however, to 
shift bridges to and fro under so many strings without endangering 
the accuracy of the intervals. When the right places were found and 
fixed, musicians gave individual bridges to each note, which could 
stop or release the string without difficulty or loss of time. The re- 
quired contrivance already existed in other instruments j the hurdy- 
gurdy had the shortening bridges or tangents, and the organ pro- 
vided both levers and keys. 

The date of this transformation is not certain - y but the keyboard 
doubtless existed in 1323 when the Frenchman Johannes de Muris, 
in his Musica speculative, mentioned a monochord with nineteen 
(diatonic) strings, covering two octaves and a fifth, besides the real 
monochord with from one to four strings. 

Following the principle of polychordic monochords, an older type 
of keyboard instrument, still existing at the beginning of the six- 
teenth century, had strings of equal length, thickness and tension. A 
more recent type, already made in the fifteenth century, had strings 
of different length, thickness and tension. According to a passage in 
Ramis de Pareja’s Musica pratica , in 1482, the first one continued to 
bear the old name ‘monochord’ while the second one was called clavi- 
chord. Eberhard Cersne’s poem Der Minne Regel (1404), the 
earliest source that mentions the name ‘clavichord,’ includes the term 
‘monochord’ as well. Still the name ‘monochord’ was less and less 
used $ in 15 1 1, Virdung depicts a clavicordium as an instrument with 
strings of equal length. 

Clavichords were first depicted more than a hundred years after 




332 The History of Musical Instruments 

Johannes de Muris: in a woodcut of the Weimarer Wunderbuch y in 
a design in Henry Arnault’s treatise and in a wood carving in St. 
Mary’s Church, Shrewsbury, all of them dating about 1 440. A few 
years later a clavichord was carved on a Dutch wood sculpture now 
in the Rijksmuseum at Amsterdam. These early evidences came 
from England, France and Holland, indicating that the clavichord 
probably originated in the northwestern section of Europe. 

One of the most striking features of all older clavichords was the 
shortness of the keys. They projected only three centimeters beyond 
the semitones, while the keys of modern pianos project five centi- 
meters. This seems to have been due to the mechanical action re- 
quired, the weight of the front of the key needing to balance exactly 
the weight of the rear. A player using modern fingering would 
stumble against the semitones on such a keyboard. The shortness of 
the keys necessitated the awkward fingering of the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries ; the players used the second and third fingers 
when they ascended, and the first and second fingers when they went 
down, while the thumb and the fourth finger were seldom engaged. 
This fingering was already familiar to players of the portative organ, 
in which the keyboard was situated at right angles to the player. 

Keyboards depicted by German artists between 1440 and 1462 
have only three semitones in the octave instead of the five that the 
organ had acquired long before: B flat as the Dorian changing note, 
C sharp as the Dorian leading note, F sharp as the Mixolydian lead- 
ing note. 

Though the Italo-Spanish theoretician, Bartolommeo Ramis de 
Pareja, had outlined the idea of an equal temperament in his Musica 
pratica (1482), all instruments were tuned to an unequal tempera- 
ment. The notes E and B were slightly lower than in the modern 
scale, and all tuning rules of the sixteenth century agreed in pre- 
scribing that the fifths producing the accidentals should be either a 
bit too low or a bit too high, but never exact. An accurate standard 
did not exist. 

Up to the first third of the sixteenth century the lower limit of 
the keyboard was F, while the highest note was g", a" or c"'. After 
the musical range in the fifteenth century had been extended below 
G y keyboards had to be enlarged as well. But only the diatonic notes 
were important ; composers and players did not think it necessary to 
have the lowest octave chromatic, as no leading or changing note was 
required in the bass. Still, virginal and clavichord makers probably 
would have added chromatic strings and keys in spite of their use- 




The Renaissance (/ 400 — 1600) 333 

lessness. But to organ makers and consigners four superfluous keys 
meant a hundred or more superfluous pipes of the largest size, the 
omission of which made an organ considerably cheaper. Instead of 
leaving out the black keys from the octave C to c , they arranged a 
short octave which looked like E to c , in which the apparent E was 
a C, while the F# key produced a D and the G# key an E: 




As organs, clavichords and virginals were built by the same makers 
and played by the same artists, this arrangement was adapted to the 
stringed keyboard instruments as well. Our graphic symbol for this 
short octave is C/E. 

Players became so used to the short octave that, when the semi- 
tones F# and G# could no longer be dispensed with, the previous 
arrangement was not given up. The expedient was to add the re- 
quired strings without adding special keys; both the F# and G# 
keys were cut into two sections, an anterior and a posterior part; 
the anterior parts played F# and Gft, and the posterior parts D 
and E. 

This division of some semitone keys must not be confused with 
another short octave which enabled the player to distinguish between 
F# and G[j, between G# and A\). In about the middle of the seven- 
teenth century, a new short octave was introduced. An apparent B t 
was added which produced a G,. It may be designated by the symbol 

Gj/Fj. 

Short octaves were not completely abandoned by makers until 
the middle of the eighteenth century. It was the new ‘long’ octave 
that, in one of his sonatas, Scarlatti designated as ottava stesa , or 
‘stretched octave.’ 

In about 1720, the clavichord had been perfected in another way. 
Certain neighboring notes had to be played on the same string, and 
when they formed a chord the lower of them did not sound. Ac- 
cording to tradition, a certain Tobias Faber at Crailsheim in Wurt- 
temberg constructed the first bundfrei or ‘unfretted’ clavichord with 
as many strings as keys. Dr. Francis W. Galpin, however, saw such 
an instrument dated 1700 in Dr. Henry Watson’s collection at Man- 
chester. But in spite of this improvement the unfretted clavichord 
was not able to oust the earlier model. Having more strings, it was 
larger, heavier, more expensive, and it took longer to tune. 





334 The History of Musical Instruments 

The clavichord revived with a redoubled vigor in the eighteenth 
century as the leading house instrument of the German Emf find- 
same Zeitalter. To the generations between 1720 and 1780 its small 
tone reflected the current aversion to grossness and ostentation, and 
its meagerness stood for noble simplicity. The finger was not sup- 
posed to strike the key, but to touch it “caressingly,” as Karl Philipp 
Emanuel Bach said. As only one mechanical link acted between the 
finger and the string, the slightest feeling of the finger commu- 
nicated itself to the vibrating string. Consequently, we owe the deli- 
cacy in modern piano playing to the clavichord. The manieren or 
graces could be played with greater transparence, stress and tender- 
ness than on any other keyboard instrument. The strings sang the 
melody, and even a single tone was animated. In the same manner 
that the violinist removes the rigidity of his tone by a vibrato, the 
clavichordist gave warmth and passion to the note by the Bebung , 
the trembling pressure given to the key without letting it go. “Who 
dislikes noise, raging and fuming, whose heart bursts in sweet feel- 
ings, neglects both the harpsichord and the piano and chooses 
the clavichord,” said Christian Friedrich Daniel Schubart 

(1739-1791)- 

SPINETS AND HARPSICHORDS were keyboard in- 
struments in which the strings were plucked by quills in- 
stead of touched by tangents as in clavichords. On the rear 
end of each key stood a jack, that is, a small upright piece 
of wood, from which projected a small quill or a leather 
tongue. These jacks were not fastened to the keys, but 
stood free, and were held in an upright position by a kind 
of rack inserted in the soundboard (which in these instru- 
ments ran the entire length of the box). When the key was 
pressed the jack jumped up, making the quill pluck the 
string, and then, owing to a springing device, fell back with- 
out plucking the string again, (fig. 106) 

Quill instruments were made in three principal shapes j 
namely, winglike grand, upright grand and square . In the 
upright grand the strings were stretched vertically, in the 
two other forms horizontally. In the grand form they ran 
from front to back, and both the wrest plank with the tun- 
ing pegs and the set of jacks were in the front, taking up 
the width of the instrument. In the square form, on the 
figure 106. contrary, the strings ran from the right to the left at 
Jack. right angles to the keys, the lowest string being in 





The Renaissance (1400—1600) 335 

the front. The wrest plank was at the right end, while the rack 
that supported the set of jacks pierced the soundboard, describing a 
diagonal line from the left anterior to the right posterior corner. 

Whatever the particular form, the case was loosely set on a stand 
— that is, a horizontal frame with legs; legs fastened to the instru- 
ment itself did not appear earlier than 1750. 

The whole structure was much lighter than that of modern pianos. 
No metal was used, and soundboards were not thicker than four 
millimeters (in modern pianos they are from eight to ten milli- 
meters). The gauge of the strings was considerably inferior to that 
of modern strings (.325 millimeters for d as against one millimeter 
of modern), and overspun strings did not exist. Consequently, the 
tone was much more delicate. 

The names varied according to the epoch and the country. The 
most important were: 

GRAND FORM SQUARE FORM 

English: harpsichord virginal or spinet 

French: clavecin epinette 

Italian : clavicembalo spinetta 

Up to the seventeenth century, the term “virginal” in English 

designated both the grand and the square form; the Inventory of 
the Guarderobes of King Henry VIII, for example, lists in 1547 
Tvooo jaire paire of newe longe Virginalles made harpe fasshio'n. 
In the same way the famous collection of pieces for a keyboard in- 
strument in the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge, the Fttzwilliam 
Virginal Book y was not exclusively intended for square instruments. 
And even within the square type, the term ‘virginal’ was not re- 
served to a special form; the use of the words spinet and virginal 
was not only vague but contradictory. In this book all plucked grand 
forms with quills will be called harpsichords; and all square forms 
spinets. 

The name virginal has mistakenly been connected with virginity 
and, as a result, with the maiden queen, Elizabeth ; this princess was 
born in 1533, twenty-two years after Virdung’s mention and descrip- 
tion of a virginal. The term goes back to the fifteenth century. It 
occurs in a poem of the epoch of Henry VII ( 1485-1509), and even 
in a manuscript in the university at Cracow written between 1459 
and 1463, the Liber viginti artium of the Bohemian Paulus Pauliri- 
nus. The word probably is related to medieval Latin virga , ‘rod, 
jack.’ 




336 The History of Musical Instruments 

The history of plucked keyboard instruments seems to begin in 
the second half of the fourteenth century. At that time English, 
French and Spanish sources mention an instrument variously spelled 
as chekker, eschequier and exaquier > all meaning chessboard. The 
first specimen of which we hear was made by a Frenchman, Jehan 
Perrot, and given in 1360 by King Edward III of England to his 
prisoner, King John of France. Between 1370 and 1380 two French 
poets mentioned it — Eustache Deschamps and Guillaume de Ma- 
chault — and the latter, in his poem Li temfs fas tour y called it the 
eschaqueil d y Angleterre> ‘the chekker from England.’ In 1385 such 
an instrument was made in Tournay and bought by the Burgundian 
court, and a few years later King John I of Aragon tried to obtain 
from Duke Philip the Bold of Burgundy an exaquier, being an 
isturment semblant d y orguens, qui sona ab cordes , and an organist 
abte de tocar exaquier [e] los fetits orguens. 

Twice in the Aragonese letters the exaquier is expected to be 
played by an organist able to handle the fetits orguens , that is, the 
portative organ. Consequently, Dr. Hans Hickmann, in his book on 
the portative, suggested that the exaquier might have been a stringed 
instrument closely related to the portative in size, construction, play- 
ing position and musical means. The only stringed instrument suffi- 
ciently like a portative organ would be a small upright harpsichord, 
of which we have two representations. Edmond Vander Straeten 
depicts a small upright harpsichord (that he mistakenly calls a 
clavichord) from a manuscript of about 1450. It has a socle, white 
and black keys and eight strings j the upper side is broken to form a 
step. A more reliable evidence is on a sculpture of about 1480 on 
the altar at Kefermarkt in Upper Austria } it represents an upright 
harpsichord, shaped and carried like a portative organ, with eleven 
double strings. 

Instruments of this kind should be mentioned in a Burgundian 
source of the first half of the fifteenth century; in other words, the 
tractate written by Henry Arnault of Zwolle, quoted several times 
in this chapter, ought to describe them. Unfortunately, the descrip- 
tions in this and other medieval treatises do not tell us what we most 
need to know; the shapes of instruments are left unmentioned. But 
there is at least one kind of stringed instrument which may have 
been related to the portative} its action contains little chains and 
“the keys must be long and bitumed as they are in portatives, for 
their length.” Again there is a connection, indeed a combination of 





Christoph Paudiss , lutanist, Pinako- Pram van Miens, drummer , Pinako- 

thek Miinchcn ( ij century ). thek Munchen {17th century). 




Pieter Codde. Music with violin and gamha , in the Liechtenstein Gallery , Vienna 

( c . 1625) 



PLATE XX. 




The Renaissance ( 1400-1600 ) 337 

the portative and an upright harpsichord described about 1460 in 
Paulirinus’s tractate (cp. page 293). 

These evidences corroborate the hypothesis that the exaquier or 
echiquier was a portative upright harpsichord. Besides, it is prob- 
able that in plucked keyboard instruments the vertical portative 
form preceded the horizontal one laid on the lap, a table or a stand. 
The keyboard, taken from the portative, must have been given first 
to that form of psaltery which had its strings in a similar position to 
that of the pipes of a portative. 

Etymology is not helpful in this problem. An old suggestion, 
based on one specimen two hundred years more recent than the first 
evidence of the name ‘echiquier,’ that it might have been the com- 
bination of a spinet and a chessboard, is farfetched. The author of 
this book pointed out many years ago that a musical instrument 
schachtbrety in a German poem of the time, literally signified ‘quill- 
board,’ not ‘chessboard’; but the earlier evidences of the Romance 
forms weaken this argument. Some portative organs had keyboards 
in two rows of alternating black and white square keys. But if this 
arrangement accounted for the term, one would hardly understand 
why the name was given only to the stringed instrument and not to 
the portative organ as well. Another possibility is suggested by Low 
Latin scacheriuniy similar to scacharium y ‘chess board,’ and equiv- 
alent to abacus , a term which was used by some theorists of the Ren- 
aissance to designate the keyboard. But this etymology is not con-* 
vincing either. Recently Dr. Henry George Farmer has proposed 
an Arabic etymology, al-saqira — this name, allegedly a musical in- 
strument, being mentioned by an Arabian writer who died in 1231. 
This derivation, too, is weak. The Arabian writer does not describe 
the instrument; the mention is too early to be connected with ex- 
aquier ; keyboards are not in the Arabian line; an Arabian origin 
would suggest that the instrument came to Europe through Spain, 
not from northwestern Europe to Spain; other Arabists deny the 
existence of such a word as the name of a musical instrument in 
Arabic literature. 

Thus, the name remains unexplained. 

The oldest pictorial evidences of the grand form were a miniature 
in the Tres belles heures of the Duke of Berry, 1409, which depicts 
a harpsichord in a celestial concert; the woodcut of a harpsichord in 
the W eimarer W under buck, about 144O; and, at about the same 
date, a drawing in Henry Arnault’s treatise. 




338 The History of Musical Instruments 

A reference to the grand form occurred much earlier, in 1323, in 
Johannes de Muris’s Musica speculativa. The passage indicates that 
the ‘monochord’ with nineteen strings (and keys) could be made in 
various shapes; one of them, a rectangular triangle with one con- 
cave side, seems to be the wing form of the harpsichord. At first 
sight, this is a confusing contradiction between the term ‘mono- 
chord,’ which suggests a (square) clavichord, and the wing form of 
a harpsichord. The explanation is that the term ‘monochord’ in- 
dicated a keyboard instrument in any form and type. This is con- 
firmed by a further statement of de Muris that the monochord com- 
bines practically {in virtute ) all instruments. The word ‘monochord’ 
occurring in the Munich manuscript of this tractate is changed to 
instrument in the eighteenth century Gerbert edition which was 
probably based on another manuscript. ‘Monochord’ as well as ‘in- 
strument’ apparently meant keyboard instrument in general. Simi- 
larly, Henry Arnault’s treatise states: “It can be made that the 
clavichord sounds like a harpsichord” {'potest fieri quod clavicordium 
sonaret ut clavicembalum) ; further, “With a certain action one can 
make both a clavisimbalum or a clavicordium or a dulce melos.” 
What were these actions? 

Previously it has been taken for granted that the early instru- 
ments had the jack action of later harpsichords. This now appears 
more than doubtful. Henry Arnault’s treatise on instruments gives 
the descriptions and diagrams of four kinds of forpices or ‘tongs’ 
which serve to stir the strings of keyboard instruments; stirring is 
called percutere and ictus. The descriptions are poor and the dia- 
grams almost undecipherable; we cannot even be sure that they 
mean plucking devices. The words ictus and percutere designate 
‘striking’; they do not seem to indicate plucking. Only the fourth 
kind of forpex is a jack, but it is unmistakably described as a striking 
contrivance. 

Yet, on a fragmentary page, Arnault refers to a monochord with 
quills, obviously a plucked instrument in the shape of a clavichord. 
This passage throws light on a sentence written about one hundred 
years later by the Italian doctor Julius Caesar Scaliger, who lived 
from 1484 to 1558: “This was the origin of those that people call 
monochords today, in which slim plectra , arranged in orderly fash- 
ion, produce sounds. Points of raven quills, afterwards ( deinde ) 
added to the plectra, elicit a more expressive harmony out of the 
wires. [The instrument called] davicymbalum and harpichordum 




The Renaissance ( 1400—1600 ) 339 

when I was a boy, is now called spineta after these points.” It was 
incorrect to conclude from Scaliger’s statement that the use of quills 
was started during his boyhood. Not only Arnault’s statement con- 
tradicts such interpretation; also Paulirinus, whom we mentioned 
above, defines, about 1460, the clavicimbalum as an instrument 
played 'per pennam introrsus coannexam. It was also a mistake to 
deduce from Scaliger that the quills replaced plucking points of 
metal, as he speaks of quills added to the plectra of monochords. 

The change of name that Scaliger indicates adds to the confusion 
in the vocabulary of early keyboard instruments. In Arnault’s trea- 
tise, clavicymbalum designates the grand harpsichord, as in later 
times. But Scaliger identifies it with spineta and arpicordo , which 
were both square instruments. The same is true of Virdung (1511)5 
he depicts the same square instrument twice with two different titles, 
Virginal and Clauicimbalum y and describes the latter as follows: 
“This is like the virginal, but it has other strings of sheep gut and 
nails which make it harp; it also has quills like the virginal; it was 
recently invented, and I have seen only one.” All previous writers 
have associated this definition with the Clauiciterium , because of 
the peculiar arrangement of the page in Virdung’s book. But 
this was a mistake, as an upright harpsichord is not “like the vir- 
ginal.” 

To sum up, the grand harpsichord can be traced back to 1409, and 
the square spinet to about 1440. The latter was a clavichord onto 
which the quill mechanism was grafted, a clavicordo da spinettu or 
‘thorn’ clavichord. 

It seems, though it cannot be proved, that the customary form in 
the fifteenth century was the grand, whereas in the sixteenth cen- 
tury the square form prevailed. The grand form not only developed 
sooner, but also survived the square form. 

Two main square types existed: the Italian and the Flemish spinet. 

The Italian spinet had a pentagonal case varying in length from 
four to six feet, and a soundboard of the same shape, both made of 
cypress or cedarwood; the characteristic smell of cedar is a charm 
of these tasteful instruments up to this day. The walls were ex- 
tremely thin in order to vibrate with the strings. Therefore, the in- 
strument was inserted into a strong outer case from which it had 
to be removed for playing. The keyboard generally projected like 
a balcony; it had the compass E/C to c 3 or / 3 ; the keys were box- 
wood or ivory, the semitones darker box or ebony. 




340 The History of Musical Instruments 

The Flemish spinet, on the contrary, was made of a cheap pine- 
wood in a large, and rather clumsy, rectangular form. Scattered 
flowers were painted on the soundboard in water colors, and instead 
of the intricate rose generally carved in the soundboard of Italian 
spinets the Flemish rose was made of unchased pewterware. The 
keyboard was recessive and placed at the right or left, not in the 
center; its keys were usually made of bone, seldom of ivory, never 
of box; the semitones were of ebony or stained black. A further 
difference was in the interior arrangement; the tuning pegs were 
no longer arranged in a straight but in a broken line, and the bridge 
was also angular instead of being curved, as in Italian spinets. 

Spinets were made in two sizes: the normal 8' instruments ( double 
virginals or, in Italian, spinette ), and small 4' instruments ( single 
virginals or spinettini) . In about 1 600, the masters of Antwerp made 
a few combined virginals ; the case of such an instrument was wide 
enough to house a smaller octave instrument as a kind of drawer 
beside the keyboard of the larger one. When used, the small instru- 
ment was pulled out and set upon the large virginal so that the 
player was able to play both of them either together or alternately. 
Two fine specimens are in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New 
York and one is in the Belle Skinner Collection at Holyoke, Massa- 
chusetts. 

To save space, certain octave spinets were built in a different 
model. The wrest plank with the tuning pegs, instead of being at 
the right end, were arranged in front like those of the harpsichord, 
and the strings were stretched diagonally across the box. 

English makers at the end of the seventeenth century enlarged 
this small spinet with its wrest plank in front and its diagonal strings 
to form a normal 8' instrument, and it was in this form, an inter- 
mediate one between the spinet and the harpsichord, that the spinet, 
at least in England, survived the seventeenth century. Everywhere 
else its existence came to an end before 1 700. 

Harpsichords , that is, plucked instruments in grand form, in the 
sixteenth century were almost exclusively made in Italy; Venice 
was the center. All preserved specimens are made in splendid style; 
precious materials, inlaid work, careful carving and an excellent 
painting of the outer case. 

At the beginning of the sixteenth century some harpsichords still 
had single strings; an example is the beautiful instrument of Do- 
minicus Pisauriensis ( 1533) m the Leipzig Museum. Double- 
stringed harpsichords already existed when Henry Arnault wrote 




The Renaissance ( 1400—1600 ) 341 

his treatise, but then the two strings of a set were arranged above 
one another so that one jack sufficed to make them both vibrate. A 
harpsichord made by Hieronymus Pisauriensis in i 52 i, now in the 
Victoria and Albert Museum in London, already has strings stretched 
in pairs and played in unison by two jacks each. Since the jacks neces- 
sarily plucked the unison strings in slightly different places, the 
second set of jacks being inserted behind the first one, the two notes 
had a different timbre due to the favoring of different partials. 

The idea of making use of these contrasting timbres by a device 
like a stop, allowing one set of jacks to function while the other was 
disconnected, was brought forth in the sixteenth century. Extensions 
of the racks pierced the right side wall of the harpsichord and could 
be shifted like the stops of an older organ. 

It is not possible to give an exact date to this improvement. In 
1514, a Venetian organ builder made a clavicembalo grande con do 
registri for Pope Leo Vj but we are not certain whether registri 
meant stops or only a double set of strings. 

The stops could provide the player either with different timbres 
or else with different degrees of loudness. The alternation of a 
meager and a full tone obtained in this way is probably the mean- 
ing of the mysterious Instromento Piano e forte, listed in an un- 
dated Este inventory of the sixteenth century. 

As early as 1538, we have evidence of the combination of an -8' 
and a 4' stop ; the hitch pins of the 4' strings, which were about half 
as long as the strings of the 8', were inserted in the soundboard. 
Italian sources call this 8' 4' arrangement instrumento in ottava. 

The earliest evidence of three stops is in the inventory of the 
Fugger collection in Augsburg, dated 1576: “A beautiful long in- 
strument of fine black ebony with ivory busts in relief inside a skill- 
fully painted case, and three stops, ivory keys and gilt nails, and a 
powerful tone. Has been made by Franco Ungaro in Venice.” Very 
probably these stops were 8' 8' 4'. Six years later, the inventory of 
the instruments at the Brandenburg court records eine Symphonei 
with four stops, probably 8' 8' 8' 4'. 

A Dresden inventory of 1593 lists three harpsichords, with two 
keyboards each. But also the undated Este inventory includes a 
clavicembalo cromatico con due tastadure. The two keyboards were 
a step forward in facilitating the use of different timbres and dynamic 
degrees. 

The upright grand harpsichord had the usual horizontal key- 
board j but the wing-shaped body stood vertical. 




342 The History of Musical Instruments 

Early portable uprights and their possible connection with the 
echiquier have already been discussed. The first evidence of a non- 
portable upright is a woodcut in Virdung’s Musica getutscht ( 1 5 1 1 ) 
with the caption clavicyterium. We find this name up to the seven- 
teenth century, but as it was rather rare, and not generally used, we 
had better avoid it. 

In an upright harpsichord the jacks jut horizontally forward in- 
stead of standing perpendicularly on the keys, and they must be 
pulled back by a special device instead of falling back by their own 
weight. Owing to this complicated action, upright instruments were 
not frequent. However, the vertical arrangement saved space and 
projected the sound directly to the listener. Therefore, it never 
was entirely given up as long as harpsichords were made. At the 
end of the eighteenth century, upright harpsichords were replaced 
by upright pianos. 

Claviorgan is the name generally given to a combination in one 
instrument of a small organ with a stringed keyboard instrument — 
either a spinet, a harpsichord, a clavichord or, later, a piano. One 
should be skeptical, however, when this term occurs in old sources. 
The two clabiorganos owned by the Spanish chamberlain, Sancho de 
Paredes, in 1480 (the earliest known mention of the name) were 
probably not combinations. In an inventory of the Este collections, 
dated 1612, we find an item, Cinque organi grandi y detti claviorgani, 
‘five large organs, called claviorgani.’ The name obviously was given 
to larger chamber organs. In another Este inventory, dated 1625, 
there is an item reading 8 Arficordi grandi comfutatovi uno che e 
sofra un claviorgano , ‘eight large harpsichords including one which 
is upon a claviorgano.’ Consequently, a claviorgan was not a com- 
bination, but could be paired with a harpsichord or another stringed 
keyboard instrument. 

Still permanent combinations existed as early as the middle of the 
fifteenth century. Paulus Paulirinus describes, about 1460, an in- 
strument [}]nnportile in the shape of a media ala (that later on 
he defines as semitriangular), being a positive organ on one side 
and an upright harpsichord with wire strings on the other side. The 
keyboard of a portative connects both of them so that their sounds 
mingle with marvelous sweetness. 

In the oldest preserved specimen of a horizontal claviorgan, how- 
ever, made by the Fleming Lodowicus Theewes, dated 1579 and 
kept in the Victoria and Albert Museum, a harpsichord is simply 
laid on the organ, and in an instrument in the Viennese Kunsthis- 




The Renaissance (i 400-1600) 343 

torische Museum, made in 1587 at Augsburg, a regal is contained 
in one half, and a spinet in the other half, of a chess box. 

In 1618, when Praetorius was writing his Syntagma, pipes were 
mingled ( a mit eingemenget ”) with the strings. Pie is probably re- 
ferring to the later type, in which one keyboard ruled both the organ 
and the stringed instrument with a device that allowed the player 
to couple or uncouple them. 

THE DULCE MELOS. In a Latin manuscript of the fifteenth 
century at the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, a French student, 
Bottee de Toulmon, found the description, as well as several designs, 
of a keyboard instrument — dulce mclos — and, realizing its impor- 
tance, he published a short extract of the text in his Dissertation sur 
les instruments de musique au moyen-dge, Paris, 1844. There he 
called it a piano. A piano, described in a treatise of the fifteenth cen- 
tury and forgotten for three hundred years before the invention was 
made anew — this was an exciting and almost unbelievable discovery. 

The manuscript has since been published in an excellent facsimile, 
and the dulce melos can be studied as far as the obscurity of the text 
and the designs admit. This is what we find. 

The dulce melos, according to the manuscript, was derived from 
the zither struck with two sticks that the English call dulcimer. It 
was a stringed keyboard instrument in square form with a range 
from B to a ". The arrangement was peculiar, indeed unique. There 
were four bridges extending from the front to the back of the box, 
one at either end and the other two dividing the strings in the pro- 
portion, 4: 2: 1. The three sections acted like three separate strings, 
producing a ground tone, its octave and its double octave. In other 
words, the same string provided c in its first section, d in its second 
section, and c" in its third section j the instrument had twelve strings 
only for a range of thirty-five chromatic notes. The keyboard ex- 
tended from the middle of the first section beyond the last section j 
while the anterior parts of the keys were of equal size, the rear 
parts had to diverge in the first section and converge in the third 
to meet the three sections of the strings. 

The action consisted of jacks loaded with lead standing upright on 
the rear ends of the keys. A U-shaped, brass staple projected side- 
ways from the upper end of each jack. When a key was pressed, and 
its action checked ( obviat obstaculo suferius 'pro'pe cor das ), the jack 
jumped up vertically to touch the string. 

To this passage the editors of the facsimile add a footnote in bold 




344 77k? History of Musical Instruments 

type saying that one could not better describe the action of a piano, 
thus following Bottee de Toulmon’s suggestion. 

This is a mistake. The action of a piano is also checked (and that 
of a harpsichord as well! ), but it consists of a hammer performing 
a rotary movement. In the dulce melos, on the contrary, the jack 
made a plain vertical movement; it was a kind of struck spinet and 
closely related to the Bavarian Tangentenfliigel of the late eight- 
eenth century, in which the jacks struck the strings instead of pluck- 
ing them. 

THE LUTE. The harmonic and polyphonic style of the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries assigned a privileged role to all instruments 
capable of playing several notes at once. This explains the increase 
of keyboard instruments after 1400. There was another instrument 
that successfully competed with keyboard instruments — the lute. 
Handier, and with the advantage of being traditional, it became the 
universal instrument. It could replace in an ensemble any other 
instrument, high or low; it accompanied singers, indeed it could 
reproduce all parts of an instrumental or choral composition at once; 
lute arrangements of all kinds of instrumental and vocal ensemble 
music were published in the sixteenth century as piano scores are 
published in our time. The importance given to the lute is indicated 
by the fact that violin makers are called luthiers in France to this day. 

The lute of the fifteenth century still had many specific features 
of the Arabian lute al ( ud y the name of which it carried. In many 
cases the neck was not distinct from the body; it was unfretted and 
relatively narrow. Certain players still used the oriental plectron 
as late as the seventeenth century. Plucking with the bare fingers, 
however, was more and more necessary as the lutanists developed a 
technique for playing chords, (pis. XVIII a, XX a) 

The new tasks necessitated a further development of the musical 
means of the lute. Between 1400 and 1520 the neck was fretted, first 
with four, gradually increasing to eight frets. The number of strings 
was six, seven or eight in 1400, and reached the classic number of 
eleven at about 1450. Eleven did not mean eleven single strings. 
Ten of them formed five double strings, only the highest string 
being single to facilitate producing delicate grace notes. Occasionally 
the number of frets and strings was increased. 

The usual accordatura was, in the sixteenth century, A/a d/d' 
g/g' b/h e ’ /^ a '- The pitch, however, was relative. 

The outer shape acquired its definitive outline at about 1500; 




The Renaissance (1400— 1600') 345 

since then it has had the elegant almond form and the shallower 
shell. The slender staves, from nine to thirty-three, which composed 
the shell were sometimes made of exotic woods, ebony, brazil, sandal, 
cypress or of ivory and even of whalebone, and often separated from 
each other by delicate purflings. 

The lutanists of the seventeenth century scorned the inaccuracy 
of this kind of lute. Thomas Mace is typical of that generation when 
he writes, in 1676, in his Musick y s Monument , p. 41 : 

There is found by Experience a Better manner of haying our Lutes , 
(as we term it) which is done y by causing the Fingerboard, 1 . to lye a 
little Round, or Up in the middle ; as also that the Bridge (answerably) 
rise a little Round to it. Then 2dly. to lay the strings so close to the Finger- 
board, that the Strings may almost seem to touch the first Fret. This is 
calVd Laying of a Lute Fine, when all the Strings lye near the Frets. 
$dly. Laying the Ranks of Strings so carefully, that the Pairs may be 
conveniently Near, and the Ranks pritty wide. By which means we have 
a more ready and certain C ommand over them, for neat and clean Play. 

Modern lutanists are anxious to revive that ancient art, but with 
a few exceptions their style is stiff and wooden ; it does not resemble 
the delicate sound of “the warbling lute,” to use Dryden’s word. 
One cannot understand the dominant position of the lute between 
1500 and 1700 without knowing from the style of oriental lutanists, 
and even outstanding Spanish guitarists, how expressive and varied 
the plucking can be. 

Though a favorite instrument all over Europe, the lute was never 
popular in Spain, in spite of its having come through that country. 
Spanish folk music was played on the guitar, and aristocratic music 
was performed on a compromise instrument, the vihuela or, more 
exactly, the vihuela de mano , in contrast with the vihuela de arco 
or fiddle. It had the flat and waisted body of the guitar, but the size 
and accordatura resembled those of the lute. Six or seven double 
strings were tuned to G c f a d' g f , or G c f g d f g\ Some different 
accordaturas are indicated in the fourth book of Fray Juan Bermudo’s 
Declaracion de instrumentos (1555). The outstanding music for 
the instrument is to be found in Luys Milan’s Libro de Mvsica de 
vihuela de mano, intitulado El Maestro , 1 535 — 3 ^- 

CITTERNS in their classical form had shallow bodies, flat on 
the front and back surfaces, and fretted necks ; wire strings were 
stretched between inferior stringholders and lateral pegs and were 
plucked with the bare fingers. 




346 The History of Musical Instruments 



The origin of this instrument is obscure. It probably originated 
in southern Europe as a plucked fiddle j the Mediterranean peoples 
have always preferred plucking to bowing, as testified by many 
medieval sculptures of plucked fiddles in Spain and Italy. The rear 




pegs of the fiddle existed with citterns as late as the fifteenth cen- 
tury. In the sixteenth, citterns sometimes had a combination of front 
and lateral pegsj in their later form they had lateral pegs exclu- 
sively. 

The usual cittern, between 1500 and 1750, had an elegant, pear- 
shaped body shallower at the lower end, and a characteristic neck in 
which the bass side was thinner than the treble side so that the thumb 
could easily reach around. Nine strings in four groups were the 
standard, though the number varied. They were tuned in different 
ways $ the most common accordaturas were d b gd' e' and F e c g a. 
In several specimens the outer string on the bass side was a high 
treble. 




The Renaissance ( 1400—1600 ) 347 

The later cittern, after 1750, had a less elegant form; the body 
was the same depth throughout, or else was slightly deeper at the 
lower end, and the neck was equally thick on the bass and the treble 
sides, (fig. 108) 

Finally, a certain Christian Clauss obtained a British patent on 
October 2, 1783, for giving the cittern a piano action to replace the 
plucking right hand, though it left stopping on the fingerboard to 
the fingers. One piano key for each set of strings was arranged on 
the soundboard j these keys acted on piano hammers striking from 
inside. The instrument was misnamed keyed guitar. 

VIOLS, in the sixteenth century, belonged to two distinct fami- 
lies: ‘leg viols’ or viole da gamba, and ‘arm viols’ or viole da braccio. 
The first of them comprised those obsolete instruments that the 
modern musician calls viols or gambas ; the second family corre- 
sponded to the bowed instruments of our days, violin, viola, cello 
and double bass. This seems surprising, as cellos and double basses 
are not held in the arm. The family names refer to the playing posi- 
tion of the oldest members of both families, and the names were 
retained for all the members regardless of their sizes and playing 
positions. 

A comparison of their distinctive characteristics follows: 



Viole da gamba 

flat back 

back sloped off at the upper end 
deep ribs 
sloping shoulders 

edges of soundboard and back not 
projecting 

reinforcing crossbars inside 

C or flame holes 
broad neck 
gut frets 

six or seven thin strings 
sound pale and flat 



Viole da braccio 

bulging back 
back not sloped off 
shallow ribs 
round shoulders 
projecting edges 

a reinforcing longitudinal bassbar 
inside 
f holes 
narrow neck 
no frets 

four thick strings 
sound round and full 



The viola da gamba became a distinct type in the fifteenth century, 
earlier than the viola da braccio, when musical evolution made large 
fiddles necessary. In large fiddles the stops on the fingerboard were 
much farther apart than those to which the artists were accustomed. 
The natural expedient was to simplify the action of the fingers by 




348 The History of Musical Instruments 

shortening the tonal distances between the strings — that is, by tun- 
ing them, lutelike, in fourths with a major third in the middle, in- 
stead of in fifths. To avoid reducing of the range, the players in- 
creased the number of strings to six and, in the seventeenth century, 
to seven. 

In a few decades we find a whole family modeled after the orig- 
inal bass viol. Even double basses were constructed j for, in 1493, 
Spanish musicians came from Rome to Mantua with viols tall “like 
myself,” as one chronicler said. But they did not belong in the family 
in a narrower sense. According to Thomas Mace’s Mustek’s Monu- 
ment (1676), a Good Chest of Viols consisted of six instruments, 
viz. 2 Basses 2 Tenors and 2 Trebles: All Truly , and Proportion- 
abley Suited. The bass was from sixty-one to seventy-six centimeters 
high and was tuned to D G c e ad' ; the tenor, from fifty to fifty- 
eight centimeters high, to A d gb e* a' ; the treble, from thirty-two 
to forty-five centimeters high, to d gc' e' a' d". 

The differences in sizes within the same category are remarkable. 
They are explained in John Playford’s Introduction to the Skill of 
Musicky which was printed in nineteen editions from 1658 to 1730: 
A Bass Viol for Consort must be one of the largest size } and the 
Strings proportionable. A Bass-Viol for Divisions must be of less 
size y and the strings according. A Bass-Viol to Play Lyraway, that 
is, by T ablature t must be somewhat less than the two former , and 
strung proportionably. In other words, the large bass viols were 
made for ensembles, the medium size served for ordinary solo music, 
and the small bass viols were supposed to be played “lyra-way.” 

This term needs explanation. At the end of the sixteenth century, 
the English favored full chords on the bass viol. This was facilitated 
by tuning it “lyra-way,” that is, following the principle of the lira 
da gamba and superposing fifths and fourths — accordaturas like 
the three following: 



A x 


E 


A 


e 


a 


d f 


A x 


D 


A 


d 


a 


d' 


A x 


D 


G 


d 


g 


d' 



As more stretching of the fingers was required on bass viols in which 
the open strings were tuned a fifth apart, playing was easier on a 
smaller instrument. Such an instrument, therefore, was called a 
lyro-viol or, as it was small enough to be confused with a tenor viol, 
a viola bastarda. 

Playford, in his Musick’s Recreation on the Lyra Viol y London 




The Renaissance (i 400-1600) 349 

1661, relates that Daniel Farrant, who was a violist in the king’s 
band between 1606 or 1607 and 1625, invented a Lyra Viol , to be 
strung with Lute Strings and Wire Strings , the one above the other ; 
the Wire Strings were conveyed through a hollow passage made in 
the Neck of the Viol , and so brought to the Tail thereof , and raised 
a little above the Belly of the Viol , by a Bridge of about 14 an inch: 
These were so laid that they were Equivalent to those above , and 
were Tun y d Unisons to those above , so that by the striking of those 
Strings above with the Bow , a Sound was drawn from those of Wire 
underneath y which made it very Harmonious. Of this sort of Viols y 
I have seen many , but Time and Disuse has set them aside. 

The discussion of the strings and their accordatura should not be 
concluded without a general remark on what we call absolute pitch. 
In earlier times no such thing existed, and uniformity of pitch was 
a consideration only in ensemble music. As late an author as Jean 
Rousseau, in his Traite de la viole (1687), tells the player to begin 
with tuning the middle string c? and to stretch it to a raisonable note ! 

All gambas, even the treble, were played in a vertical position on, 
or between, the legs. The bow, which Rousseau calls the “soul” of 
the viol, was slightly shorter than ours and held palm upward with 
the thumb above and the middlefinger on the hair, about two inches 
from the nut; its position on the strings was three or four fingers 
from the bridge. In playing, the accents were given by pushing the 
bow forward, beginning with the outermost point — not, as with the 
violin, by pulling it back. The delicate, fine-pointed sound resulting 
from this peculiar manner of bowing is the most characteristic feature 
in viol music, and modern gambists who handle the bow in cello 
fashion produce entirely the wrong effect. It is also incorrect to undo 
the frets, to lengthen and round the fingerboard and to raise the 
bridge. 

The outer shape of the viol has undergone many changes. 
Throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the outline varied. 
Sometimes the waist was almost indistinguishable and sometimes so 
deep that it touched the fingerboard ; the soundholes were cut, now 
above, now beneath, now beside the bridge. Every maker had his 
own shapes, and artists unaccustomed to instrument making tried 
to design the forms. A well-known case is Leonardo da Vinci’s “in- 
vention” of a bowed instrument in the form of a horse’s head, men- 
tioned by his biographer, Giorgio Vasari. Many a writer has racked 
his brains over the existence of such an awkward instrument. The 
author believes this must have been a form of fiddle, occurring at 




350 The History of Musical Instruments 

the beginning of the sixteenth century, the elongated body of which 
was wide at the top and narrower below, like a horse’s head seen 
from the front, (pis. XIX b, XX c, XXI a) 

The viol did not adopt a definite form earlier than the seventeenth 
century. The soundholes were placed a little below the middle of 
the soundboard. As to the position of the bridge, Thomas Mace 
asserts in his Musick’s Monument , London 1676, that it is to stand 
just in 3 quarter dividing of the Open Cuts Below; though Most f 
most Erroneously suffer them much to stand too High y which is a 
Fault. In other words, the bridge should be placed at one quarter 
of the height of the soundholes. 

With the holes and the bridge correctly placed, the viol achieved 
a perfection of appearance that could even surpass the pattern of the 
violin. Though less Classic,’ according to the standards of a violin 
enthusiast, its curves have a more appealing diversity. 

THE LIRA DA GAMBA, or lirone } was a late bass modeled on 
the lira da braccio — in other words, a hybrid of various instruments. 
The body was copied from the viola da braccio, the rear pegs and 
two drone strings from the medieval fiddle (called lira da braccio 
at that time), a small rose above the two ordinary holes from the 
lute. Besides the drones, the instrument had from nine to fourteen 
gut strings, tuned in fourths and fifths as well as in octaves. Cerreto, 
Praetorius and Mersenne indicated various accordaturasj only that 
given by Scipione Cerreto in his book Della prattica musica (1601) 
will be reproduced: G geef gd f a e? hf% f c%\ With a rather flat 
bridge, such an accordatura allowed the lirist to play full chords, 
and only chords. Their effect was increased by sympathetic vibra- 
tions, as all notes played had partials coinciding with some open 
strings. Unknown in modern instruments, sympathetic vibrations 
were possible because the strings were extremely thin, so thin that 
the highest of them could be tuned an octave above the highest string 
of the modern violoncello in spite of its equal length. 

The lira was too unemotional to be successful. As a mixture of 
several kinds of stringed instruments, it was the typical product of 
an epoch in which every possibility was explored. But it came too 
late. Between 1584 when its name first appeared, and the middle of 
the seventeenth century when it dropped out of use, the reserved 
style of the Italian Renaissance already had begun to change. 





The Baroque 



( 1600-1750 ) 



A RADICAL revolution in music broke out at the opening of 
the seventeenth century. Never before had composers em- 
phasized the contrast to the old style with the same decisive- 
ness, indeed arrogance j never before had they laid stress on the 
novelty of their style with similar determination. 

The new generation strove for strong emotion j it tried to appeal 
to the listeners 1 hearts. “What passion cannot Music raise and quell,” 
sings Dryden. Composers represented human feelings with a fervor 
resulting in the complete illusion of the hearer. Father Mersenne 
relates that Italian singers of his time expressed passions so violently 
that the audience would think they themselves were involved $ and 
when, in an opera by Monteverdi performed in 1 608 at the Mantuan 
court, Arianna, forsaken by Theseus, sang her heart-rending lament, 
the listeners burst into tears. 

With such tendencies, the lyric madrigal of the sixteenth century 
was necessarily superseded by the musical drama. This change in- 
volved another contrast. The Renaissance, aiming at equilibrium, 
had given equal weight to all parts, from the treble to the bass. At 
about 1600, composers re-established the prevalence of one of the 
parts. The polyphonic style was replaced by a monodic style, which 
was better able to express man’s mind and emotion. The polyphonic 
style had utilized instruments and voices within the compass of a 
tenth only, to avoid the interference of neighboring parts j the new 
monody, on the contrary, required a wide range to express passion 

351 





352 The History of Musical Instruments 

and the sudden changes from joy to grief, from melancholy to 
exultation. 

The new style necessarily started in the vocal field ; singing was 
the natural medium of an expressive style. The instruments soon 
followed the lead of the voice. Salomone Rossi Ebreo wrote the 
first sonata for two violins in 1613, and Biagio Marini the first 
sonata for one violin in 1617, both in stile raffresentativo , in a 
highly emotional style. 

Instruments had to undergo a severe process of selection. Only 
those could be kept which had a sufficiently wide range and enough 
flexibility to afford all dynamic shades from pianissimo to fortissimo j 
instruments were expected to sing like human beings. 

The first symptom was the dismissal of the majority of those 
oboelike instruments, the reed of which, being concealed within a 
wind cap, could not be grasped by the player’s lips. As they had no 
‘expression,’ no dynamic elasticity, and were not able to ‘overblow’ 
into a higher octave, they were not appropriate to the new style. All 
at once rankets, cromornes, schryari, rauschpfeifen, bagpipes were 
put aside. Only bassoons and, especially in France, the smaller 
shawms or oboes were preserved, and with them the flutes. 

There was a coloristic reason as well. The taste of the Renaissance, 
in painting as in music, had favored the alternation of contrasting 
colors. The seventeenth century, again in painting as in music, pre- 
ferred dominating color, indeed monochromes. In music, this domi- 
nating color was the timbre of bowed instruments. 

To illustrate the change it would suffice to compare an inventory 
of the Berlin court orchestra from 1667 with the 1582 inventory 
listed on page 303. While in 1582 wind instruments comprised 
eighty-five percent of the total, the inventory of the seventeenth cen- 
tury lists 

17 viols 2 pandorcs 

1 violin I harp 

1 dulcian 

or twenty-one stringed instruments (including eighteen bowed in- 
struments) to one wind instrument. And this one wind instrument 
had been bought only recently. 

Still, this inventory illustrates the English and German taste of 
the seventeenth century but does not indicate the advanced tendency 
in Italy and France. In Italian and French orchestras the proportion 
of seventeen viols to one violin would have been impossible j the 





PLATE XXI 



Clavichord Harpsichord 

Gerard Dow y in the Dulwich Gallery • Van Steen , in the National Gallery y London • 

iyth century 



The Baroque ( 1600—1750 ) 353 

reserved sound of the viols had been replaced by the powerful and 
flexible tone of the '“sharp violins,” which, again in Dryden’s con- 
temporary words, “proclaim Their jealous pangs, and desperation, 
Fury, frantic indignation, Depth of pains, and height of passion.” 



THE VIOLIN FAMILY shares the same general construction 
with the viols. In spite of some differences in detail, the curving 
outline of the body is marked off into the same carefully propor- 




sct oil 
-pegs 

pegbc u 
nut 

fingerboard 



purfling 

soundboard 



sound hole 
vibrating center 
bridge 



edge 

stnngholder 



tioned sections — the lower bouts separated from the smaller upper 
bouts by the waisted middle bouts. The bulging back of the body is 
made of one or two maple boards and slightly depressed near the 
outline. The sidewalls or ribs are also made of maple but are ex- 
tremely thin so that they need to be reinforced by narrow ribbons of 
pinewood called linings that follow the outline inside the body. 
Further reinforcement is secured by six blocks , four of which fit 
into the corners between the bouts, the other two at the upper and 
lower ends of the body. The front of the body, or soundboard , which 




354 Fh e History of Musical Instruments 

is made of pine, bulges like the back and has the same depression 
near the edge. It is inlaid with purflings that follow the outline and 
are said to increase its elasticity. The edges of both the back and the 
soundboard project lightly over the ribs. Two soundholes in ff are 
cut half in the middle, half in the lower bouts. On the inner side of 
the soundboard there is a tiny ledge or bassbar y which is carved or 
glued on, placed longitudinally underneath the position of the low- 
est string, serving to strengthen the tension of the bulging board. 
A soundpost is wedged upright between the front and the back near 
the treble foot of the bridge to transmit the vibrations to the back. 
The neck is inserted in the upper block. It is covered by a slightly 
bulging fingerboard of ebony which projects at the lower end over 
the soundboard. It ends at the top in a tiny cross ledge, the nut , 
which terminates the vibrating section of the strings and holds them 
away from the fingerboard at the upper end. The pegbox is crowned 
by a scroll. Four strings run from a stringholder, loosely attached 
to a button in the middle of the lower rib, to a bridge , and from the 
bridge over the nut to lateral pegs. (fig. 109, pi. XXIV) 

A mute, that is, a comb-shaped rider placed on the bridge, suffo- 
cates some of the vibrations of the bridge and, consequently, of the 
body; the resulting timbre is thinner and less material than that of 
unmuted violins. The first evidence of such a device is in Renaud’s 
air in the second act of Lully’s opera Armtde (1686), Plus f observe 
ces lieux; there, all parts of the string orchestra bear the direction: 
“11 faut jouer cecy avec des sourdines .” 

The special features of the violin family, which distinguish it from 
the viols, have been shown in a juxtaposition on page 347. 

The construction of the violin depends upon an important acous- 
tical phenomenon. The function of its body in forming the charac- 
acteristic timbre is not confined to picking up the vibrations of the 
bowed strings and to radiating them from a broader surface. To use 
the words of Sir James Jeans, it is expected “to add something of its 
own.” This is the formant. 

In the old theory, 

the timbre of an instrument was uniquely determined by the number 
and proportions of the harmonics relative to the fundamental. If the same 
instrument played another note, the timbre would be unchanged, but 
all the harmonics would be shifted so as to retain the same relation to the 
fundamental. But according to the new formant theory, all harmonics 
lying within a certain range of pitch would be prominent in the note of the 




The Baroque (1600-/750) 355 

instrument, no matter what the fundamental, and it is the predominant 
range which characterizes the timbre of the instrument (Richardson). 

Generally speaking, a formant is “an emphasis of certain harmon- 
ics lying in a particular region of the musical scale. . . . It is pointed 
out that not merely the range of the formant , but also the intensity 
within that range relative to the fundamental, together determine 
the timbre” (Richardson). 

Most violins have the formant between three thousand and six 
thousand frequencies j 

and it is through the reinforcement of harmonics having these frequen- 
cies that the violin gains its distinctive rich tone. The free vibrations of 
the viola are of lower frequency because of its larger dimensions, and this 
explains why a low note on the violin sounds quite different from the 
same note on the viola — the body of the violin reinforces a group of quite 
high harmonics, while the body of the viola reinforces a group of much 
lower harmonics (Jeans). 

The formant does not only cause the tonal difference between the 
violin and other kinds of instruments, but also between good and 
poor violins. The frequencies of the body vibrations are high and 
evenly distributed in good violins j they are lower and less well 
distributed in mediocre instruments. The varnish does not seem to 
have any importance. 

The origin of the violin is hard to trace. It underwent an ex- 
tremely slow process of crystallization. Several instruments contrib- 
uted to its formation. The fiddle in Europe was always held on the 
shoulder and bowed palm-downward as it is today. Other character- 
istic features of the violin appeared occasionally in the fiddles from 
the thirteenth century on: the bulging soundboard with a depression 
near the outline, the projecting edges, the lateral pegs and even the 
four strings. At the end of the fifteenth century several of these 
features were combined. For instance, an instrument pictured on a 
French tapestry of that time has three distinct bouts, lateral pegs and 
four stringsj it is leaned against the left shoulder and bowed palm- 
downward. 

It is not difficult to guess the accordatura of the four strings. Fid- 
dles, according to Lanfranco’s Scintille di musica ( 1533), were tuned 
in g g' d' a ' e” ; if the strings were reduced to four, it would be natural 
to omit the doubling g' and keep g d ' a ' e" } that is, the accordatura of 
the violin. 

The fiddle was not the only instrument to contribute to the violin. 




356 The History of Musical Instruments 

The medieval rebec also became an important factor in its evolution. 
At the beginning of the sixteenth century that old oriental instru- 
ment had no place in serious music. Though Virdung depicts a rebec 
or clein geigen in his Musica getutscht ( 1 5 1 1 ) , he does not describe 
it in the text, since he ranks it with the onniitze instrumenta or use- 
less instruments. 

Seventeen years later the situation has changed. The rebecs or 
kleine geigen that Agricola depicts in his Musica deudsch (1528) 
are given equal importance with the grosse geigen or viols. Their 
tuning is identical with the three lower strings of the violin, the 
viola and the tenor violin : 

Treble: g d' ct 

Alto-Tenor: c g d' 

Bass: F c g 

Agricola is not the only authority ; in 1543 the same tunings are in- 
dicated in Ganassi’s Regola Rubertina. 

Two details are particularly remarkable in Agricola’s explanation. 
First, the viols are called walsche y which, in older German, means 
Italian. Second, the kleine geigen are closely related to a third kind 
mentioned by him — the Polische geigen — except that in the latter 
the strings are touched with the nails instead of the fleshy finger 
tips, in consequence of which the strings are more widely separated. 
A direct confirmation of a contact between the Polish instrument 
and the violin is given by Michael Praetorius, who in 1618 writes 
that musicians call the Violen de gamba mit dem Namen Violen y die 
Violen de bracio aber y Geigen oder Polnische Geigeln. He adds: 
“Maybe this kind of instrument came from Poland, or there are, 
in that country, prominent artists who play it.” 

As early as 1528 some rebecs had begun to abandon their oriental 
shape, while retaining other of their characteristic features. Agricola 
gave two sets of woodcuts illustrating the kleinen geigen , one depict- 
ing the usual rebec shape, the other one the shape of the grosse 
geigen or viols. This seems to be the first evidence of blending the 
two types. 

Five years later an Italian writer, Giovanni Maria Lanfranco, 
mentioned in his Scintille di musica (1533) a similar family of 
three sizes and called its members either violette da arco senza tasti 
(‘small bowed viols without frets’) or violette da braccio (‘arm 
viols’). Except for the four-stringed bass, these violette had three 
strings tuned in fifths. 




The Baroque (1600—1750) 357 

About two years later the Italian painter Gaudenzio Ferrari dec- 
orated the cupola of the Saronno cathedral with a large fresco repre- 
senting a celestial concert. Among the crowd of playing and singing 
angels, three are playing a consort of violette da braccio senza tasti 
with three strings in the true shape of the present violin family, with 
shallow ribs, pointed corners, round shoulders, a depression running 
near the edge, ff and a scroll. Moreover, the alto-tenor is played in 
the third or fourth position, that rechte kunstliche applikatz which 
Hans Judenkunig had taught in his U tilts et compendiaria intro- 
ductio (1523). 

Thus, the violin with its alto-tenor and bass (later on called re- 
spectively viola and tenor violin ) existed at the end of the first third 
of the sixteenth century, though with three strings only. The fam- 
ily that the Hispano-Italian Pedro Cerone described in his Melopeo 
y Maestro ( 1613) was still three-stringed. 

The uppermost string began to be added in the second half of 
the sixteenth century. 

In Sylvcstro di Ganassi’s Lettione Seconda (1543), which again 
refers to the three sizes of violette senza tasti with the same pitches 
mentioned in Agricola, we have the first reference to playing pizzi- 
cato and vibrato. The vibrato may have been taken from the Polish 
fiddlers j Agricola said that they caused “by a trembling play the 
melody to become sweeter than on any other instrument.” The piz* 
zicato was probably an old Italian technique, as on many Mediter- 
ranean sculptures of the middle ages players are represented pluck- 
ing, not bowing, their viols. 

In its classical, though not final, form the new family is men- 
tioned and pictured in Praetorius’s Syntagma musicum (1618-20) 
and is called viole da braccio or ‘arm viols,’ including in this term not 
only the smaller sizes but also the basses and double basses which 
could not possibly be held by the arm. The terminology, however, 
varies greatly at that period. For instance, Giovanni Gabrieli, who 
seems to have been the first composer to prescribe definite instru- 
ments for his scores, writes, in his Sacrae Symphoniae ( 1597 ) > a P ar t 
for a violino; but having an alto clef and descending beyond g, this 
is clearly a viola part. Correspondingly, Lodovico Zacconi, in his 
Prattica di musica (first published in 1592), includes in the term 
violino both the violin and the viola. In the same way, writers of 
the earlier part of the century had given diminutives, violette and 
kleine geigen, to all three members of the family. 

This indefiniteness must be taken into consideration in interpreting 




3 58 The History of Musical Instruments 

the strange term violini piccoli alia francese in the score of Monte- 
verdi’s opera Orfeo (1607). Previous authors have concluded that 
they were small violins a fourth higher than the usual violin. But the 
family of violins in this score consists of the two piccoli } two violini 
or dinar j da braccio and one basso de viola da braccio; if they were, 
in our terminology, two small and two usual violins and a bass, the 
quintet would not have had any alto or tenor. But there are no in- 
consistencies when we interpret the violino ordinario as a viola, fol- 
lowing Gabrieli and Zacconi, and the violino 'piccolo as a violin in 
the modern sense. 

The strange epithet alia francese is repeated in a Florentine text 
of 1612, which says that French musicians in that year played the 
violini alia francese. Although violino is an Italian term, and al- 
though all preserved specimens are Italian, it seems that even before 
the Italians recognized the violin as the leading instrument it had 
an outstanding place, not in French music in general, but in French 
ballet music. A violin orchestra, indeed the classic violin orchestra, 
had first been formed to accompany the ballets de cour in the middle 
of the sixteenth century, though by an Italian player, Baldassare de 
Belgiojoso, whom the French called Balthasar de Beaujoyeux. 

The first great makers of violins lived in Brescia in Lombardy: 
the masters Gasparo Bertolotti, called da Salo (c. 1542-1609), 
and Giovanni Paolo Maggini (c. 1580-1632). They favored a 
small pattern, less deeply waisted middle bouts, corners with shorter 
points, deeply bulging bodies, shallow ribs and long, steep, angular 
holes. 

Almost at the same time the neighboring town, Cremona, had 
begun to become the world center in violin manufacture. Andrea 
Am ati (c. 1535-after 1 61 1) was the founder of this new center and 
of a large dynasty of leading violin makers. His sons Antonio (c. 
1555-after 1640) and Hieronymous (c. 1556-1630) made and 
signed their instruments jointly j his grandson Nicola (1596- 
1684), Hieronymus’s son, became the greatest artist of the family. 
For a period of more than a hundred years these men determined 
the forms of violins. They flattened the body, deepened the middle 
bouts, sharpened the corners, rounded the holes and improved the 
varnish $ they created the classical shape of the violin. It was Nicola 
Amati’s greatest disciple who became the grand-master of all epochs 
and countries — Antonio Stradivari (c. 1640-1737). His violins 
can easily be recognized, but it would be difficult to describe them, 
since during the almost one hundred years of his life he was continu- 




The Baroque ( 1600—1750 ) 359 

ally altering his pattern. Violins are like human beings ; no two are 
identical. Their differences and similarities cannot be classified by any 
systematization, nor do they lend themselves to scientific description. 
The historically trained scholar has to give up his place to the sensi- 
tive eye of the connoisseur. 

Around Stradivari arose an innumerable quantity of masters. The 
most outstanding of them were Carlo Bergonzi (c. 1675-1747) 
and Joseph Guarneri ‘del Gesu’ ( 1687-after 1742). By about 1750 
the peak of Italian violin making was already over. One hundred and 
fifty years of producing first-rate instruments, which improved in- 
stead of deteriorated with use and age, provided enough violins for 
a long time. With necessity lacking for great makers, inspiration and 
skill passed rapidly away. 

The German school started at Absam near Innsbruck with Jacob 
Stainer (1621-1683), who was the first to introduce refined Italian 
workmanship into his country. His influence was strong enough to 
act on the violin industry of Mittenwald and to make this small Ba- 
varian town a center in which the dynasty of the Klotz had a leading 
position. The most important members of this family were Mathias 
(1653-1735), his sons Georg (1687-1734) and Sebastian (1696- 
after 1743), and this latter’s son, Aegidius Sebastian (1733-1815). 

In England a native production of some importance began with 
Thomas Urquiiart (born 1625), and was continued principally by 
Edward Pamphilon (c. 1680) and Barak Norman (died 1740). 

France, on the contrary, had no great name before Francois 
Tourte (1747-1835), who was the great-master of bow makers, 
and Francois Lupot (1774-1837). 

The brief survey shows that England and France were behind 
Italy in violin making. The chief reason was that, unlike Italy, these 
countries did not consider the violin the queen of instruments. They 
used it as a dance instrument but were less ready to accept it in cham- 
ber music. The heavier strings and the stronger resonance of the 
bulging back, probably also its different bowing, made it more vigor- 
ous than the treble viol. Playford calls it “cheerful and spritely,” 
and Jean Rousseau (1687) expects the dessus de viole to caress 
( flater ), and the violin to enliven {animer). But it should be con- 
fined to this, Thomas Mace (1676) thinks: You may add to your 
Press , a Pair of Violins, to he in Readiness for any Extraordinary 
Jolly, or Jocund Consort-Occasion; But never use Them, but with 
This Proviso, viz. 

In France the resistance persisted to the eighteenth century. Fa- 




360 The History of Musical Instruments 

ther Menestrier, who in 1682 published a book Des Ballets anciens 
et modernesy calls the violin somewhat noisy ( quelque feu tafageur ) , 
and in 1705, Jean-Laurent Lecerf de la Vieville, making a Com fa- 
raison de la Musique italienne et de la Musique frangoise , states: 
“The violin is not noble, everyone agrees on this.” It was the violin- 
ist and composer Jean-Marie Leclair (1697-1764) to whom the 
violin finally owed its social rank in France, and due to his efforts 
“decent folk,” to quote the Mercure de France } were not ashamed 
of cultivating this instrument. The struggle of the viol to keep out 
the violin was paralleled by the struggle of the gamba against the 
violoncello. The competition between the two families was so ani- 
mated that in 1740 a French Doctor of Law, Hubert le Blanc, felt 
compelled to publish a Defense de la Basse de Viole contre les En- 
trefrises du Violon et les Pretensions du Violoncel. There we read: 
“The violoncello, that until now has been looked upon as a miserable 
hated and pitiful wretch, whose lot was to starve to death for lack 
of a free meal, now flatters itself that it will receive many caresses 
in the place of the bass viol; it already conjures up a bliss that will 
make it weep with tenderness.” How dreadful are “the thick strings 
demanding an exaggerated pressure of the bow and a tension that 
makes them shrill!” After all, the new instruments, the violin and 
the cello, “not being able to dispute the delicate touch of the viol, 
its euphonious resonance in a suitable place where its attractions may 
be closely scrutinized and intimately impressive, falls back on the 
expedience of setting itself up in an immense hall capable of produc- 
ing effects as harmful to the viol as they are favorable to the violin.” 

The “immense hall” of the eighteenth century, as opposed to the 
chamber of the sixteenth, is one of the essential factors which explain 
the change in musical instruments and style. The new tendency 
towards dramatic, overpowering music favored the strong accents 
and the dynamic contrast of the violin. As soon as the first operas 
were performed, the violin dislodged the viols and became the 
leading instrument in the orchestra and the chamber. It was charac- 
teristic that England and France, the two countries most opposed to 
a general introduction of the violin, were the last to accept the opera. 

The classical shape of the violin was not its final form. At the end 
of the eighteenth century, when music strove for more brilliancy and 
power, the bridge was raised and more highly arched. Consequently, 
the strings had to run downhill from the bridge to the pegs, and the 
neck and fingerboard were slanted back to follow the angle of the 




The Baroque (7600—1750) 361 

strings} thinner strings were used, and the bassbar became heavier 
to counterbalance the stronger pressure. Not only were new violins 
made after this pattern} old instruments that were still in use were 
transformed, so that it is extremely rare to find a violin in its orig- 
inal condition. 

More radical innovations, such as Francois C hanot’s edgeless 
and cornerless violin ( Paris 1 8 1 7 ) , F ran^ois Savart’s straight-sided 
model (Paris 1817), as well as many others, have been failures. 

One recent improvement, on the contrary, has been successful: 
the G string overs'pun with silver. When Jean Rousseau published 
his Traite de la Viole in 1687, overspun strings already existed} but 
there is no evidence of their being used on violins. In the same year 
Daniel Speer, in his Grund-rich tiger Unterricht , related that some 
violas had strings overspun with silver or copper. There is no men- 
tion of them in the most detailed method of violin playing in the 
eighteenth century, Leopold Mozart’s V er such einer Violins chute, 
first published in 1756. The first mention of overspun strings in 
violins seems to be in a British patent dated January 31, 1772, which 
protects William Lovelace’s special “manner of wiring fiddle strings 
so as not to injure the gut, and to wire them more compactly and 
firmly.” Some eighty years later, however, such strings were not 
yet universally accepted. In 1855 an instrument maker, Heinrich 
Welcker von Gontershausen, wrote that some violinists imitated the 
example of the three lower strings of the guitar by overspinning 
the G string with silver, but that most players preferred gut strings. 

Small violins existed as early as the end of the sixteenth century. 
Some puzzling items in German inventories of that time must have 
been similar to the small treble tuned to cf g' d " a" mentioned by 
Praetorius in 1618. Several German composers, Philipp Heinrich 
F,rlebach, for instance, and Johann Sebastian Bach, used this sharp- 
sounding instrument in their scores. Strung and tuned to the pitch 
of normal violins, they are still employed to teach children. 

Quinton was the French name of a violin with five strings in 
g d ' a f d" g”. It is a mistake to apply this name to five-stringed treble 
viols. 

The viola is the alto of the family and has its strings tuned to 
c g d f a'. It ought to be larger than it usually is to have enough res- 
onance. Its insufficient size is a consequence of the subordinate posi- 
tion of violas in the eighteenth century. Sandwiched between the 
melody of the violins and the accompaniment of the basses, they had 
an unimportant role. Consequently, they were played by superan- 




362 The History of Musical Instruments 

nuated violinists who, unwilling to adjust themselves to the larger 
size, had them reduced. Even precious old specimens were clipped. 
The instrument is not always clearly designated by composers ; in 
German scores one finds the term violetta y and in French scores 
quinte y cinquiesme y hautecontre y or taille y which are names of a part 
rather than of a definite instrument. 

The tenor-violin in F c g d' y the strings of which had a vibrating 
length of less than twenty inches, was constructed between the end of 
the sixteenth and the middle of the eighteenth centuries. It had a 
deep body and must have been held like a cello. It was rare, however, 
and was finally given up ; all modern attempts to revive it have been 
failures. 

The violoncello began its career as bass viola da braccio. It was 
tuned either to C G d a or a tone lower. As a bass, it was not expected 
to play solo parts; its role was to provide music with a solid founda- 
tion. Specimens up to the middle of the seventeenth century, and 
even beyond, were larger and broader than the later cello, and they 
must have had thicker strings. Like gambas, they were bowed in 
palm-upward position. 

The modern pattern of the violoncello must have originated in 
the middle of the seventeenth century. The Bolognese composer, 
Domenico Gabrielli ( 1659-1690), wrote the first solo pieces for this 
instrument, two sonatas for cello and basso conti nuo, ricercari for 
cello without accompaniment, a canon for two celli and several ricer- 
cari for cello and basso continuo, all of which bear the date 1689. We 
do not know whether the Italian cellists of that time played palm up- 
or downward; at any rate, Frederick the Great’s teacher, Johann 
Joachim Quantz, in his Versuch ( 1752), ascribed the palm-downward 
position of the cello bow to the Italian, (pi. XXIV) 

The usual violoncello in Germany was probably not as advanced 
as the Italian type. It must have been too clumsy for a brilliant tech- 
nique. Johann Sebastian Bach preferred, in soio pieces, a so-called 
violoncello pccolo , a hundred to a hundred and ten centimeters high 
and some thirty centimeters wide. It was tuned like the usual cello 
and not a fifth higher, as some writers have claimed ; the parts writ- 
ten for it in Bach’s scores require low C. 

The violoncello a cinque corde y on the contrary, that Bach pre- 
scribed at about 1720 in the sixth of his suites for cello solo, was not 
necessarily a violoncello piccolo. But the fact that it would be hard 
to keep an e? string from breaking on a large instrument suggests 
a small cello with five strings rather than the usual cello. 




The Baroque (1600—7750) 363 

An eighteenth century variety of the cello, suspended from the 
shoulders of ambulant musicians, was, in a scholarly terminology, 
called viola da spalla or ‘shoulder viol.’ Contemporaneous pictures 
seem to indicate that this portable cello was shallower than the or- 
dinary one. 

The violone y pictured by Praetorius under the name grofie bafi- 
geige y was intermediate between the violoncello and the double bass. 
It was, according to Praetorius’s woodcut, four and a half Brunswick 
feet or one hundred and twenty-five centimeters tall and had five 
strings \n F X C G da. Under various names ( Kammerbass, Halb- 
bass) and in various accordaturas it has persisted to this day, though it 
is officially replaced by the double bass. 

T he double bass existed in Germany as early as the sixteenth cen- 
tury. Praetorius pictures such a gigantic grojVcontra-baf>geig y two 
hundred and twenty-five centimeters or ninety inches high, with five 
strings, the accordatura of which he does not indicate. Striving for a 
strong foundation of the orchestra, makers in three centuries pur- 
sued the phantom of “giants.” The Victoria and Albert Museum, 
London, owns a double bass of the seventeenth century which is 
over eight feet high. But Jean-Baptiste Vuillaume’s octobasse 
(Paris 1849) four meters high, has the strings stopped by seven 
pedals and is played by a bow that is supported by blocks shaped like 
oarlocks. An American model (1889) by John Geyer is even taller.. 
The most practical types, however, do not exceed one hundred and 
eighty centimeters or seventy-two inches. 

As to the form, one can distinguish the German and the Italian 
model. The double bass of German makers approached the form of 
the viola da gamba ; it had sloping shoulders, a flat back with a slant- 
ing upper part, deep ribs and sometimes even frets. It usually had 
five strings tuned by fourths, and even when it dropped the fifth 
string, it kept the tuning E x A X D G } which was generally accepted. 
The Italians, on the contrary, preferred a true violin form and even 
reduced the number of strings to three. Most players use the palm- 
upward position ( Dragonetti bow), some prefer the palm-downward 
position ( Bottesini bow). 

In the nineteenth century the fifth string was restored in order to 
extend the range of the double bass to C,, in accordance with the 
cello, which the double bass was expected to accompany in the lower 
octave. As the fifth string increases the pressure on the bridge and 
the soundboard interferes with bowing, some players prefer the me- 
chanical contrivances created at the end of the nineteenth century in 




364 The History of Musical Instruments 

order to change the pitch of the fourth string. This is lengthened on 
a narrow extension of the fingerboard running parallel to the scroll. 
It produces E x in its usual length, and C x in its total length. Four 
keys for the left hand, arranged at the upper end of the fingerboard, 
work metal stoppers that can lengthen the vibrating section of the 
string from E x to E\> X) D Xi D\) x or C. 

THE VIOLA D’AMORE as we usually think of it, is a bowed 
instrument the shape of a treble viol, with a set of thin wire strings 




figure no. 
Viola d’amore. 



stretched behind the bowed gut strings which vibrate sympathetically 
without being bowed themselves, thus producing a silvery echo j the 
instrument has no frets and is held and bowed like a violin. The 
sympathetic strings are the principal trait in this picture. It happens, 
however, that they were a late acquisition and not at all characteristic 
of the instrument called viola d’amore by the generation before 
Bach and Handel, (fig. no) 




The Baroque (1600-1750) 365 

At first the name was given to a violin with bowed metal strings. 
Praetorius (1618) had already stated that violins produced a soft 
and charming sound when strung with brass and steel strings, but 
he had no special name for such a violin. Sixty years later the name 
‘viola d’amore’ is first mentioned in Evelyn’s Diary (1679) ; he had 
much enjoyed for its sweetnesse and novelty , the viol d’amore of 5 
wyre-strings 'plaid with a bow, being but an ordinary violin, play’d 
on lyre way by a German. In 1687 two excellent authorities, one 
French, one German, gave the same definition as Evelyn. Jean 
Rousseau in his Traite de la Viole described the viole d’amour as a 
kind of dessus de viole with wire strings which, when bowed, made 
a bad effect and sounded too sharp ( aigre ) ; this is why the French 
never used such strings. According to Daniel Speer’s Grund-rich- 
tiger Unterricht, the viol de l’ amor had double steel or gut strings. 

Even in the first decades of the eighteenth century the literary 
sources do not mention any sympathetic strings. Sebastien Brossard’s 
Dictionnaire de Musique, first published in 1703, defines in its last 
(English) edition of 1740 the viole d’amour as “a kind of triple 
viol or violin, having six brass or steel strings, like those of the 
Harpsicord, ordinarily played with a bow.” Both Johann Mattheson, 
in Das neu-eroffnete Orchestre (1713), and, referring to him, 
Johann Gottfried Walther in his Musicalisches Lexicon (1732) give 
it the accordatura g cf <?'(b) g' d r , while Johann Philipp Eisel’s Musi-, 
cus autodidactus (1738) indicates F B\) c gcf f b\f. Not one of them 
speaks of sympathetic strings, and it is hard to believe that specialists 
on the viol, such as Rousseau, or on the orchestra and timbre, as 
Mattheson, would have failed to mention them if they existed. The 
question then arises whether such noted pieces as Heinrich Biber’s 
partita for two violes d’amour and bass, written at the end of the 
seventeenth century, Attilio Ariosti’s sonatas of about 1720 for a 
viola d’amore with only four strings in the range of the violin (tuned 
between a and c "), or those in four works of Johann Sebastian Bach, 
were actually intended for, and played with, sympathetic strings. 

Sympathetic strings had come to England from the Near East, 
apparently in the sixteenth century. Praetorius related that the Eng- 
lish used sympathetic viol strings to sound per consensum with the 
bowed gut strings. Details about the arrangement of sympathetic 
strings can be deduced from English sources of the middle of the 
seventeenth century. Chancellor Francis Bacon of Verulam (d. in 
1626), in his natural history, Sylva Sylvarum, published after his 
death in 1648, writes: 




366 The History of Musical Instruments 

It was devised, that a Viall should have a Lay of Wire Strings below y as 
close to the Belly as a Lute: A nd then the Strings of Guts mounted u-pon 
a Bridge , as in Ordinary V tails: To the end that, by this means , the 
uffer Strings strucken t should make the lower resound by Sympathy , 
and so make the Mustek the better ; Which, if it be to purpose , then Sym- 
pathy worketh as well by Report of Sound, as by Motion. 

And four years later, in 1652, John Playford speaks of sympathetic 
strings on the lyra viol (cp. page 348). Of this sort of Viols, I have 
seen many, but Time and Disuse has set them aside. 

Not until 1741 was there any mention of sympathetic strings on 
the viola d’amore. In that year Joseph Friedrich Bernhard Caspar 
Majer published a book Neti-eroffneter Theoretisch- und Prack- 
tischer Music-Saal. Its § 13 distinguishes between two kinds of viole 
d’amore, a smaller one like a violin, and a larger one slightly bigger 
than a viola. Both have six strings. After having indicated as many 
as seventeen different accordaturas, Majer adds in a footnote that 
there are six sympathetic strings which can be tuned to the upper 
octave of the bowed strings. Even here, where there are sympathetic 
strings, almost all the bowed strings are of metal: the first two are 
overspun with silver wire, three middle strings are steel or brass 
and only the highest one is gut. 

Actual specimens, too, give no evidence of early sympathetic 
strings. Some authors have cited a viola d’amore in the Musik- 
historisk Museum at Copenhagen (no. 376), which bears a label of 
the famous viol maker, Joachim Tielke, in Hamburg, and a date, the 
three first figures of which can be deciphered as 168. Unfortunately, 
this instrument belongs in the eighteenth century and has nothing 
whatsoever to do with Tielke. The label, as so often happens, must 
have been taken from quite a different instrument. But there are in 
existence viole d’amore with sympathetic strings, the authenticity 
of which cannot be doubted, made in Bavaria about 1720. Conse- 
quently, the first literary evidence in 1741 does not give the earliest 
date of viole d’amore with sympathetic strings. 

Antonio Vivaldi’s concerto in D minor, written about 1740 for 
lute, muted strings, a keyboard instrument and a viola d’amore with 
seven strings i n A d a d' f a ' d", is then doubtless intended for an 
instrument with sympathetic strings. 

In spite of the great number of specimens preserved in museums, 
the actual significance of the viola d’amore was small. The composi- 
tions mentioned, by Biber, Ariosti, Bach and Vivaldi, represent the 




The Baroque {i6oo—iy$oj 367 

bulk of good music written for the instrument. Soon after the publi- 
cation of Vivaldi’s concerto, it fell into almost complete oblivion. 
There is almost no music for it dating from the second half of the 
eighteenth century, with the exception of a weak sonata by Karl 
Stamitz (1746-1801). 

Though apparently forgotten, the instrument was recently resur- 
rected in the air “Doux comme Hermine” in Meyerbeer’s opera 
Les Huguenots (1836), with the accordatura d f a d' f$' a' d". A 
new fashion for it started in about 1900. Charles Martin Loeffler in 
America had used it in his Heath of Tintagiles ( 1 897). It was given 
parts in Gustave Charpentier’s opera Louise (1900), in Massenet’s 
Le jongleur de Notre Dame ( 1902) , in Puccini’s Madame Butterfly 
(1904) and in Wilhelm Kienzl’s Her Kuhr eigen (1911). 

We do not know why this instrument was called a viola d’amore. 
Its tone was not loving but metallic. The name is probably not con- 
nected with love. As the majority of these viols have a blindfold 
boy’s head instead of a scroll, it seems more logical to interpret the 
name as ‘Amor’s fiddle’ without any reference to the emotion that 
the little god symbolizes. Moreover the blindfold head is not con- 
fined to the viola d’amore and, therefore, is not indicative of its 
characteristic sound. 

Musicians often speak of the “viola d’amour,” thus carelessly 
combining an Italian with a French word. The term is either Italian, 
viola d’amore , or French, viole d’amour. 

THE VIOLA POMPOSA. Johann Sebastian Bach is credited 
with the ‘invention’ of a bowed instrument of this name. But no 
contemporaneous source has mentioned or described it, nor did Bach 
write any part for it in his scores. The sources which mention it, 
dating 1782 to 1792, are unreliable, not only because of their dates 
but because they confuse the pomposa with the violoncello piccolo. 
Fortunately, a few pieces written for the instrument have been pre- 
served, though not compositions of Bach: two in Georg Philipp Tele- 
mann’s Der getreue Music-Meister y Hamburg, 1728, a concerto by 
Karl Heinrich Graun (1701-1759) and a sonata fer la Pomfosa 
col Basso by the Viennese Cristian Giuseppe Lidarti about 1760. The 
information drawn from these pieces is first, the highest note is <? 3 , 
the lowest note /,* second, two of the open strings were doubtless d' 
and g, as in the violin and the viola j third, a transposition into a 
lower octave would be musically impossible. Thus, the pomposa 
must have had the range of the violin with an additional note below. 




368 The History of Musical Instruments 

These conclusions call to mind a strange passage in Heinrich 
Christoph Koch’s Musikalisches Lexikon (1802) : “Once in a while 
one uses a viola in the usual shape and accordatura with the addition 
of the e string of the violin, which by some is also called violino 
pomposo.” 

This violino pomposo must have been identical with the viola 
pomposa, as its accordatura fits in with the compositions ; its lower 
limit even exceeds the lowest note in Telemann’s and Lidarti’s pieces. 
The fact that in one passage Lidarti breaks the melodic line in order 
to avoid the notes below g is no reason to suppose there was no c 
string. The lowest string was weak on all instruments before over- 
spinning came into general use; and that melodic line of Lidarti’s 
demanded a particularly full tone up to the end. Besides, the lowest 
string must have been unusually weak on the viola pomposa; five 
strings tuned in fifths required a compromise in the size of the body 
which could not be large enough to give sufficient resonance to the 
lowest string. The change of name is easily explained. Being a 
combination of violin and viola, the instrument could be called by 
either name. This is confirmed by Graun’s concerto. There are two 
manuscripts of it; they are identical, except that the instrument in 
question is called violino pomposo in one of them, and in the other, 
viola pomposa. 

Such a combination of violin and viola could certainly not be larger 
than a viola, and according to Koch, the violino pomposo was eine 
Viole in gewohnlicher Form } ‘a viola in usual form.’ Thus, one 
should not classify as viola pomposa certain five-stringed instru- 
ments of the early eighteenth century which were thirty inches long 
and had ribs as deep as three or three and a half inches. These instru- 
ments were tenor violins, intermediate between the viola and the 
violoncello and tuned to F c g<T a'. This has been confirmed by 
experiments made by Ernest Closson in Brussels, and by the author, 
together with Paul Hindemith, in Berlin. 

THE BARYTON was a bass gamba with six bowed strings in 
A d f a d' f and sometimes as many as forty wire strings. These 
latter were stretched inside the neck as usual, but the neck was open 
from the rear side so that, as well as vibrating sympathetically, the 
strings could be plucked by the left thumb, (pi. XXII b) 

Barytons were almost exclusively built and played in South Ger- 
many. The first evidence of them is in a collection of nine Partien 
auf die Viola Paredon , composed by a certain Johann Georg Krause 




The Baroque ( 1600—1750 ) 369 

and dedicated to Duke Christian Ulrich of Wiirttemberg. As this 
prince died in 1704, the instrument must have existed before that 
date. Among the outstanding amateurs of the baryton was the Prince 
Nicolaus Esterhazyj it was for him that Joseph Haydn, the con- 
ductor of his orchestra, wrote a hundred and seventy-five pieces for 
the instrument. The baryton stood on the periphery of musical life 
rather than at its center, even at the peak of its existence at about 
1750. There was one single player of the instrument in the nine- 
teenth century — Sebastian Ludwig Friedel, member of the royal 
orchestra in Berlin (d. 1842). Playing was particularly difficult and 
tuning laborious $ considering the effort necessary to overcome these 
impediments, the musical result was poor. 

THE BOW has always been neglected in the history of musical 
instruments i dated specimens have not been preserved, literary 
sources are lacking, and on art works the decisive part of the bow is 
generally hidden under the player’s hand. 

The essential step in its early development was the passage in 
Asia from rattan to wood. European bows were exclusively made of 
wood. Wooden bows are not as elastic as rattan and are less easily 
curved, and therefore need a device to keep the hair away from the 
stick. The most primitive expedient is the choice of a stick with the 
stump of a branch, to which the hair can be tiedj this is what players 
of the Jugoslavian fiddle gusla do, and such bows can be seen on 
Italian paintings representing violists as late as the sixteenth century. 
A less primitive expedient was used for instance in India, a small 
piece of wood wedged between the stick and the hair at the lower end 
and held in place by a wrapping band of cloth. In later specimens the 
wedge was fastened to the stick and was called the nut. Such a device 
seems to have been known in Europe as early as the twelfth century. 
For many centuries the nut was reminiscent of the loosely wedged 
piece of wood. Its shape was improved by being rounded and slightly 
grooved, and it was held fast on the stick by slipping into a small 
track. The hair was still wrapped around it and was caught in place 
by being squeezed between the nut and the stick. 

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the bow had generally 
a horn-shaded nut , the base of the horn being attached to the stick 
and the tip curving toward the head of the bow. 

At the end of the seventeenth century a special device allowed the 
player to alter the tension of the hair j the nut ran in a slide in the 
stick and could be adjusted at will by a wire loop that could hook 




370 The History of Musical Instruments 

onto any one of a series of teeth in a piece of iron inlaid in the outer 
side of the stick. This dentated bow had only a temporary impor- 
tance, but it has survived in Swedish folk instruments. 

At the beginning of the eighteenth century the dentation was re- 
placed by an inner screw, the head of which, forming a turnable end 
of the stick, shifted the nut and regulated the tension at will. This is 
the modern device. 

Up to about 1650 the head of the bow was sometimes distinct from 
the stick j it was a kind of tooth made of bone curving toward the 
hair with the tip pointing upward. After 1650 the head was always 
one piece with the stick and in most cases elegantly curved in the 
form of a pike’s head. In the eighteenth century the head became 
curved more and more steeply, until it was at right angles to the 
stick. Finally, Francois Tourte in Paris (1747-1835) gave it its 
modern form. 

At the same time its curve was changed. The older bow curved 
very slightly outward (but certainly not as much as some violinists 
imagine if they consider the difficulties in playing Bach’s polyphonic 
sonatas). The modern bow* was curved inward to increase the elas- 
ticity and response of the stick and to enable the player to give the 
expression required in modern music by a minimum of pressure. 
Half a century earlier the stick had been lengthened and fluted or 
cut in an octagonal form. 

ARCHLUTES (Italian arciliuti). In the second half of the 
sixteenth century, when basses became more important than they 
were before, the lutanists tried to add lower strings to their instru- 
ments. But the reach of the stopping left hand was limited j a certain 
width of the fingerboard could not be exceeded. So they no longer 
tried to stop the required bass strings. Instead, they arranged them 
as open drones outside the fingerboard and tuned them beforehand 
in accordance with the bass notes demanded in the piece that they 
were going to play. To maintain a safe tensile strain, the drones had 
to have a separate pegbox. Three different arrangements were de- 
vised. 

The chitarrone seems to have been the oldest among them. The 
first clear evidence of it is on a portrait of Lady Mary Sydney (d. 
1586) in Penshurst Place, Kent, that Dr. Francis W. Galpin has 
discovered. This new Italian instrument was man size. It had the 
body of a large lute, but the peg arrangement was different. The 
pegbox was straight instead of being bent back. Above, the neck was 




The Baroque ( 1600—1750 ) 



371 



FIGURE III. 
Chitarrone. 





FIGURE 1 12. 
Theorboe. 



considerably lengthened and bore a second pegbox for the drones. 
Praetorius distinguishes two main kinds: the Paduan chitarrone, 
nearly seven feet high, with eight pairs of strings on the fingerboard, 
and the Roman chitarrone, six feet high, with only six pairs of 




372 The History of Musical Instruments 

strings on the board. The two strings of each pair were an octave 
apart. Both chitarroni had eight open bass strings. A third type, the 
Bolognese chitarrone, had wire strings. The accordatura varied, 
(fig. hi) 

After the chitarrone came the theorhoe. It is, says Thomas Mace 
in 1676, an Instrument of so much Excellency , and Worth , and of 
so Great Good Vse , That in dispite of all Fickleness , and Novelty, It 
is still made use of, in the Best Performances in Mustek. Its arrange- 
ment was similar to the chitarrone except for the upper part. The 
first pegbox was straight as in the chitarrone. The second one was 
placed a little higher and slightly to the side. The two were con- 
nected by an S-shaped neck. The strings, at first single, were gemi- 
nated in the eighteenth century, (fig. 112) 

What did the name mean? It cannot be traced back to any Ro- 
mance or Germanic language, but the root trh, meaning something 
bulging like a belly or a bag, is frequent in Slavonic languages. A 
relation with a Slavonic word is the more possible as a kind of 
theorboe exists in the Ukraine under the name torhan. Nevertheless 
the torban cannot have been copied from the Italian tiorbo. It is not 
only much clumsier, but different in one important point — fourteen 
or fifteen open strings are stretched over the treble side of the sound- 
board and fastened to pegs in the edge of the body. Such a combi- 
nation of a lute and a zither in one instrument is unknown in the 
Occident, but not in the Orient ; a Persian book of 1345, the Kanz 
al-tuhaf, describes an instrument mugni, which had the neck and 
the body of a lute and the string arrangement of a zither. The rela- 
tion between the Italian theorboe and the Ukrainian torban cannot 
yet be determined. 

A third kind of drone lute was the theorboed lute (Italian liuto 
\at\tiorbato') . Though Praetorius gives this name to an ordinary 
theorboe with double strings, we should reserve the term for the 
usual lute of the seventeenth century. In this lute the stopped strings, 
running over the fingerboard, were tuned by pegs in the usual peg- 
box turned back at a right angle from the neck; the pegbox for the 
drones, on the contrary, formed a straight elongation of the bass 
side of the neck so that the first pegbox stood at right angles both to 
the neck and the second pegbox. (pi. XXIII c) 

CITTERNS. The general tendency towards increasing the bass 
range led, in northern Europe, to the construction of several larger 
citterns which still had the essential features of the family — that is, 




The Baroque (1600-/750) 



373 




figure 1 15. Guitar (c. 1700). 



the flat front and back, lateral pegs and wire strings — but which 
differed in some details. 

Pandora was the name of one of them, which was said to have 
been invented by a certain John Rose in London in 1562. The name 
first appears in 1566 in the scenario of Gascoigne’s tragedy Jocasta 
and, for the last time, one hundred years later, in an inventory of 
the Berlin court orchestra dated 1667. It must, however, be noted 
that this name was given to entirely different instruments. Rose’s 
pandora was four feet high j its outline was doubly scalloped, thus 
forming three lobes $ the stringholder was frontal and lutelike. The 




374 The History of Musical Instruments 

strings, in sets of two or more, were tuned to G 1 C D G c e a or 
C D G c f a d'. (fig. 1 13) 

A second instrument, called penorcon , was slightly shorter and 
wider than the pandora and had nine double strings in G x A x C D 
G c e a d ‘ '. 

The orpheoreon or orpharion had the most unusual appearance. 
It was a meter high and had an elegant outline with undulating 
lobes. The frontal stringholder was placed slantwise, ascending 
toward the treble side, while the frets slanted slightly toward the 
same side, in order to shorten the upper strings. Eight double strings 
were tuned to C F G cf ad' g'. (fig. 1 14) 

Late in the eighteenth century French makers gave the cittern the 
neck arrangement of the theorboe and replaced the wires by gut 
strings. Seven sets on the fingerboard, formed of eleven strings, were 
tuned to e a c%' e' a ' c\" e" ; the five drones had the accordatura 
A B c%d d%. (pi. XXII a) 

THE GUITAR. Though lutes were played as late as approxi- 
mately 1750, the lutist’s art had declined after the end of the seven- 
teenth century, particularly under the pressure of the harpsichord. 
Its decline involved the rise of the guitar. 

The lute could be superseded by the harpsichord, both as a chord 
instrument to accompany on a figured bass, and as a solo and cham- 
ber instrument. But its portability could not be matched by any 
harpsichord, clavichord or piano j it blended with the player’s body 
and reflected his every feeling by the directness of the touch in play- 
ing. This attraction belonged to another simpler instrument too, the 
Mediterranean guitar, with its flat waisted body and its straight 
head. 

At the beginning of the seventeenth century the guitar still had 
only four double strings in either cf ad' or fb d g', though Vincente 
Espinel, a guitarist in Madrid in the second half of the sixteenth 
century, is credited with having added a fifth pair below. Compared 
with a modern guitar, the body was narrower and deeper and the 
waist was less emphasized and higher in the body; the soundhole 
was covered with a rose and the head had a quadrangular outline. 
The strings in these earlier guitars were knotted through holes in 
the crossledge which served as a stringholder. (pis. XXII c, 
XXIII a, fig. 1 15) 

In the seventeenth century the Hispano-Italian guitar began to 
overrun the aristocratic world of France $ it seems that les Italiens } 




The Baroque (r6oo— 7750) 375 

the Italian actors in Paris, brought it into fashion. Painters a la mode, 
like Watteau and Boucher, depicted it in the hands of both comedians 
and ladies of high society. 

When it became an amateur instrument it was simplified. Six 
single strings in E A d gb e' (written one octave higher) replaced 
the five double strings ; to counteract the loss of sound volume, the 
body was made larger, relatively broader and shallower, and the 
soundhole lost its rose. The new form was easier to handle and 
musically more robust j it was to the old form what the cello was to 
the gamba. 

Handling was still more facilitated in the nineteenth century by 
metal screws replacing the wooden pegs. 

THE HARPSICHORD. In the sixteenth century the best harp- 
sichords were made in Italy. But in the seventeenth century the Ital- 
ian harpsichord began to lose its former supremacy. The makers, 
persisting in the old tradition, were reluctant to adopt foreign im- 
provements. The first evidence of two keyboards on an Italian instru- 
ment is an Innsbruck inventory of 1665 — that is, eighty or ninety 
years after the first mention of •zweyen clavieren in the north. The 
reason for adopting a second keyboard so late was a prejudice against 
the use of stops j they finally went as far as to increase the number of 
keyboards to three for only three stops in order to avoid pulling out. 
the stops. A harpsichord by Vincenzo Sodi in the Crosby Brown 
Collection in New York, dating from 1779, has three stops, 4' 8' 8'; 
the upper manual worked the 4' stop, the middle manual worked 
one 8' and the 4', and the lower manual both 8'. 

In about 1600, when most of the Italian centers of harpsichord 
making had lost their importance, Antwerp with the Ruckers dy- 
nasty became the uncontested center, (pi. XXI b) 

The Ruckers were the first of those famous families in which 
genius and skill for a certain branch of instrument making was kept 
alive and fertile for generations. To own a harpsichord or spinet of 
one of the Ruckers was the pride of musicians and music lovers in all 
countries of Europe for two centuries ; when, in 1792, under the 
Terror, a special commission inventoried the estates of the emigres, 
an astonishing number of Ruckers instruments were found in the 
forsaken homes of French aristocrats. 

Until recently, the eldest, Hans Ruckers, was credited with all 
imaginable improvements of the harpsichord. Today we know that 
stops and double keyboards existed long before him; the merit of 




376 The History of Musical Instruments 

the Ruckers consisted in the rare quality of their instruments rather 
than in the invention of special contrivances. The very quality of 
the instruments has made them difficult to study, because they were 
not put aside or chopped up for fuel when superseded by improved, 
‘modern’ harpsichords, but transformed according to the latest fash- 
ion. Our museums possess more than a hundred Ruckers instru- 
ments j scarcely one of them is in its original condition, without 
additional or altered keyboards or keys or stops. Investigators can- 
not be too skeptical of such museum pieces. 

The second keyboard, that we now suppose to be a means of rap- 
idly changing force and timbre, seems to have originally had an 
entirely different purpose. A Dutch organist, Quirijn van Blanken- 
burgh (1654-c. 1739), who knew many harpsichords in original 
condition and witnessed their transformation, described the old 
arrangement and its significance in his book Elementa musica of 
nieuvo licht tot het welverstaan van de musiec (1739) : transposition 
was difficult on a keyboard instrument (and certainly unsatisfactory 
because the temperament was unequal). A satisfactory transposition 
was brought about without any mental effort on the part of the 
player by adding a second keyboard under the first that was shifted 
five semitones to the left. A C on the lower keyboard coincided with 
a G on the higher one, and the harpsichordist could seemingly play 
C major from his book and yet produce the required G major. One 
specimen of a harpsichord with two transposing keyboards is pre- 
served in the Morris Steinert Collection of Keyboard Instruments 
at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. When musicians after 
1700 had no more use for this obsolete transposition, the two key- 
boards were shifted and completed to coincide. The instrument be- 
came what the French called a ravalement or ‘let down.’ Instead of 
ending on the apparent E (which actually was a C), the five addi- 
tional keys made it end on an apparent B u which was actually a 
forming a kind of short octave already explained on page 333. (pi. 
XXIV) 

The seventeenth century transformers of old harpsichords had 
to make use of four stops, each keyboard having two. As then the 
two keyboards were used to enrich the timbre instead of transposing 
music into another key, the four stops were embarrassing. Three of 
them could be used as 8' 8' 4', and all combinations of them were 
made possible if the keyboards could be coupled by pushing in or 
pulling out one of them. The fourth was useless ; it was either dis- 
connected or changed into a clipped and dry sounding lute-sto'p. This 




The Baroque (1600—7750) 377 

could be arranged by plucking the strings near the bridge or by mut- 
ing with a felted ledge the strings plucked by the jacks of one of the 
three first stops. 

Harpsichord players of today may wonder why the fourth stop 
was not used for a 16'. This was not done for two reasons. First, the 
instrument was not long enough. Second, there was no need, indeed 
there was a dislike, for a 16'. No English, Flemish, French, Italian 
or Spanish harpsichord ever had one; it occurs exclusively in a few 
German harpsichords of the eighteenth century. This should be 
learned by modern harpsichordists who are continually pressing the 
16' pedal in Couperin’s Pieces de Clavecin as well as in rounds of the 
Fitzmilliam Virginal Book. 

Moreover, it cannot be too often repeated that the harpsichord, 
generally speaking, had no pedal to facilitate the change of timbre 
and power. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries it had lateral 
stops , piercing the right wall of the case almost beyond the reach of 
the player’s hand and eluding any change in the middle of a piece. 
They were replaced by jrontal stops in the eighteenth century, which 
to a certain extent allowed the player to connect or disconnect them 
even during a piece, but not without taking the hand off the keys. 

It is true that a pedal was invented in the seventeenth century. 
In Thomas Mace’s Mustek's Monument ( 1676) we read an aston- 
ishing report on a new harpsichord called pedal. This was 



an Instrument of a Late Invention , contriv'd by one Mr John Hayward 
of Londony a most excellent Kind of Instrument for a Consorty and far 
beyond all Harpsions or Organs. The player had several Various Stops at 
Pleasure; and all Quick and Nimble y by the Ready Turn of the Foot. 
. . . There being right underneath his Toes four little Pummels of 
Woody under each Foot two y any one of those four he may Tread upon 
at his Pleasure; which by the Weight of his Foot drives a Springy and 
so Causeth the whole Instrument to Sound , either Soft or Loudy accom- 
panying as he shall chuse to Tread any of them down. 

In spite of this marvelous quality, the pedal had no success; not 
one source besides Mace mentions it. If the failure had been in the 
mechanical field, then cleverer hands would have improved the con- 
trivance. It rather must be looked for in the musical field. “Several 
various stops at pleasure, and all quick and nimble” — this was cer- 
tainly not to the taste of the seventeenth century. Music in that time 
was much less motley and variegated than we like to imagine, and 




378 The History of Musical Instruments 

we had better modify our ideas than force an inappropriate style 
upon ancient music. 

When finally the harpsichord was given a pedal, it was in Eng- 
land and only in the last two decades of its existence, when the com- 
petition of the piano caused the harpsichord makers to think of all 
possible accommodations in order to keep up with the newcomer. 
As far as the author knows, one wooden pedal was sometimes at- 
tached near the left leg of the instrument after 1760. One must not 
confuse this kind of harpsichord with the German Pedal-Klavizimbel 
(e.g. in Bach’s possession) which had a pedal keyboard like an organ 
and was a practicing instrument for organists. 

CARILLONS. On page 279 we spoke of sets of bells used in 
monasteries, suspended from horizontal bars and struck by hand 
with hammers. They were made mechanical in the thirteenth cen- 
tury by being connected with tower clocks ; a cogwheel in the works 
caused the hammers to strike the tuned bells in a prescribed melodic 
sequence. Flanders and northern France, later also Holland, made 
this contrivance more and more elaborate. Little iron nails, inserted 
in a rotating cylinder in an appropriate arrangement, released the 
hammers so that finally a complete tune, indeed a series of tunes, 
was played without a man’s interference (as in our musical boxes). 
After about 1 500, if not earlier, these carillons could be disconnected 
from the clock and the rotating cylinder and played by hand from 
a keyboard, and, after 1600, even by foot. When John Evelyn came 
to Amsterdam in 1641, he went up to the carillon in the tower of 
St. Nicholas and found, according to his Diary , 

one who played all sorts of compositions from the tablature before him, 
as if he had fingered an organ; for so were the hammers fastened with 
wires to several keys put into a frame twenty feet below the bells, upon 
which (by help of a wooden instrument, not much unlike a weaver’s 
shuttle, that guarded his hand) he struck on the keys and played to 
admiration: all this while, through the clattering of the wires, din of the 
too nearly sounding bells, and noise that his wooden gloves made the 
confusion was so great, that it was impossible for the musician, or any 
that stood near him, to hear any thing himself; yet, to those at a distance, 
and especially in the streets, the harmony and the time were the most 
exact and agreeable. 

These carillons became the pride of Netherlandish towns and 
objects of their competition. To outdo rivals, carillons were made 
with more than fifty bells and ten thousand nails in the rotating 




The Baroque (1600—1750) 379 

cylinder. Other countries also have adopted the carillon and its 
cheerful music. But their manufacture has almost exclusively been 
confined to the Netherlands, and nowhere else did they enter so 
intimately into the daily life as in their native land. 

Park and chamber chimes were an offshoot of carillons. In sei- 
gnorial parks the Netherlands had a predilection for all kinds of 
automatons released by water works, and especially for hydraulic 
chimes. When John Evelyn visited such a park in Amsterdam in 
1641, “there was likewise a cylinder that entertained the company 
with a variety of chimes, the hammers striking upon the brims of 
porcelain dishes, suited to the tones and notes, without cracking any 
of them.” 

Chimes in chamber size encased in a piece of furniture with a key- 
board served for the entertainment of amateurs, or even practicing 
purposes of those in charge of the large town chimes. But as the 
needs of professional players required the full range of tower chimes, 
including even the big bass bells, Dutch bell founders devised the 
system of replacing the bells by space-saving slabs of bronze, which 
may have been suggested by native metallophones in the recently 
conquered Dutch colonies in East India. From that time, sets of 
metal slabs, generally called glockens-piel both with or without a 
keyboard, were used at home, in orchestral performances (from 
Handel’s Saul, 1738, and Mozart’s Zauberflote, 1791, to Gustav. 
Mahler’s Seventh Symphony, 1908), in musical bands and even in 
the organ. It probably was an organ glockenspiel on which J. S. Bach 
played the canifanella in b and e of his cantata no. 53, Schlage dock 
gewiinschte Stunde. 

Sometimes the higher harmonics of a struck metal slab are 
stronger than the fundamental, or even drown the fundamental 
entirely so that the musical effect is uneven. To prevent this draw- 
back, a Frenchman, Auguste Mustel in Paris (1886), perhaps in- 
spired by the resonance bamboos of the Javanese metallophone 
gender , made a piano out of the old glockenspiel, with tuned steel 
slabs instead of strings, which singly or in pairs were placed on tuned 
resonance boxes. The vibrations in these boxes reinforced the fun- 
damentals of the slabs and, consequently, muffled the penetrating 
tinkle of the harmonics. This instrument, known as celesta, is much 
used in the modern orchestra. 

Flemish carillons must not be confused with English change- 
ringing. Here, the bells of a chime are rung with ropes by individual 
men, and the purpose is not to play tunes but to change the order 




380 The History of Musical Instruments 

of the bells j starting from a scale arrangement, the players pass 
through a number of permutations until the scale is finally re-estab- 
lished j in these permutations each bell either keeps its position or 
else is rung in the position adjacent to that in which it was struck 
before j for instance : 



12345 
2 13 5 4 
2 3 14 5 
32415 
34251 

and so on. Practiced for three hundred years, this kind of ringing 
has become a traditional sport of enthusiastic amateurs. 

THE FLUTE. The introduction to this chapter has said that 
the passage from the sixteenth to the seventeenth century involved 
a particularly decisive change in the importance of wind instru- 
ments. For two reasons their former prevalence declined. The first 
reason was that most of the older wind instruments were inadequate 
for the expressive style of the new epoch j the second reason was 
the strong tendency away from the variegated colors of the past to 
the monochrome style in which one color, that of stringed instru- 
ments, dominated almost exclusively. This process was completed 
at different times in different places. The string orchestra, which 
is still the nucleus of our modern orchestra, was established at that 
time. But no sooner had this restriction taken place than wind in- 
struments came back, only in a less important position. They were 
needed both as a spice to enliven the monotony of the strings and, 
in the opera, as a means of characterizing typical scenes and per- 
sonages. 

Flutes, oboes and bassoons were the first to be readmitted to the 
orchestra. But they had to undergo some changes in order to com- 
pete with the violins and the singers in ‘cantability* and agility. The 
first improvement was to make the instruments out of two or more 
pieces tightly fitting into each other instead of making one clumsy 
tube. This allowed the player to regulate the pitch by adjusting the 
length in the manner of a telescope. 

The second improvement, in oboes and bassoons, consisted in 
adapting the cut of the reed to the new conditions, although we do 
not know exactly how this change took place. 

The third improvement was in the bore, which procured a 




The Baroque ( 1600—1750 ) 38 r 

smoother tone. Here again, a careful investigation has not yet been 
made. 

The transverse flute , even more than other instruments, was 
greatly enhanced. As a shrill military instrument it had had a cylin- 
drical bore. French makers in the second half of the seventeenth 
century made it conical, decreasing from nineteen millimeters at 
the mouth-hole to fourteen millimeters at the lower end. Six open 




figure 1 16. Flute ( 1 8th century). 

front holes were arranged in two groups ; a key covered a seventh 
hole producing d%' when opened, as this lowest semitone could not 
be produced by cross-fingering. The axis of this key was fixed in a 
bulbiform swelling of the tube which did not affect the bore. 

An earlier type, in the seventeenth and the beginning of the 
eighteenth century, sometimes made of ivory instead of wood, had 
a rich profile, and its six fingerholes were united in an undivided 
section of the tube. Jacques Hotteterre lf. Romain was its out- 
standing maker, player and theoretician ( Principes de la flute traver- 
siere, Paris, 1707). The later flute, after about 1710, had the two 
groups of holes in different sections of the instrument and a simpler 
profile. This was the flute on which King Frederick the Great of. 
Prussia excelled, for which Michel Blavet wrote his sonatas, and 
Johann Joachim Quantz his fundamental treatise, Versuch einer 
Anweisung die Flote traversiere zu spielen (Berlin, 175-)* (fig- 
116, pi. XXIII b) 

It must, however, be emphasized that this flute was expressly des- 
ignated as traverse or traversiere in the compositions of the first half 
of the eighteenth century j flauto, for instance in Johann Sebastian 
Bach’s scores, meant the recorder, which had the privilege of senior- 
ity. Accordingly, flauto piccolo, for instance the one prescribed in 
Handel’s opera Rinaldo (1711), where it accompanies Almirena’s 
song, Augeletti, with the warble of birds, was a French flageolet, 
not a transverse piccolo. 

Earlier authors sometimes call the flute a D flute, because its 
natural scale, when finger after finger is lifted, is D major. This is 
a mistake. An instrument should be called in D only if it transposes 
into D , that is, if a note written and played as if it were C sounds a 
note higher (cf. the section on the clarinet in the next chapter). In 
spite of its D scale the flute is a C instrument. 





382 The History of Musical Instruments 

THE OBOE. The French term hautbois has generally been trans- 
lated by ‘high wood’ (as opposed to grosbois } ‘low wood’), but 
doubtless meant ‘loud wood’ originally, according to the old French 
contrast between instruments hauts et has. The Italian term oboe ) 



<Tr 




FIGURE I 17. Oboe 

(c. 1700). 




FIGURE I 18. Oboe 
(c. 1900). 




FIGURE 120 . 

Cor anglais. 



derived from hautbois , is a correct transcription of the French word 
as it was pronounced in the eighteenth century. 

Though the French had formed, and occasionally employed, this 
word for shawms as early as the late fifteenth century, the history 
of musical instruments applies the term ‘oboe’ only to the modern 
instruments that the French developed in the later seventeenth cen- 
tury out of the older shawms. 

The earliest form of this modern oboe, such as we find in speci- 
mens made between about 1660 and 1760, had a slim conical bore, 
the diameter at the lower end being twice the size of the diame- 







The Baroque ( 1600-1750 ) 383 

ter at the upper end. The head was cup-shaped, probably a last 
vestige of the oriental lip-supporting disk. As a distinguishing 
characteristic, this form of oboe had two pairs of smaller holes 
pierced side by side instead of the two middle fingerholes, which 
allowed the player to produce f, /#', g' and g#' by stopping either 
one or both holes of a pair. Moreover, the oboist had three keys at 
his disposal — one open to add a c\ and two more, on the right and 
the left side, to produce d%’ either with the right or with the left 
little finger, (fig. 117) 

The tone of modern oboes has twelve or more partials. Their 
formant is very high and loud, so that the partials lying in the for- 
mant region are even stronger than the fundamentals and give the 
sound its piercing quality, (fig. 1 18) 

The oboe d'amore , in French hautbois d? amour, was a larger oboe 
in A, a minor third below the usual oboe, sixty-one to sixty-two centi- 
meters long, with a pear-shaped bell to soften the timbre. Thus, it 
was a link between the pitches of the ordinary oboe and the cor 
anglais. 

The oboe d’amore was created about the year 1720, very probably 
in Germany. The first records of its use were in Georg Philipp Tele- 
mann’s opera Der Sieg der Schonheit , Hamburg, 17225 in Johann 
Sebastian Bach’s cantata no. 37, Wer da glaubet (1725)5 and in 
Georg K. Schiirmann’s opera Ludwig der Fromme ( Wolff enbiittel 
1726). This instrument with its beautiful warm tone fell into ob- 
livion in the middle of the eighteenth century, but has recently been 
recalled. The Belgian Charles Mahillon was the first, in 1874, to 
reconstruct it in a modern form for authentic performances of the 
forty-nine cantatas and two passions in which Bach had prescribed 
itj and, in 1904, Richard Strauss introduced it into the orchestra of 
his Sinfonia Domestica to characterize the “dreaming child.” Some 
French composers followed his example. 

Parallel to the development from the shawm to the oboe was 
the development from the alto pommer to the alto oboe in F y a fifth 
below the ordinary oboe. The oldest form of alto oboe was straight 
with an expanding bell. The expanding bell which continued to 
exist in some specimens down to the second half of the eighteenth 
century, was usually replaced by a pear-shaped bell that was designed 
to soften the rather rough timbre of the larger oboes. The straight- 
shaped alto oboes with such bells were called oboi da caccia or ‘oboes 
of the hunt’} there are evidences of oboes used in hunting at the be- 
ginning of the eighteenth century. The oboi da caccia were called, 




384 The History of Musical Instruments 

we do not know why, cors anglais or ‘English horns/ when they had 
a curved or angular form ; in the nineteenth century, however, the 
cors anglais were again given a straight form. (figs. 119, 120) 

Oboes with pear-shaped bells, as the oboe d’amore and the cor 
anglais, were not a new invention. Instruments of this kind occur as 
early as the thirteenth century in the miniatures of King Alfonso el 
Sabio’s Cantigas en loor de Santa Maria at the Escorial, and certain 
provinces of France have preserved the form in instruments called 
musettes , which must not be confused with the bagpipes of the same 
name. 

HORNS. In the second half of the seventeenth century the hunt- 
er’s horn was transformed into an art instrument. But the details of 
the transformation are not indicated anywhere, and the confusion 
grows when from one source we hear that in England the instru- 
ment, because it was transformed in France, was called French horn y 
and from another source that it was rare in France, having been ad- 
mitted there only at a late date and called cor allemand. We are 
certain only of two phases — its undeveloped form, used by hunters 
and depicted by Mersenne in 1636, and the definitive horn a hun- 
dred years later. During this hundred years the horn developed 
from a short to a long tube} from a wide to a narrow bore; from a 
purely conical to a partly conical, partly cylindrical bore; from a 
narrow bell to a widely expanding bell; from a cup-shaped trumpet 
mouthpiece to a funnel-shaped French horn mouthpiece; from a 
limited range up to the eighth partial, to a wide range at least to 
the sixteenth partial; from the timbre of a bugle to the bright 
tone of a trumpet; and, finally, to the mellow timbre of the French 
horn. The various stages cannot yet be traced. It seems, how- 
ever, that in Bach’s time, about 1725, the horn was in the trum- 
pet stage of its evolution. In many German scores of that epoch the 
composer prescribes tromha o corno or corni d clarini J and in an edict 
of 1736 the Elector of Saxony bars interfering with the rights of 
privileged trumpeters. 

SLIDE TRUMPETS. On a painting by Antonio Vivarini of the 
three magi (fifteenth century), now in the Berlin Kaiser Friedrich 
Museum, appears a trumpeter carrying his trumpet and, separately, 
its mouthpiece. The ‘throat’ of the mouthpiece, destined to be in- 
serted in the tube, is not the usual length of one inch, but approx- 
imately ten inches long. So abnormal a throat may have served to 





'cques-Louis David y The composer Marguerite Gerard y Lady with a guitar y 

y-an^ois de Vie?me y Museum y Brussels Eremitage y Leningrad ( early iyth cen- 

ate 1 8th century ). tury ). 




Frans van Mieris y Lady with a theorboed lute y in the Gallery y 
Dresden ( ijth century ). 



PLATE XXIII. 



The Baroque (1600—1750) 385 

adjust the tone of the instrument, but it is no less possible that it 
served to complete the natural scale of harmonics by being pulled 
in and out while played. This is the more probable as pictures of the 
fifteenth century often show the trumpet forming a trio with two 
shawms, so that it must have been capable of producing a diatonic 
scale. 

An unmistakable slide trumpet, made at Naumburg in Saxony 
in 1651, is preserved in the Berlin Instrumental Museum. It is a 
trumpet in the usual coiled form; it cannot be distinguished from 
other trumpets except that the throat of its mouthpiece is so long 
that by pulling it out gradually all gaps in the scale can be filled 
up. The trumpeter had to press the mouthpiece against his lips with 
two fingers of the left hand and draw the trumpet out and in like 
the slide of a trombone. This was doubtless the tromba da tirarsi , 
or ‘trumpet to be pulled out/ that Bach has prescribed in the cantatas 
5, 20, 46 and 77. 

In cantata 46, however, Bach writes tromba o corno da tirarsi y 
and in two other cantatas, 67 and 162, he indicates corno da tirarsi. 
As a horn cannot be shifted, Charles Sanford Terry interprets the 
latter term as a tromba da tirarsi with the funnel-shaped mouthpiece 
of a French horn. Such a combination is unprecedented and hardly 
possible, as the bore of a horn’s mouthpiece is much too narrow for 
a trumpet. It would be more probable to suppose that the two terms 
both referred to the same instrument. The real trumpets in Bach’s 
time were in the hands of privileged “knightly” members of a guild, 
who jealously guarded their rights. Though the tromba da tirarsi 
was free to all, players probably felt safer in calling it a horn so that 
they could not be troubled by the guild. 

The small success of this instrument can easily be explained. The 
steadiness required of the playing lips was not easily achieved ; and, 
although the instrument was coiled, the slide was single, so that it 
necessitated twice the length of traction that a trombone with its 
U-shaped slide would demand. An English slide trumpet, con- 
structed at the beginning of the nineteenth century by Woodham 
in London, was much superior, as the U in the coil of an ordinary 
trumpet was transformed into a springing, trombonelike slide. Eng- 
lish trumpeters have used this instrument to perform the high parts 
in Handel’s and Bach’s scores by playing the horns (W dldhorner) 
in trumpet fashion. This is important for those who interpret Bach’s 
orchestra works: his corni were not yet the romantic French horns 
with the bell held downward. 




386 The History of Musical Instruments 

THE ORGAN of the seventeenth century is particularly inter- 
esting to us because it was the model for a certain type of modern 
organ generally called the Baroque or Praetorius organ, which will 
be discussed in the chapter on the twentieth century. 

On the whole the organ in about 1600 had a light, transparent 
color. The timbres of the various stops were sharp and contrasting, 
so that the effect was penetrant although not harsh because the wind 
pressure was low. The majority of the stops were 4'} in one of the 
ideal plans in Praetorius’s book the proportion of 4' to 8' stops is two 
to one. Moreover, some vigorous compound stops gave the organ 
a metallic glitter. Although the various stops of one keyboard had 
different timbres, they nevertheless were enough alike in character 
to form a homogeneous group. The stops of the first keyboard or 
Great organ were grave and solemn 5 those of the second or Choir 
organ were keen and penetrant j the third manual keyboard was 
delicate and sweet, and the pedal powerful. 

A hundred years later the colors had been softened, though the 
timbre was still transparent and silvery. The plans of Gottfried 
Silbermann, for instance, mirror the contrast between the sixteenth 
and the seventeenth centuries. Unyielding stops such as nachthorn 
and ranket have disappeared} instead we find pungent bowed stop 
like the viola da gamba. The epoch also favored vibrato effects, 
achieved either by the tremulant or by the pulsating vox humana 
tuned a vibration higher or lower than the other stops. 

In 1712, the London organ maker, Abraham Jordan, even in- 
vented a crescendo pedal called nags head swell, which opened at 
will the door of the Echo, that is, a case including a series of soft 
stops. It was the same tendency towards an expressive style that was 
typical of contemporary music in general, and came to its climax 
in the period between 1750 and 1900. 

From the viewpoint of a pure organ, however, these expressive 
devices inaugurated an era of degeneration. In the latest phase of 
modern organ building, builders are trying to recapture an un- 
spoiled organ, inspired by the plans of Praetorius and Silbermann. 

THE PITCH. It is a common belief that “the old pitch” was 
lower than ours. It is further a misinterpretation that in earlier days 
there was a higher ‘organ pitch’ or Chorton, and a lower ‘chamber 
pitch’ or Kammerton. Organs of those times varied between 347 
vibrations and 567 vibrations, that is, their a r varied as much as a 
fifth, from f sharp to c” sharp according to modern pitch} the 




The Baroque (1600—1750) 387 

chamber pitch varied between 403 and 563 vibrations, or g' and c" 
sharp. In 1714, the same year that Gottfried Siebermann gave 
420 vibrations (or modern g' sharp) to an organ in Freiberg, his 
brother, Andreas Silbermann, gave 337 vibrations (or f sharp) 
to an organ in Strasbourg. Mersenne indicates as a chamber pitch 
first 403, then 563 vibrations. Johann Sebastian Bach’s pitch is in- 
dicated by two organs of Gottfried Silbermann’s, the above men- 
tioned Freiberg organ of 1714 with 420 vibrations, and the Hof- 
kirchenorgel at Dresden (1722) with 415 vibrations, a half-tone 
below our standard. Handel has left us his tuning fork of 1751 with 
423 vibrations. Italy, in the time of Scarlatti, seems to have pre- 
ferred a still lower pitch ; some Roman pitch pipes of 1720 produce 
395 vibrations or g', and a Roman tuning fork of 1730 has 404 
vibrations. There was no accepted standard of pitch until the nine- 
teenth century. 




1 7 - Romanticism 

C 1750-1900 ) 



T HE epoch 1750-1900 follows the trends of both the seven- 
teenth and the sixteenth centuries. Its instrumental style 
was reminiscent of the sixteenth century. The quantity of 
timbres increased astonishingly j clarinets, cors anglais, cornets, 
tubas, saxophones and numberless others were added. Moreover, 
all instruments following the example of strings were established 
in families, the clarinets, for instance, being built in eight sizes — 
octavines, small clarinets, normal clarinets, alto clarinets, basset 
horns, bass clarinets, contrabasset horns and double bass clarinets. 

Notwithstanding this interest in timbre, which was reminiscent 
of the sixteenth century, the eighteenth century carried on the tend- 
ency begun in the seventeenth century towards an expressive emo- 
tional music. Feeling which had been confined to a few general 
moods, majesty, liveliness, joy, affliction, now spread into new ro- 
mantic fields. Striving for emotional atmosphere, romantic musi- 
cians made use of all possible timbres, but not for the purpose, as in 
the sixteenth century, of polyphonic distinctness and contrast. 

Instead, they tried to express all the shadings of human feeling. 
They discovered the effectiveness of mixing colors and of modu- 
lating from timbre to timbre in the same way that they modulated 
from chord to chord. No detail could be left to the performer $ the 
composer, in his score, was minute. Orchestration became a self- 
sufficient branch of musical composition. 

In order to have the musical palette of the orchestra as complete 

388 





Romanticism (1750-/900) 389 

as possible, practically all instruments were drawn into it, and for 
this many of them had to be basically improved. Centuries, indeed 
millenniums, had accepted the defective range of trumpets. Now, as 
a color in the composer’s paintbox, the trumpet had to respond to 
every note required. Kettledrums were freed from the rigid scheme 
of beating d and A to the flourishes of trumpets; they had to be 
made available for any note of the scale. The harp, strictly diatonic 
for five thousand years, was made chromatic. 

Under the influence of modern orchestration all instruments were 
developed to the greatest possible technical efficiency and musical 
effectiveness. 

The most outstanding requirement was power. Even the softest 
of them, the flute, was given a stronger sound. In violins, the Stradi- 
vari pattern was preferred to the weaker Amati, and the nineteenth 
century abounded in futile attempts to increase the power of bowed 
instruments by all kinds of devices, shapes and materials. 

Again, striving for power necessitated cumulating all available 
instruments. In 1784, a Handel Commemoration held at West- 
minster Abbey in London amassed an orchestra of 



48 first violins 
47 second violins 
26 violas 
2 1 violoncellos 
15 double basses 
4 drums 
2 organs 



6 flutes 
26 oboes 
26 bassoons 
1 double bassoon 
12 trumpets 
12 horns 
6 trombones 



Dreams are more characteristic than facts, as they do not depend 
on the impediments which restrict reality. The truest mirror of what 
the time desired was Hector Berlioz’s vision of an ideal orchestra, 
which included in its 465 instruments a hundred and twenty violins, 
forty-five cellos, forty violas, thirty-seven double basses (four of 
them gigantic octobasses ), thirty harps and thirty pianos! 

There were various causes for stressing the power. The passage 
from an aristocratic to a democratic culture, in the eighteenth cen- 
tury, replaced the small salons by the more and more gigantic con- 
cert halls, which demanded greater volume. But this was only one 
manifestation of the larger tendency. It is more important to realize 
how, after the French Revolution, the arts evolved from an aris- 
tocratic reserve to unfettered passion, from Racine’s Alexandrines 
to Byron’s Manfred , from Couperin’s Concerts ro^aux to Beetho- 




390 The History of Musical Instruments 

yen’s Eroicay from the Neopolitan opera to Wagner’s music dramas. 

Overwhelming forcefulness was perhaps the most important, but 
was only one of the many kinds of expressiveness required. Senti- 
mental reverie, too, had to find its musical outlet. Amateurs needed 
instruments at hand that allowed them to pour out their emotional 
effusion in the very midst of the daily round. Pianos were concealed 
in writing desks and sewing tables, and also in tea tables which could 
be revolved to face the guest expected to contribute a rondo. Even 
on a solitary walk one had to be prepared to react to sunsets or ruins, 

3C T T- I -T ■ = 

figure 12 1 . Walkingstick flute. 

for which occasions there were canes that in a twinkling could be 
transformed into flutes, clarinets, violins, (fig. 12 1) 

In all cases emotion was the principal requirement, in the per- 
formances of gigantic orchestras, in chamber music, and in the sen- 
timental effusions of languid amateurs. Instruments, consequently, 
were expected to have a maximum of musical flexibility, that is, of 
span between strong and soft, of crescendo and decrescendo, of al- 
most imperceptible shades. The transformation of the hunter’s horn 
into the versatile French horn is one of the most striking examples. 
But there are others: the replacement of the recorder by the trans- 
verse flute, and of the viols by the violin family and, above all, the 
successful invention of the piano. 

PITCH. Before discussing the instruments typical of that time, 
it is necessary to remark on the rising pitch which is indicative of the 
general tendency towards a stimulating tone. Between 1762 and 
1789 it varied between 377 and 428 vibrations, that is, from a minor 
third to a half-tone below the modern standard. The French pre- 
ferred a low, the Germans a middle, the English a high pitch. The 
fork used in 1780 by Johann Andreas Stein in Augsburg to tune a 
piano for Mozart had 422 vibrations, a half-tone lower than the 
modern pitch. 

The nineteenth century started with 423 vibrations j the Grand 
Opera in Paris had 427 in 1811, 434 in 1829 and 446 in 1856} the 
Opera Comique still had 423 in 1820, but 428 in 1823. In Vienna, 
the pitch reached 456 in 1859, an< ^ Steinways tuned their pianos to 
457 in 1880, that is, a quarter-tone above the normal pitch. 



39i 



Romanticism (i 750— 1900) 

The constant and increasing elevation of the pitch presents incon- 
veniences by which the musical art, composers, artists, and musical 
instrument-makers all equally suffer, and the difference existing between 
the pitches of different countries, of different musical establishments, and 
of different manufacturing houses, is a source of embarrassment in musi- 
cal combinations and of difficulties in commercial relations. 

A first attempt to fix a standard was made in 1 834. A congress of 
physicists held at Stuttgart proposed the present four hundred and 
forty vibrations but had no success. In 1858, the French govern- 
ment nominated a committee of six physicists and six musicians 
(among them Berlioz, Halevy and Meyerbeer) to investigate the 
question. Their decision to stabilize the pitch at 435 was confirmed 
in 1889 by a conference held in Vienna. Nevertheless, the pitch has 
continued to rise and is still doing so today. 

THE PIANO was invented “to obviate the bad habit of the 
harpsichord which could not express coloring at all, or expressed it 
in exaggerated contrasts by its stops.” 

The problem was solved by devising a lever that slung a hammer 
against the string when the finger pressed the key; the force of the 
pressure was answered by a corresponding force in the resulting tone. 

Most writers have taken for granted that the idea of a struck 
keyboard instrument was due to the activity of a curious artist, 
Pantaleon Hebenstreit, who, improving the despised and primi- 
tive dulcimer and playing it throughout Europe as an admired vir- 
tuoso, showed how delicate and powerful strings beaten by soft 
hammers could be. In 1716 and 1717, the Parisian Marius and the 
Saxon Gottlieb Schroter presented models of pianos to the Paris 
Academy and to the Dresden court respectively ; Schroter admitted 
that Hebenstreit had inspired his invention. However, neither he 
nor Marius was the first. As early as 1709 the harpsichord maker 
Bartolommeo Cristofori at Florence had published the diagram 
and description of an excellent piano, and this was so far ahead of 
the dulcimer that it cannot be traced directly to it, even less because 
Hebenstreit never had played in Italy. Cristofori^ action even had 
the upright springing hopper or escapement which, after slinging the 
hammer up to the string, set it free immediately, so that it fell back 
and was ready for repetition even though the finger did not release 
the key. Two of Cristofori’s grand pianos have been preserved; the 
older one, dated 1720, is in the Crosby Brown Collection in New 
York. They are entirely reminiscent in form and arrangement of 




392 



The History oj Musical Instruments 



5a fie 




figure 122 . German Prellmcchanik without escape- 
ment; del. Carmina Manger. 



Saife 




figure 123. German Stossmechanik without escape- 
ment; del. Carmina Manger. 



Sane 




figure 124. German Prellmechanik with escapement; 
del. Carmina Manger. 



Saite 




figure 125. German Stossmechanik with escapement; 
del. Carmina Manger. 




R omanticism (i 750-1 goo) 393 

the harpsichord. The name that Cristofori gave to these oldest pianos 
was gravicembalo col pan e forte , or harpsichord with [the faculty 
of producing] piano and forte [by the touch]. 

Italy invented the piano, but then abandoned it. The Germans 
adopted the art and evolved and transformed the piano j for the 
following forty years pianos were made exclusively in Germany. 

The first and best early maker of grand pianos in Germany was 
the famous organ builder Gottfried Silbermann, of Freiberg, 
Saxony. He was well acquainted with Johann Sebastian Bach, who 
criticized and advised him in his attempts, and Frederick the Great 
of Prussia bought three of the pianos which are now in Potsdam 
palaces. 

Germany had a decisive influence on the transplanted Italian in- 
strument, not only on its action but also its shape. German homes 
had been more accustomed to the clavichord with its square form 
than to the wing-shaped harpsichord, and therefore did not easily 
accept the grand form of piano. The problem was how to enclose in 
the square form the complicated new action which had been devised 
for the grand form. Cristofori’s action was too big to be placed in 
so shallow a case, too heavy to be played by persons accustomed to 
the clavichord, too expensive for the average music lover. In trying 
to make an action that was smaller, lighter and cheaper than Silber- 
mann’s, the German makers that followed him produced a square 
piano much rougher in craftsmanship. 

The actions of these German square pianos were built according 
to two principles — action with a hammer connected with the key 
{Prellmechantk ) , and action with a hammer disconnected from the 
key (Stossmechanik ) . 

In the action with a hammer connected with the key, the rear end 
of the key bore an upright wooden fork ( Kapel ) in which the ham- 
mer pivoted. In resting position, the hammer butt rested on the 
key in front of the fork, while the hammer tail projecting behind 
the fork reached under an overhanging rail that ran the entire width 
of the piano. When the key was pressed, the tail was checked by the 
rail and the hammer was jerked up against the string, (fig. 122) 

This simple action was given an escapement about the year 1770, 
probably by Johann Stein in Augsburg. In 1777, Wolfgang Ama- 
deus Mozart wrote to his father that he had called on Stein’s work- 
shop. “His instruments distinguish themselves by an escapement ; 
not one in a hundred makers troubles himself about that* but with- 
out an escapement a piano clatters and leaves a sound j when one 




394 7A<? History of Musical Instruments 

presses the keys, his hammers fall down again in the very moment 
in which they bounce against the strings, whether one holds the 
key down or releases it.” In place of one continuous rail to check 
the action of the tails, each key in such an instrument had a separate 
escaper — that is, an overhanging piece of wood at its rear end — 
that, after checking the tail momentarily in order to jerk up the 
hammer butt, slipped back to allow the tail to rise and the butt to 
fall again, even though the key was not released. This action with 
an escaping hammer connected with the key was called first the 
German action , and later on, when the Stein family had moved to 
Vienna, the Viennese action, (fig. 124) 

In the action with a hammer disconnected from the key, the rear 
end of the key bore, not a fork, but an upright wire pusher (Stofier). 
The hammer, instead of being fastened to the key, was fastened at 
its tail end to a rail running the entire width of the piano. When the 
key was pressed, the pusher knocked the stem of the hammer so that 
it pivoted on its fastening and the butt hit the string, (fig. 123) 

This action, too, was given an escapement by supplanting the rigid 
fastening of the pusher on the key by a moveable fastening. This 
has always been called in Germany the English action, since it was 
devised by German makers working in England, though the true 
English action at the end of the eighteenth century differed in that 
the hammer pointed backwards, not forwards, (fig. 125) 

The sounds that these various actions provided v/ere all rather 
rigid and uniform. No wonder that the makers made use in the piano 
of the old expedient in harpsichord making — stops that by some 
device gave special timbres to the instrument. Among these stops 
we find the two modern stops — forte, lifting the dampers, and una 
corda, shifting the keyboard so that the hammers strike only one 
string in each set. They also had many other stops, among them the 
. piano, inserting a strip of cloth, felt or leather between the hammers 
and the strings} the harp, inserting such a strip between the ham- 
mers and one of the strings of each set} the swell, raising a lid above 
the strings. The stops, modeled after those of the harpsichord, were 
in the form of handles to be pulled out or to be shifted, until, in the 
seventeen seventies, knee stops (to be pressed up or to be shifted) 
were introduced. The first patent for a pedal was taken out on July 
17, 1783, by John Broadwood, though an English piano, dated 
1782, already had a pedal. 

In 1760 a dozen Saxon piano makers, jobless on account of the 
Seven Years’ War, came to settle in London. After this move Ger- 




Romanticism ( 7750 -/ 900 ) 395 

many was no longer the exclusive piano-making country $ England 
began to compete seriously and soon became the leading center. The 
most famous among the German makers in London were Jacob 
Kirchmann, who changed his name to Kirckman, and Johann 
Christian Zumpe, a former pupil of Silbermann. Zumpe entered 
the noted factory which first bore the name of Burkat Shudi, and 
afterwards of John Broadwood, which became the leading firm in 
British piano making. The first pianist, too, was a German on English 
soil — Johann Christian Bach, Johann Sebastian’s youngest son, gave 
the world’s first piano recital in 1768 in London. 

The instrument that the German makers had carried to England 
was the square piano $ but there the harpsichord, not the clavichord, 
was the prevalent keyboard instrument. Therefore, the makers had 
to turn to the grand piano and abandon the square form. Under the 
influence of John Broadwood the new English grand became essen- 
tially different from the older Italian and German models. It aban- 
doned the tradition of the harpsichord j it became much heavier and 
was given the two modern pedals j its keyboard, instead of being 
recessed between the walls of the case, projected so that the hands 
of the virtuoso were visible. 

While England prepared the modern form of the piano, Austria 
created a special type of piano. The outstanding German master in 
the second half of the eighteenth century, Johann Andreas Stein 
in Augsburg, died in 1792 and left his factory to a son and, more 
important, to an energetic daughter who afterwards became Na- 
nette Streicher. In 1794, Stein’s factory was moved to Vienna, 
at that time the coming center of German music. The Stein-Streicher 
grand became the typical Viennese instrument imitated by all piano 
makers of the town. It was charming in its way, depending for its 
outer appearance on the harpsichord, and preserving the musical 
qualities and the delicacy of touch of the old clavichord. It was 
archaic even in the preservation of the many pedals that German 
makers had created in the eighteenth century. Some Viennese pianos 
had as many as six pedals, among them two characteristic new ones — 
the bassoon pedal, which pressed a strip of wood lined with tissue 
paper against the bass strings so that they rattled, and the Turkish 
Music , a pedal operating a triangle, cymbals and a drumstick hit- 
ting the soundboard. Johann Nepomuk Hummel, an outstanding 
Viennese pianist and composer of that time, claimed that “the 
Vienna grand can easily be played by the most delicate hands. It 
allows the pianist to produce all kinds of nuances, responds promptly, 




396 The History of Musical Instruments 

has a round flutelike tone . . . and does not interfere with fluency 
by being too stiff.” 

To the nimble easiness of Hummel’s art the Viennese piano could 
give satisfaction. It was not made for the power and passion of 
Beethoven, who personally preferred a Broadwood. As we see now, 
it led to a dead end in the history of piano making. 

Finally in Beethoven’s time, Paris after long resistance had also 
become a center of piano making. Though a few stillborn inven- 
tions in this field were submitted to the Academie des Sciences , no 
factory was opened until the seventeen eighties. Pascal Taskin, a 
noted harpsichord maker, made at that time a few fine pianos with 
a peculiar action in which the hammer, disconnected from the key, 
pointed forward. When he presented his first piano to the court, the 
organist Jean Balbatre exclaimed: “Whatever you may do, this 
newcomer will never oust the majestic harpsichord!” Taskin did 
not witness the extinction of the harpsichord, but Sebastian Erard 
( 1752-1831), who had made his first piano in 1777, was so success- 
ful with his new instruments that the harpsichord was abandoned. 

The modern piano emerges at this time. Erard shares with Broad- 
wood and the Americans the honor of having created it. The strings 
became much heavier and, consequently, the soundboard thicker. As 
at the same time the range of the keyboard was greatly increased and 
the pitch raised, the tension (up to twenty thousand kilograms or the 
weight of nearly three hundred adults) was much too great for the 
old wooden frame. After some experiments made by various piano 
makers in the seventeen nineties, John Isaac Hawkins in Phila- 
delphia (1800) inserted metal braces between the wrest plank and 
the soundboard j in 1821, Broadwood extended steel bars longi- 
tudinally over the strings j and, in 1825, Alphaeus Babcock in 
Boston produced the first full cast-iron frame, which took all the 
tension off the wooden parts. 

About the same time, 1821, Sebastian Erard in Paris created the 
definitive form of action, appropriate to the heavier strings of the 
new type of instrument, while in the older actions the hammer had 
fallen back to its resting position even though the finger did not 
release the key ( single escapement). Erard gave it an intermediate 
rest, from which it fell back to its original position only after the 
finger had left the key ( double escapement ) . This allowed the player 
to repeat a note with more promptness as the hammer on its second 
trip started from a position nearer the string. The action as a whole 
became stronger and more reliable. 




Romanticism (ij 50-1 900) 397 

The last step in the evolution of the piano was taken by creating 
the overstrung scale. Overstringing or cross-stringing consisted in a 
new arrangement of the strings within the casej the treble strings 
diverged in the form of a fan, thus spreading over the largest part 
of the soundboard j the bass strings crossed over them at a slightly 
higher level. There were two main advantages. No strings had to 
run along the less resonant borders, the arrangement allowing them 
all to run nearer the middle of the soundboard, and the closeness of 
the bass and the treble strings favored the formation and intensity 
of harmonics when the right pedal was pressed. Thus, the over- 
strung piano is much more powerful than the older piano $ but it 
is lacking in transparence, and certain full chords that composers of 
the beginning of the nineteenth century have written in the basses 
cannot be played on a modern piano without causing confusion. 

The inventor of cross-stringing was Babcock $ he took out a patent 
for it on May 24, 1830. But it was not until Steinway and Sons in 
New York gave it the definitive form at about 18 55 that the over- 
strung scale was generally introduced. 

All these improvements since the days of Broadwood and Erard 
were created for the grand piano, but were adopted by the nine- 
teenth century square piano as well. Just as the grand had abandoned 
the traditional model of the harpsichord to develop an arrangement 
appropriate to itself, the square shook off the rules of the clavichord. 
Even the basic structure, with the wrest plank on the right side, was 
given up in the nineteenth century j in order to accommodate the in- 
creased number of strings, the wrest plank had to be enlarged and 
was removed from the side to either the front or the rear. The 
square piano, then, became just as heavy as, and not much smaller 
than, the grand. The last square pianos in the United States, made 
at about 1880, were more than two meters wide and more than one 
meter deep. All other countries, except South Germany, had aban- 
doned this type for the upright. 

U f rights had been devised at the very outset of piano making by 
giving a hammer action to the upright harpsichord. Already in 
1716, Marius in Paris had presented the model of an upright piano, 
and a German upright, dated 1735, has been preserved in the In- 
strumental Museum at Leipzig. Ten years later, the organ builder 
Ernst Christian Friderici in Gera, Saxony, replaced the wing 
form by a symmetric pyramid, in which the strings were arranged in 
a slanting position. However, it was not easy to construct a reliable 
action in this complicated model, and the piano maker Bleyer in 




398 The History of Musical Instruments 

Vienna was right when he wrote laconically in 1 8 1 1 : “If one looked 
closely at the engine, one saw the inventor’s sweat on it.” 

Altogether, upright pianos were rare until 1795. On January 12th 
of that year William Stodart in London took out a patent for “an 
upright grand piano in the form of a bookcase,” that is, a high, 
rectangular case in which the extra space beside the winglike piano 
frame was used for music shelves. For the next forty years upright 
pianos were common j the old harpsichords and clavichords had to 
disappear before the new space-saving home instrument could come 
into favor. Soon after 1800, the Germans reverted to Friderici’s 
pyramidy and the Viennese created the asymmetric giraffe with a 
vertical bass side and an oblique treble side meeting in a point at the 
top and tumbling over in an ornamental scroll. A last form, in favor 
in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, was the Berlin 
lyrafliigel. It had the symmetrically arched sides of an antique lyre 
and a number of gilded sticks, imitating lyre strings, to enliven the 
dead front. 

All these upright grand forms proved musically unsatisfactory. 
Therefore, John Isaac Hawkins in Philadelphia, and Matthias 
Muller in Vienna, both in 1 800, began to abandon the grand piano 
scheme in building uprights. The old form had its case with the 
strings beginning at the level of the keyboard and ending in a point 
at the top; in the new form (that the French call piano droit , and 
the Germans pianino ) , the case with the strings reaches down to the 
floor and stands the other way round — that is, the wrest plank forms 
the horizontal top, and the pointed end of the frame is at the lower 
end of the case. This new form has become the leading type of home 
instrument. 

THE HARP may owe its advancement at the end of the eight- 
eenth century to the victory of the piano over the harpsichord. As 
long as the harpsichord existed, between the fifteenth and the eight- 
eenth centuries, the harp, which was also a plucked instrument, was 
regarded as inferior in chords, polyphony and technique. With the 
disappearance of the harpsichord, the field was clear for an instru- 
ment like the harp, provided that it could be given a chromatic 
scale. 

At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the harp differed from 
its medieval ancestors only in the greater number of its strings; its 
accordatura was still diatonic without semitones. A first attempt 





towards adapting the harp to the modern evolution of music was 
made in the Tyrol in the second half of the seventeenth century. 
Some iron hooks were driven in the neck close to the upper ends of 
the strings. Such a hook, when turned to touch the corresponding 
string, acted as the stopping finger of the violinist j the string was 
then higher by a semitone. Thus, it was possible to avoid an eternal 
playing on ‘white key’ strings} the G major scale could be produced 




400 The History of Musical Instruments 

by sharpening all Fs, and so on. Nevertheless, even a simple modula- 
tion could not be accomplished without interrupting the perform- 
ance. 

A better solution was the 'pedal harp } the invention of which, 
about 1720, is credited to two Bavarians, Hochrucker in Donau- 
worth and J. P. Vetter at Niirnberg. The hooks, instead of being 
manipulated by the fingers, were connected with pedals through an 
action of wires inside the hollowed pillar. Pressing the F pedal re- 




FIGURE127. The double pedal action. 



suited in the sharpening of all F strings, not only one of them; in 
the same way the C pedal moved all C hooks, etc. The weak point 
of this so-called ‘simple action’ was the impossibility of playing in 
flat tonalities. As a flat was produced by sharpening the next lower 
string, B\) for example by sharpening the A string, there was no 
string left to provide A , so that the seventh could not be played, 
(fig. 126) 

A satisfactory solution was found by the French in about 1800. 
P.-J. Cousineau was the first to conceive of a double-pedal harp in 
1782. But a suitable model was not made until 1 820 when Sebastian 
£rard built the same harp which is in use today. This instrument 
is diatonically tuned to C\), each of the seven pedals has a double 
action, and the crooks are replaced by rotating disks with two pro- 
jecting studs. By pressing the pedals down, the player revolves the 
disks one complete revolution and shortens the strings by two semi- 
tones j the C pedal changes C\) into C#, and the D pedal changes 
D\) into D%. The pedals, however, can be stopped midway. The 
disks then make a half-revolution only, and it is the first stud which 
shortens the string by one semitone j C \) becomes C and D\) is trans- 
posed to D. The entire range of the modern harp is C\) 2 to b\f. (figs. 
127, 128) 





PLATE XXIV 



Romanticism (iy^o-igoo) 401 

Besides this evolution of the diatonic harp, a second evolution 
concerned the problem of how to arrange a chromatic harf , that is, 
with twelve strings in each octave. It would seem simple to tune the 
harp strings in semitones instead of arranging them diatonically. 
The difficulty in a chromatic arrangement was that, if the strings 
belonging to a chord were near enough to be reached, their distance 
from the neighboring strings was not sufficient to allow their vibra- 
tion without hitting one another. Three solutions were tried: the 
disposition of the strings in two parallel planes in the seventeenth 




figure 128. The double action of the disks. 



century $ in one plane in the eighteenth j and in two crossed planes 
in the nineteenth century. This latter model, having the diatonic 
strings in one plane and the semitones slanting in the opposite direc- 
tion, was conceived of by J.-H. Pape in Paris in 1 845 and improved 
by Lyon & Healy in Chicago and Gustave Lyon in Paris. It is still 
in use, though rare because the strings are so close together at the 
intersection that they touch each other when vibrating in forte. 

Developing at a time when the piano was striving for an ever- 
increasing power, the harp was particularly assigned to the feminine 
province of musical expression, where its ornamental shape was an 
added attraction. It has been a lady’s instrument since the days of 
Marie Antoinette, both at home and in the orchestra, and composers 
have stressed its aptitude for tenderness and mystery. Thus, the harp 
expressed one of the most typical moods of romantic feeling. 

This responsibility was shared by a large group of new or resur- 
rected instruments that had no function other than to be ethereal and 
mysterious, such as the aeolian harp and rubbed rods' and glasses. 




402 The History of Musical Instruments 

THE AEOLIAN HARP. A Jewish legend relates that King 
David’s lyre, suspended above his bed in the night, sounded in the 
north wind j and an old Indian poem speaks of the breeze that played 
the strings of a vina. Archbishop Dunstan of Canterbury, who lived 
in the tenth century, is said to have been suspected of magic as he 
experimented with wind-blown strings. In any case, the middle ages 
were suspicious of this phenomenon, and not until the sixteenth cen- 
tury was such an instrument seriously discussed in Giovanni Battista 
Della Porta’s Magia naturalis. The first modern aeolian harp was 
constructed by Father Athanasius Kircher who, in the middle of the 
seventeenth century, stretched a set of strings over an oblong box 
and added screens attached like lids to catch and concentrate the 
wind. In such an instrument the strings are generally tuned to the 
same note, but their thickness and, consequently, their elasticity 
differ, so that, when set into vibration by the wind, they produce 
various harmonics. 

The supernatural, ghostly sound of these chords, changing, in- 
creasing and fading away with the wind without any player or any 
artificial contrivance, was wholly romantic. Between 1780 and i860, 
therefore, aeolian harps were much in favor in parks, on roofs and 
on ruins of medieval castles, especially in Germany and England. 

But long before the romantic period its immaterial sound had been 
appreciated in England. The finest words on the aeolian harp are due 
to James Thomson (1700-1748) in his poem, Castle of Indolence: 

A certain Music, never known before, 

Here sooth’d the pensive melancholy Mind; 

• •••••• 

The God of Winds drew Sounds of deep Delight: 

Whence, with just Cause, The Harp of vEolus it hight. 

Ah me! what Hand can touch the Strings so fine? 

Who up the lofty Diapason roll 

Such sweet, such sad, such solemn Airs divine. 

Then let them down again into the Soul? 

The instrument must have been rare at that time; for the editor 
of the second edition of Thomson’s poem (1748) comments in a 
footnote that such an instrument did exist in reality, not only in the 
poet’s imagination. 

FRICTION RODS. In the middle of the eighteenth century 
there lived in St. Petersburg a certain musician, Johann Wilde, 




Romanticism (1750—1900) 403 

who, when he came home in the evening, used to suspend his bow 
on a nail in the wall. Discovering the peculiar flageoletlike sound of 
the hair rubbing the nail, he got the idea of a nail violin. In spite 
of the name, this was simply a wooden resonator shaped like a large 
pill box (or half a pill box) with a set of nails, or of U-shaped iron 
pins, driven into its edge or side wall j the deeper they were driven, 
the shorter was their effective length and the higher their pitch. 
Thus, the nails could be tuned to form a scale. Smaller specimens 
were held in one hand and rubbed with a bow held in the other hand ; 
larger specimens, such as one in the Crosby Brown Collection in 
New York with no less than sixty-six pins, were screwed on the table 
and played with two short bows simultaneously, (fig. 129) 




Wilde’s nail violin was the earliest and simplest of a long series 
of instruments based on the friction of rods. In 1788, Charles 
Clagget in London obtained a patent for a piano with metal rods 
or tuning forks instead of strings, with a special celestina stof which 
consisted of “an endless fillet (rub’d with resin dissolved in spirits 
of wine) producing the sounds on these bars as it does on the strings.” 
Three years later, in 1791, a drawing teacher in Bernburg, Saxony, 
transformed in a similar way the nail violin with a rubbing wheel 
into a nail fiano. 

About the same time, the famous physicist Ernst Friedrich 
Chladni in Halle, the father of modern acoustics, constructed in- 
struments of thin glass rods rubbed lengthwise by the fingers and 
transferring their longitudinal vibrations to iron rods which re- 
sounded in a “soft and aethereal” way. The inventor called them 
eufhones. In 1799, he replaced the rubbing fingers by piano keys and 
a rubbing cylinder and called this keyboard instrument clavicy Under. 
It was more practical, but less immaterial than the euphone — “a 
strong and healthy food, of which one can eat much and frequently,” 




404 The History of Musical Instruments 

while Chladni compared his euphone with “a dainty that one can eat 
only in lesser portion as a dessert.” 

An infinite quantity of instruments was constructed on this princi- 
ple between 1790 and 1820, but not one had much success. Among 
all “soft and aethereal” friction instruments, only the glass harmon- 
ica, based on bells instead of rods, attained an important place in 
musical life. 

GLASS HARMONICA. As early as 1677 an author describes 
“a gay wine music,” popular in convivial circles, which was made by 
rubbing the rims of wineglasses with moistened fingers. This kind 
of music seems to have been formalized in Great Britain and Ireland. 
In 1743, the Irishman Richard Pockrich caused a sensation with a set 
of tuned glasses and he continued performing on them in England 
as well as in Ireland until 1759, when he was consumed by fire with 
his instrument. Meanwhile, in 1746, Gluck had given at the little 
Haymarket Theatre in London “a Concert upon Twenty-six Drink- 
ing Glasses, tuned with Spring water, accompanied with the whole 
Band, being a new Instrument of his own Invention, upon which he 
performs whatever may be done on a violin or harpsichord.” In 
1749, he gave a similar performance in Denmark. By 1761, the 
instrument had become so fashionable that English ladies, as Oliver 
Goldsmith’s Vicar of Wakefield describes them, “would talk of noth- 
ing but high life, and high-lived company j with other fashionable 
topics, such as pictures, taste, Shakespeare and the musical glasses.” 
Simple instruments of this kind are still existent and are occasionally 
used in variety entertainment and public gardens. 

In about 1761, the American inventor Benjamin Franklin made 
a well-constructed instrument out of the loose set of glasses. Some 
thirty or forty bowls of decreasing size, each pierced with a hole in 
the middle, were strung on a horizontal spindle as close together as 
possible without touching, so that only the rims were visible. The 
spindle, set into a desklike piece of furniture, could be rotated by a 
pedal. The player touched the moving rims with his fingers and 
this arrangement allowed him to play full chords. 

The beautiful sound of the glass harmonica y as the instrument 
was called, was indescribably vague and immaterial j it seemed to 
emerge from infinite space and to fade away into endlessness. Thus, 
it anticipated one of the romantic ideals. No wonder, then, that Ger- 
many became its homestead in spite of its foreign origin. “Of all 
musical inventions, the one of Mr. Franklin has created perhaps the 




Romanticism (7750-1900) 405 

greatest excitement,” says the Musikalische Almanack fur Deutsch- 
land auf das Jahr 1782. It belonged to the indispensable requisites 
of romantic novels j their heroines, hearing the ghostly chords of a 
harmonica hidden in a bosket of the countryseat, were expected to 
faint. Not only amateurs played the harmonica j the instrument was 
rewarding enough to attract virtuosi and outstanding composers, 
among them Mozart and Beethoven. 

The drawback was that both the irritating permanence of ex- 
tremely high partials and the continuous contact of the sensitive 
finger tips with the vibrating glass bowls caused serious nervous dis- 
orders. Marianne Davies, the blind Marianne Kirchgessner and 
other artists were compelled to retire from their profession. To 
obviate such consequences, Philipp Josef Frick at Baden-Baden 
made experiments with artificial pads in 1769, and ten years later the 
Italian abbate Mazucchi introduced violin bows. In 1784, three 
men, independently of each other, constructed harmonicas with key- 
boards: David Traugott Nicolai at Gorlitz and Hessel and Karl 
Leopold Rollig in Berlin. In 1787, the American composer, poli- 
tician and poet Francis Hopkinson, followed with a similar con- 
struction. But these early attempts had no more success than later 
ones. The essential quality of the glass harmonica was the sensitive 
touch of the fingers, and this had gone. 

Finally, the glass harmonica in both forms, with and without a 
keyboard, was driven out by the cheaper, easier and less fragile 
instruments of the new harmonium family. 

THE HARMONIUM is a keyboard instrument with free reeds. 
To use the words of Sir James Jeans, the reed 

consists of a spring of metal which is screwed down tightly at one end 
and is shaped to fit closely into an aperture in a rigid piece of metal, which 
lies between a lower wind-chest, and an upper wind-chest. When the 
appropriate stop of the harmonium is drawn, air under pressure fills 
the wind-chest and spreads round the reed into the upper wind-chest. In 
the top of this latter chest is a second opening, which is normally covered 
by a felted block of wood. When the appropriate key of the harmonium 
is depressed, the block is raised and air under pressure escapes from [the 
upper chest] . As the reed now has a greater pressure of air below than 
above, it is forced upwards, air rushing past it from the lower chest to 
the upper wind-chest. But before the pressures in the two chests have 
become fully equalised, the elasticity of the reed carries it back to its 




406 The History of Musical Instruments 

original position, so that the flow of air is checked and the pressure in [the 
lower chest] again increases. By a continued repetition of this process, 
the reed is set into violent vibration, with a period equal to that of its 
free vibration. 

The eighth chapter has mentioned that the free reed of the 
Chinese mouth organ was brought to Russia in the second half of 
the eighteenth century. This heretofore unknown kind of tongue 
spread over Europe with unusual rapidity. Makers of organs and 
automatic instruments accepted it, and at the beginning of the nine- 
teenth century an entirely new group of instruments was based on 
the principle of the free reed. The most long-lived among them were 
two inventions of Friedrich Busch mann in Berlin — the mouth 
organ, German Mundharmonika, in 1821, and the accordion, Ger- 
man Ziehharmonika, in 1822. The mouth organ had the form of a 
small, flat box with tiny tongues in grooves j the accordion was a 
bellows itself, with reeds in the two headboards. Both combined 
aspiration and expiration, pushed-out tongues and drawn-in tongues. 

While these handy instruments were popular with everyone, an- 
other group of free reed instruments, with a keyboard and a pres- 
sure bellows inside, was accepted rather by the bourgeois class. Many 
such pseudo organs were constructed between 1810 and 1840 and 
called aeoline, aeolodicon, melophone, phys harmonica, or by other 
scraps of Greek. These attempts culminated in 1 840 with Alexandre 
Debain’s harmonium. This was almost identical with the modern 
instrument, especially when three years later the inventor had added 
to it the expression, allowing the player to disconnect the equalizing 
‘reservoir’ so that his action on the treadle was reflected through 
the feeder bellows directly on the wind channels, and he was able to 
produce crescendo and diminuendo. At about the same time L. P. A. 
Martin de Provins invented the prolongement to sustain notes 
after the finger had released the key, and the percussion in which 
small piano hammers struck the tongues as if they were strings, giv- 
ing a quicker and more precise response than the reluctant wind 
action. 

As early as 1836, Friedrich Buschmann, then in Hamburg, had 
constructed a physharmonika with sucker bellows instead of pressure 
bellows. A French workman was said to have conceived of the same 
aspirating device and to have brought it to this country. It then 
became the principle of the so-called American organ, the har- 




Romanticism (1750-1900) 407 

monium with sucker bellows constructed in 1856 by Estey in Brat- 
tleboro, Vermont, and in 1 86 1 by Mason and Hamlin in Boston. Its 
tone was softer and more organlike, though slow to act. 

Romanticism vibrated between two poles of expression. At one 
end of its sphere were mysticism and sentimentality, and at the other 
violence and passion. This contrast required the overwhelming 
power and the strong accents of wind instruments. The introduction 
of new types of this class, and the adaptation of older ones, became 
one of the most important features in the musical life between 1750 
and 1900. 

THE BOEHM FLUTE. The fingerholes of the flute, when 
opened successively, produce a diatonic D major scale. Other notes 
than these had to be produced either by cross-fingering or by ‘half- 
stopping.’ In cross-fingering, the player, for example, flattened his 
normal F$ to F tj by closing the D hole and leaving the inter- 
mediate E hole open; in half-stopping, the player could, for instance, 
sharpen D to D# by partially closing its hole. Notes produced in 
these artificial ways were difficult to play and slightly muffled. Thus, 
it was scarcely feasible to play in other tonalities than Z), G and A 
major and their minor parallels. This difficulty was emphasized 
when in the second half of the eighteenth century composers, having , 
the benefit of an equal-tempered system, did not hesitate to write 
even in remote tonalities. In consequence, the flute was given a 
quantity of auxiliary keys, for B\)> F } C, D#, GJ. 

Nevertheless, the flute was still imperfect ; every new hole com- 
promised the correct intonation of the already existing holes. A re- 
form was necessary; but it was not made by professional manufac- 
turers. In 1808, the Reverend Frederick Nolan in England took a 
first step by inventing the ring-key , permitting the addition of cor- 
rective holes. This was a springing metal ring suspended over the 
regular open hole and connected by a lever with another key over an 
auxiliary hole somewhere beyond the reach of the finger. As long 
as the hole under the ring-key was open, the auxiliary hole was also 
open and functioned as a correction. But when the finger closed its 
hole it had to press down the ring, thus automatically closing the 
auxiliary hole as well so that it did not interfere with the lower holes. 

Between 1820 and 1830, the flutist Charles Nicholson in Lon- 
don tried to improve the quality and correctness by larger holes. 




408 The History of Musical Instruments 

About the same time, William Gordon, a former captain in the 
French king’s Swiss Guards, changed the position of the holes and 
employed Nolan’s ring-key. The German flutist Theobald Boehm 
became acquainted with these attempts in 1 83 1 and based an entirely 
new system on them. His principles were 1 ) the holes were to be as 
large as possible; 2) their position would depend on acoustical cor- 
rectness only, without considering the player’s comfort; 3) this latter 
would be accommodated by an appropriate arrangement of keys 
covering all holes; 4) all keys were to be open in their position of 
rest (except G#, which only later was transformed into an open 
key), (figs. 130, 131) 

Boehm’s first flutes, issued in 1832, were still conical; it was as late 
as 1 846 that he created the modern cylindrical bore with a parabolic 
head. This made the pitch more accurate and equalized the timbres 
of the various registers. But the actual flute character was completely 
altered. A great deal of its sweetness had gone; instead, the timbre 
was more ‘reedy’ and powerful and, in the lower register, almost 
hornlike. These qualities were emphasized when flutes were made 
more and more of metal. The harder the material, the brighter the 
timbre; silver flutes are more brilliant than the rare golden ones. 

As to the timbre of a modern golden flute, the greatest authority 
on flutes, Dayton C. Miller, says: 

When played pianissimo, the tones are nearly simple, containing about 
95 per cent of fundamental, with a very weak octave and just a trace of 
some of the higher partials. The pianissimo tones of the middle register 
. . . are simple, without overtones. When the lower register is played 
forte, it is in effect overblown, and the first overtone becomes the most 
prominent partial . . . the fundamental is weak, being just loud enough 
to characterize the pitch. The player is often conscious of the skill re- 
quired to prevent the total disappearance of the fundamental and the pass- 
ing of the tone into the octave. The tones of the low register, when played 
loudly, have as many as six or eight partials, and at times these sounds 
suggest the string quality of tone. The tones of the middle register played 
forte consist mainly of fundamental with traces of the second and third 
partials. In this respect these flute tones are very similar to those of the 
soprano voice of like pitch. . . . The average of all of the tones of the 
lower and middle registers of the flute . . . leads to the conclusion that 
the tone of the flute is characterized by few overtones, with the octave 
partial predominating. The tones of the highest register have been ana- 
lyzed and found to be practically simple tones. 




Romanticism (1750—7900) 



409 



FIGURE I30. 

Gordon’s flute. 



a D shake, b C sharp, 
c C, <L keeps the 
thumb in its place, 
e B, / axle, g D 
shake, h E, i G 
sharp, /, G sharp, 
k G sharp, l G 
sharp, m C, n C 
sharp, 0 G sharp, 
f G and G sharp 
shakes, q r s to 
F sharp, t F sharp, 
x E flat, y C, z C 






FIGURE 1 31. 
Early 

Boehm flute. 

a D shake, b 
arms for clos- 
ing the valves, 
c C sharp. 



Neither Boehm nor the flutists who adopted his flute gave much 
emphasis to its powerful sound j still, it is hard to believe that such 
a flute could have been accepted before the ‘loud era.’ 

Its introduction was not easy, however. Flutists opposed the 



410 The History of Musical Instruments 

adulteration of the genuine timbre and, though they rarely confessed 
it, the new fingering. And up to this day attempts have been made to 
revive the “old” conical flute. 

Besides the ordinary flute, the modern orchestra uses a small flute, 
flauto 'piccolo (or simply piccolo ), in the upper octave of the former. 
With its shrill and penetrating tone it dominates the tutti of the 
orchestra. 

Larger flutes are less frequently made and used. Some scores pre- 
scribe an alto flute, which is either a fourth lower, as in Rimski- 
Korsakov’s opera ballet Mlada (1892), or a fifth lower than the 
ordinary flute, as in Ravel’s Daphnis et Chloe ( 1913). In both scores 
it is called “in sol.” But Ravel is wrong ; his flute is “in fa.” The in- 
correct terminology is due to the fact that a century ago the ordinary 
flute, which, being nontransposing, is in C, was called a D flute be- 
cause the series of fingerholes produced a D major scale. Sometimes 
these alto flutes have erroneously been called bass flutes. 

An actual bass flute, in the lower octave of the ordinary flute, was 
constructed by the middle of the eighteenth century. The maker had 
given it a peculiar shape by folding in both the upper and the lower 
ends so that the practical length was reduced. At the beginning of 
this century, in 1911, an Italian, Abelardo Albisi, created a new 
type, the albisifono. Its mouth part is bent to form the top of a T, 
while the rest of the tube is upright so that the latter is held in a 
vertical position. The original width of the bore was thirty-nine 
millimeters; as this demanded too much breath, a more recent model 
has a smaller bore (and slants down from the headpiece in an oblique 
position) . After this model, Albisi also made an alto in F. 

CLARINETS. The principle of the clarinet has been explained 
on page 91. In the European clarinet the mouthpiece or beak, made 
of wood or any other hard material, looks as if it were pinched to 
form a sharp edge at the top ; its front is rounded, while the back is 
flat and smooth. A rectangular orifice cut in the flat back is covered 
by a thin piece of cane that is screwed or tied on to serve as a beating 
reed. (fig. 132) 

Clarinets have a cylindrical bore; the lower end only is conical. 
The acoustical consequence is a debilitation, or else complete obliter- 
ation, of the even-numbered partials, that is, the second, fourth, sixth 
and so on. It is a mistake to believe that a clarinet has no even- 
numbered partials at all, although they cannot be obtained by over- 
blowing. When the player increases the pressure, he passes directly 




Romanticism (1750-1900) 41 1 

from the fundamentals to their twelfths and from the twelfths to 
the thirds above their double octaves : 

d GO (<*") /#" (*") . . . 

This involves a certain complication. A flutist needs only six holes 
and fingers to fill diatonically the gap between the fundamentals and 
their next harmonics, the octaves. A clarinetist, on the contrary, re- 
quires ten holes and ten fingers to fill the longer gap between the 
fundamentals and their twelfths. Tonalities remote from the natural 
scale of the instrument had to be avoided more than ever, and clari- 
nets began to be constructed in C, B\) and A. These letters are sym- 
bolic j they have nothing to do with the tonalities bearing the same 
letters. An instrument in C is a nontransposing instrument , that is, 
one on which we play the notes as they are written (as we do on a 
violin) $ the written C corresponds with the heard C. A clarinetist 
used a C clarinet when the tonality of the piece did not require too 
many sharps or flats. The B\) and A clarinets, on the contrary, are 
transposing instruments. In the key of B\) major the fingering would 
have been difficult on a nontransposing clarinet and the tone rather 
unsatisfactory. So he played it on a B [5 clarinet, in which the arrange- 
ment of the holes and keys was identical. He pressed what he called 
the C key, and the instrument, being a little longer, produced a B\) 
for a C, an F for a G. Not only B\), but any flat tonality was easier 
on a B\) clarinet. Likewise, all sharp tonalities were easier on an A 
clarinet. D major, for example, played on an A clarinet would re- 
quire one flat instead of two sharps, and D\) major on a B\> clarinet 
would require three flats instead of five. 

When the clarinet was gradually given modern keys so that play- 
ing was simplified, it did not need these different tunings. The C 
clarinet disappeared, and the A clarinet, though not extinct, has 
become rarer than the B b clarinets. 

But this belongs to the history of the clarinet and we must go 
back to its beginning before continuing. 

The clarinet was not “invented.” It existed as a folk shawm of 
inferior rank in a short, cylindrical shape, either with a beating reed 
cut in the cane itself, or with a separate reed tied on. These instru- 
ments, generally known by their French name chalumeaux , turned 
into clarinets when, at the end of the seventeenth century, Johann 
Christian Denner, at Nurnberg, gave them the shapes of oboes, 
with wooden tubes turned on a lathe and cut into several joints, with 
a separate bell and two keys — one above the front holes to produce 




412 The History of Musical Instruments 

a' y and another, opposite in the rear, for b f . Denner’s son, Johann 
Denner, working at about 1720, shifted the b' hole towards the top 
in order to facilitate overblowing. At the same time he diminished 
its size so that it produced b\f. Then he pierced an e hole into the 
lengthened lower joint and covered it with a long key to be pressed 
by the small finger of the left hand. This hole, when overblown, 
produced b ' and secured a complete fundamental scale from e to 
b\)\ and an overblown scale from b' on. 

Although this instrument was a genuine ‘clarinet/ the name itself 
is not mentioned before 1732 in Johann Gottfried Walther’s Musi- 
calisches Lexicon. As new names for old things are always hard to 
establish, the original name chalumeau was not only preserved in 
early Hamburg operas, such as Reinhard Reiser’s Croesus ( 1 7 1 1 ) 
and Serenata (1716) or Georg Philipp Telemann’s Sieg der Schon- 
heit (1722), but as late as 1767 in Gluck’s Orfeo y and it is idle to 
question whether the instrument intended was an early or an im- 
proved chalumeau. The fact that it was prescribed in art works shows 
that it had become an art instrument. 

Clarinets were used in Paris in 1749, where two of them played 
in Rameau’s opera Zoroastre , though the score did not indicate 
them. They were more common after 1760, but played by oboists 
and therefore never used simultaneously with oboes. 

The timbre of these early clarinets was indeed more closely con- 
nected with the tone of oboes than the timbre of modern clarinets. 
The smooth rear surface of the mouthpiece on which the flat reed 
was placed was shorter and narrower, and the reed consequently was 
smaller. As a small reed vibrates faster than a large one, the formant 
(cf. page 354) of the early clarinets must have been higher and the 
tone lighter and more penetrating. The inverted position of the 
mouthpiece with the reed on the front, which in some countries was 
preferred, increased the shrillness. Thus, Johann Gottfried Walther 
could say in 1732 in his Lexicon : “From a distance it sounds rather 
like a trumpet.” This explains the trumpetlike name clarinet y or 
even clarino t which is inappropriate for the modern instrument. 

The clarinet must have been shrill up to the beginning of the nine- 
teenth century; methods of clarinet playing published before 1850 
emphasize the “now fuller, much softer and more agreeable” tone 
of recent clarinets. 

Meanwhile, the mechanical part had also been improved. A fourth 
key for /# and a fifth one for gf date from the middle of the century. 




Romanticism (7750-7900) 413 




A maker in Braunschweig, Barthold Fritz, is credited with their 
introduction. In 1791, Xavier Lefebvre in Paris added a sixth key 
for r#'. A few years later, Ivan Muller created the modern clarinet 
with its thirteen keys for £ / g# £ \) b C V e V f /#' g#' * W* 





414 The History of Musical Instruments 

A few further dates may interest the reader. In 1 808, J.-F. Simiot 
in Lyon used a metal tube to line the thumb hole and protrude a 
short distance into the bore, to keep the saliva from leaking out; 
for the same purpose he placed the b\ / hole on the front although 
the handle of the key remained on the rear. In 1823, C. Janssen in 
Paris introduced the sliding rollers to facilitate the legato from key 
to key. After 1 839 certain qualities of the Boehm flute, above all the 
ring-keys, were adapted to the clarinet j specialists may distinguish 
between the systems of L.-A. Buffet Jeune in Paris (1839), Le- 
febvre in Paris (1846), Hyacinthe E. Klose in Paris (1843), 
R. Mollenhauer in Fulda (1867). 

Clarinets in C,B\j and A (after about 1 808 sometimes combined in 
the same instrument) were completed to form a whole family ex- 
tending from octave clarinets to double bass clarinets. 

The oldest addition was the bass clarinet , an octave below the 
normal clarinet (generally with an e\) key). The first one was con- 
structed by G. Lot in Paris in 1772. After his so-called basse-tube 
came Heinrich Grenser’s Bassklarinette (Dresden, 1793), Du- 
mas’s basse-guerriere (Paris, 1810), Friedrich Sautermeister’s 
basse-orgue (Lyon, 1812), Georg Streitwolf’s model (Gottingen, 
c. 1833) an d C. Catterini’s glicibarifono (Bologna, c. 1835). Some 
of them were folded like bassoons. The modern straight model was 
designed by Adolphe Sax in Brussels in 1836. In the same year the 
instrument appeared in Meyerbeer’s opera Les Huguenots. 

Alto clarinets in G existed as early as 1792; later they were con- 
structed in F and E\). They have never been admitted to the or- 
chestra, but they play a certain role in German bands and, as tenor 
clarinets, in English bands. 

Octave clarinets in C, 2 ?f> or A\), and fourth clarinets in F, E\) and 
D have been made since about 1 800. We also possess D clarinets dat- 
ing from the beginning of the eighteenth century but it is doubtful 
whether they were intended to be D; possibly they were C clarinets, 
tuned to some older pitch which was higher than our standard. 

The double bass clarinet, two octaves beneath the normal clarinet, 
is the most recent member of the family, although makers ventured 
on this problem as early as the first decade of the nineteenth century. 
In 1808, Dumas in Paris constructed a contrebasse guerriere , and 
in 1839, Eduard Skorra in Berlin a bathy'phon. But the lowest notes 
in these instruments were weak and dim, and the higher notes could 
be more easily obtained and were better on a bass clarinet. Conse- 




Romanticism (1750-1900) 415 

quently they were put aside, until, in 1890, Fontaine-Besson in 
Paris again attempted, and finally succeeded, in making an excellent 
double bass clarinet. After him, Kohl in New York and Evette & 
Schaeffer in Paris, as well as Wilhelm Heckel in Biebrich, con- 
structed good systems. But owing to its high price, this marvelous 
instrument is very seldom used. (fig. 133) 

A separate branch of the clarinet family comprises the basset- 
horn and the contrabasset-horn. The basset-horn is an alto clarinet 
with a narrower bore, a thinner wall and four semitones beyond the 
low e (which sounds A in the usual F pitch). The first model, con- 
structed in Germany about 1770, was crescent-shaped. The curved 
piece of wood was split lengthwise j the two halves then were hol- 
lowed, glued together and covered with leather. This was the basset- 
horn in Mozart’s scores. At about 1800 the crescent shape was re- 
placed by a model which was sharply bent at an obtuse or nearly 
right angle. A few years later Heinrich Grenser in Dresden tried 
to give it the straight form in which it is constructed nowadays. Once 
more a great composer used itj in 1833, Mendelssohn wrote two 
concerted pieces for clarinet and basset-horn with piano (op. 113 
and 1 14). It then disappeared totally from the scene, until Richard 
Strauss assigned a part to it in his opera Electra in 1909. (fig. 134) 
A contrabasset-honiy an octave below the basset-horn in F, was 
constructed in the first half of the nineteenth century by Georg 
Streitwolf in Gottingen j a few new models were introduced from * 
the eighteen eighties on, though the instrument is rare. 

Besides the basset-horns, the clarinet family had a second off- 
spring, the clarinet te d* amour. It was a larger clarinet in G or A\) 
with the pear-shaped bell of the oboe d’amore. The first evidence of 
it is Johann Christian Bach’s opera T emistocle (1772) j but less than 
thirty years later, in 1801, it was “entirely obsolete.” (fig. 135) 

THE SAXOPHONE is a wide metal tube of parabolic bore, 
usually bent to the shape of a tobacco pipe, with the key arrange- 
ment of the oboe and a clarinet’s mouthpiece. Its sound is incredibly 
variable. Being intermediate between the timbres of wood and brass 
instruments, it passes from the softness of the flute over the broad, 
mellow tone of the cello to the metallic strength of the cornet. 

The principal member of the family is the alto, made either in 
F or E\)) soprano, alto, tenor and baryton (more correctly, bass) 
form the usual quartet. Besides, some makers build a sopranino in F 




4i 6 



The History of Musical Instruments 




figure 134. Basset-horn in 
angular form. 



D*> 



figure 135. Clarinette 



d’amour. 






or E\) and three big saxophones down to a subcontrabass an octave 
below the ordinary contrabass. In the United States the tenor in C 
is called melody saxophone. Thus, the family comprises: 



in F or E\) 

Sopranino 

Alto 

Baryton (correctly bass) 
Contrabass (correctly subbass) 



in C or B\ > 

Soprano 

Melody (C), Tenor (i?b) 
Bass (correctly contrabass) 
Subcontrabass 



The written range for the entire family is b\> to / 3 . (fig. 136) 
Predecessors of the saxophone were a clarinet with bent mouth- 
piece and bell, constructed in 1 807 by Desfontenelles at Lisieux, 
and the small octave bassoon, tenor oon y built about 1 820 by Lazarus 
in London with a clarinet's mouthpiece. The saxophone itself was 
invented about 1840 by the famous Adolphe Sax, who then still 
lived in Brussels. In 1844, Jean-George Kastner introduced it into 
one of his scores, and it was in continuous use from that time on, 



Romanticism (1750-/900) 417 

above all in France and Italy. Its outstanding role in modern music, 
however, has been in jazz and swing. 

A relative of the saxophone is the wooden tarogat6 y an ancient 
Hungarian military oboe of wide bore that in 1900 was given a 




clarinet, or rather a saxophone, mouthpiece by W. J. Schunda in 
Budapest. Its timbre is less brilliant than that of the saxophone. 

CHROMATIC HORNS AND TRUMPETS. The usual term 
brass instruments should be avoided in scientific language. All kinds 
of trumpets and horns can be, and have been, made of other material 
— horn, tusk, cane, wood, clay, crystal. On the other hand, most 
saxophones and flutes, and many clarinets, are made of brass in spite 
of their being called wood-wind instruments. 

Another more recent and half-scientific name, instruments with 
cup-shaped mouthpieces , is not recommendable either. Besides being 
too long, it is not accurate} the funnel mouthpiece of a French horn 
is not in a proper sense cup-shaped and most primitive horns and 
trumpets have no mouthpiece at all. Whether cup- or funnel-shaped, 




41 8 The History of Musical Instruments 

the mouthpiece is dispensable. It facilitates and influences tone pro- 
duction by its shape and size, but the essential acoustical factor is 
the player’s lips. This cannot be referred to in terminology as it does 
not belong to the instrument, (figs. 137, 138) 

While the production of sound is due to the lips, the pitch, as in 
pipes, is determined by the length (and in a very small measure by 




figure 137. Mouthpieces; del. Carmina Manger. 

Horn Soprano Alto Tenor Bass Double bass 




figure 138. Mouthpieces; del. Carmina Manger. 

Clarin modern principal curved straight serpent bass-horn 

' y ' ' , * 

trumpet cornet 



the width) of the tube. Again, the lips cause the production of 
additional notes by the degree of their tension. The lowest tension 
creates the fundamental. When the player overblows by increasing 
the tension of his lips, the air column is pushed on again, before hav- 
ing had time for a complete vibration. Instead of vibrating in its full 
length, it then vibrates in its halves, or thirds, or fourths and so on, 
according to the tension of the lips. Thus, a well-made instrument 




Romanticism (7750-7900) 419 

is able to produce a series of harmonics, formed by the fundamental, 
its octave, the fifth above, the double octave, the major third above, 
the fifth above the double octave, etc. If the fundamental is C, for 
instance, this harmonic series is 

C c g c' e' / V c" d" e" /"+, etc. 

This series is constant in its structure — that is, in the succession of 
its intervals — but variable in its pitch. A tube three halves as long as 
the one which produces C as the fundamental, produces 

F x F c f a c f e\ Y f g' of, etc. 

Thus, we distinguish trumpets, cornets, horns ‘in’ C or B\) or any 
other pitch. This distinction, however, is not sufficient to determine 
the pitch and size of the instrument, as it does not indicate whether 
a horn in C y for instance, has C x or great C or small c as the funda- 
mental. Therefore, musicians and instrument makers speak of so- 
prano, alto, tenor, bass instruments. This would clearly indicate the 
pitch and size, if such denominations were consistently applied. Un- 
fortunately, this is not the case. Let us quote two examples only: 
the large trumpet in C or B\) y in spite of its having the same length, 
the same pitch, the same series of harmonics and even a higher 
range than the tenor trombone, is called a bass trumpet, and the 
French call the various members of the saxhorn family sometimes’ 
soprano, contralto, tenor, bass, sometimes sopranino, soprano alto, 
tenor and so on. 

The use of these names can be preserved, but it should be careful 
and unmistakable. It ought to be based on the sole reliable criterion 
that we have: the length of the tube and, in its consequence, the 
absolute pitch of its harmonics. The following summarizes a con- 
sistent application of the terms, in which only C and F pitches are 
considered: 



Octave (cornet) 




Sofranino (cornet, fliigelhorn, trumpet) 


f r c" . 


Sofrano (cornet, fliigelhorn, trumpet) 


C F g f . 


Alto (cornet, trumpet, trombone) 


F f c' . 


T enor (trumpet, trombone, horn, euphonium) 


C c g . 


Bass (trombone, horn, tuba) 


F X F c . 


Contrabass (trombone, tuba) 


C X C G . 


Subbass (tuba) 


F 2 F x C . 


Subcontrabass (tuba) 


Cjp x G x . 




420 The History of Musical Instruments 

We need not list the (theoretically) endless series of its harmonics 
to locate an instrument. Nor do we designate it by its fundamental, 
which in the majority of cases cannot even be produced because it 
demands an unfeasible relaxation of the lips. Instead, we designate 
an instrument by its harmonic fifth, that is, the interval formed by 
the second and third harmonics. A C trumpet and a C cornet, for 
instance, have the harmonic fifth a bass trombone and an F 
horn F-c. 

The available scale is a section out of the theoretical series of 
harmonics. The place of this section within the series and its range 
depend on the bore, the mouthpiece, the player’s lips and training, 
and even on the way in which the composer allows the player to ap- 
proach hazardous notes. 

To resume the two main points: the absolute pitch of the series of 
notes changes with the instrument j but the structure of the series, 
that is, the proportion between the various notes, is constant. The 
player’s mind is directed towards producing the second or third or 
fourth harmonic rather than towards hitting c or / or a. The player 
plays something like an abstract mathematical formula made up of 
unknown quantities like x, y, z, while the tube itself, according to its 
length, substitutes definite quantities for them. Taking this into ac- 
count, trumpeters and horn players use a symbolic notation in C, 
and the instrument they play transposes the fictitious notes into real 
ones in the required tonality. 

Musicians and makers, anxious to have trumpets and horns in the 
orchestra, which already included trombones, investigated every 
means of filling the gaps between the harmonics, in order to give 
these instruments diatonic and even chromatic scales. 

SERPENTS AND BASSHORNS. Following this general 
tendency, makers recalled to life an ancient fingerhole horn — the 
serpent — which, though clumsy, was chromatic. This instrument had 
been created in the sixteenth century, probably in France, as a double 
bass of the cornet family. Its serpentine shape was not as elegant as 
the S shape of the tenor cornet. A wide tube of chestnut covered with 
black leather was curved in serpentine form to make the six finger- 
holes reachable j the upper end was provided with a deep mouth- 
piece of horn or ivory. Serpent players in the seventeenth century 
must have been great artists j Father Mersenne stresses their versa- 
tility in being able to accompany as many as twenty of the most 
powerful singers and yet play the softest chamber music with the 




Romanticism (1750-/900) 421 

most delicate grace notes. Later musicians did not share his enthusi- 
asm j Berlioz, for instance, referred to it as a barbaric instrument. 
The skill had been lost and the serpent was confined to accompanying 
the plainsong in Catholic churches. It continued at this task until the 
nineteenth century, (fig. 139) 

Meanwhile, the large military bands, which sprang into being in 
the last quarter of the eighteenth century, used the serpent as a 




foundation, and they did not give it up until the bass tuba and its 
relatives were introduced beginning in about 1835. Even the sym- 
phonic and opera orchestras kept it; serpents were prescribed, for 
example, in Rossini’s opera Le Siege de Corinthe (1826), Carafa’s 
Masaniello (1827), Mendelssohn’s Meeresstille und gluckliche 
Fahrt (1828), his oratorio Paulus (1836), Wagner’s opera Rienzi 
(1842) and Verdi’s Les V eyres siciliennes (1855). 

This later serpent was improved from the earlier model by a few 
keys for chromatic notes and by a more convenient form. An Italian 




422 The History of Musical Instruments 

musician, Regibo, who lived at Lille in France, was the first, in 1789, 
to abandon the serpentine tube and to bend it back on itself in the 
shape of a bassoon. Though this so-called ophibaryton ) or Russian 
bassoon , was not able to replace the genuine serpent, it was a step in 
the creation of a new instrument — the bas shorn, (figs. 140, 141) 

Two men invented the basshorn in about 1800, a Frenchman, 
Alexandre Frichot, and an English maker, J. Astor. As both of 
them lived in London, it was called the English basshorn on the 
Continent. The basshorn had the bore of a serpent and the shape of 
a bassoon plus a wide metallic bell and keys j the cup-shaped mouth- 
piece was inserted in a crook. In spite of its imperfection, it was ac- 
cepted in bands and preserved up to about 1830. Increasing the con- 
fusion in terms, Frichot gave different names to later improved 
models. As a basse-cor he submitted it to the Paris Conservatoire, 
and four years later he took out a patent on it under the calamitous 
title basse-trompette. The most improved model was Streitwolf’s 
Chromatisches Basshorn (1820) with a better bore, two open holes 
and ten keys, which made it possible to play with the same ease in all 
tonalities. 

KEY TRUMPETS AND KEY BUGLES. In 1760, a member 
of the Russian Imperial Orchestra, Kolbel, had given keys to the 
French horn, but the instrument was not established. Forty years 
later, in 1801, a certain trumpetist Weidinger, in Vienna, gave the 
trumpet four, five or six keys to bridge the gap between the second 
and third harmonics j but this key trumpet , too, had little success 
and disappeared in another twenty years. The failure of the key 
trumpet was probably due to the side holes and to the soft pads 
covering the insides of the keys, both of which combined to muffle 
the noble tone of an otherwise uninterrupted tube. 

Keys did not make such a noticeable difference in a rude instru- 
ment like the bugle } which had the relatively largest bore of any 
horn and, therefore, the broadest tone. Originally a hunter’s horn, 
it became a military instrument when at the end of the eighteenth 
century battle formation became too large for oral commands to be 
heard. Its old, semicircular tube had been bent to two right angles. 
After the Napoleonic wars this form was replaced by the so-called 
English model, that is, the coiled, trumpetlike form. The pitch of a 
bugle is generally C or B b, its harmonic fifth c'/g', its range c'-gf'. 
(fig. 142) 

In 1810, Joseph Halliday at Dublin added, as he said in the 




Romanticism (1750-1900) 423 




specification of his British patent of May 5, 1810, “five keys to be 
used by the performer, which, together with its five original notes, 
render it capable of producing 25 separate tones in regular progres- 
sion.” Later, the number of keys was increased to seven, the lowest 




424 The History of Musical Instruments 

being open. This was the key bugle or kenthorn, named in honor of 
the Duke of Kent j the French called it bugle a cles , and the Germans 
Klaffenhorn. It was able to hold its position until the second half 
of the nineteenth century, (fig. 143) 

Following the tendency towards forming complete families, the 
Parisian maker Jean Aste, called Halary, constructed some larger 
key bugles that he named ofhicleides. Despite this clumsy term 
(composed of of his, ‘serpent/ and kleides, ‘keys’), the instrument 
was not serpentine, but had the bassoonlike form of the basshorn. Its 
most usual size was a so-called bass (correctly baritone) in C or B\) 
with nine to twelve keys and the range B x to c". As early as 1819, 
Spontini prescribed it in his opera Olymfia, and, in 1826, Mendels- 
sohn in his overture to A Midsummer Night } s Dream. Although a 
few decades later the ophicleide was replaced by the tuba in the or- 
chestra, it was used in Italian, French, Spanish and South American 
bands up to this century. 

Smaller ophideides with nine keys, in alto and even in soprano 
pitch, had no greater success than the ofhicleide monstre of 1821, a 
bass in F , five feet high and provided with eleven keys, with the 
range E x to d. 

All these keyhorns were finally superseded by valve instruments. 

STOPPED FRENCH HORNS must, however, be discussed 
before the valve action is explained. At the middle of the eighteenth 
century a celebrated horn player at the court of Dresden, Anton 
Joseph Hampel, who died in 1771, invented a method of bridging 
over some of the intervals between the harmonics by inserting 
several fingers held close together into the bell. This is what the horn 
player calls ‘stopping.’ He distinguishes three degrees: half-stop- 
ping, three-quarter stopping, whole-stopping. The difference be- 
tween half and three-quarter stopping is so vague that the methods 
of producing certain notes vary greatly. In certain cases the note 
can be raised instead of lowered by stopping. Thus, within the 
average range c to c 3 or f 3 most gaps between the harmonics can be 
bridged over. 

A new playing position of the horn was the essential consequence 
of this practice. The player was forced to turn his instrument to 
allow the hand to enter the bell. This was the origin of our modern 
way of holding it ‘pocketwards.’ 

The soft, almost muffled, tone resulting from this new position is 
quite different from the brisk sound that the horn had in the first 




Romanticism (7750—1900) 425 

half of the eighteenth century. Conductors should keep this in mind 
when they perform music of the Bach-Handel period. 

Hampel’s stopping achieved the modern horn timbre which, in 
Dayton C. Miller’s words, “contains the largest number of partials 
yet found in any musical tone. . . . The analysis . . . shows the 




figure 142. 
Bugle. 




FIGURE 143. 
Key bugle. 




FIGURE I44. 
Stopped trumpet. 



presence of the entire series of partials up to thirty, with those from 
the second to the sixteenth about equally loud.” 

A few makers even tried to change the traditional shape of so 
inappropriate an instrument as the trumpet was, in order to allow 
a stopping hand to enter the bell. (fig. 144) 

VALVES. The latest and most effective system of completing the 
deficient scales of trumpets and horns is based on the principle of 
combining several harmonic scales in one instrument. Scores at the 
end of the eighteenth century and at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century show many evidences of a preliminary step which consisted 
in using two, or four, horns of different tonality to supply the re- 
quired notes. Four horns, a semitone apart, would provide an un- 
interrupted chromatic scale from the fourth harmonic on. For obvi- 
ous reasons, the use of several trumpets or horns in different 
tonalities was not satisfactory j the ideal was a chromatic scale con- 
trolled by one player with one instrument. 



426 The History of Musical Instruments 

In 1788, an Englishman, Charles Clagget, obtained a British 
patent for “uniting two French horns in such a manner that the 
mouthpiece may be applied to either of them instantaneously as the 
music may require. One of the trumpets being of the tone D, and the 
other of the tone E flat, it is evident that by moving the mouthpiece 
to the suitable horn or trumpet any piece of music may be played, as 
it then contains an entire chromatic scale.” 

But it was not necessary to tie several instruments together. A sec- 
tion could be added, say, to an F horn, that was long enough to trans- 
form the original tube into one producing the scale on E y a second 
section corresponding to the difference between an F and a D horn, 
and so on. Such sections had been used long before in the form of 
crooks , that is, coiled tubes loosely inserted between the original tube 
and the mouthpiece to increase the length and to lower the pitch. But 
even when, in the second half of the eighteenth century, the crooks 
were inserted in the middle of the horn instead of its top ( Inventions - 
horn), they did not admit an instantaneous change of scale. Some 
makers of the nineteenth century even constructed omnitonic horns 
with crooks for all transpositions solidly fixed to the instrument in a 
circular arrangement and connected at will by a small dial. But these 
horns, loaded with so many crooks, were too heavy and the dial was 
too slow. 

The needed invention was made about 1815 by two musicians, 
Bluhmel in Silesia and Heinrich Stolzel in Berlin. Additional 
crooks branched off and re-entered the main tube, their inlets and 
outlets lying close to one another $ spring valves connected them 
when pressed down and automatically disconnected them when re- 
leased. Thus, the action was as fast as that of any keyboard instru- 
ment. 

Following this first invention countless systems of valves have 
been devised, and the patent bureaus of all countries are infested with 
them. Numerous as they are, they can be reduced to two fundamental 
types — pistons and rotary valves, (fig. 145) 

The fiston has an up-and-down action. When in rest, the piston 
disconnects the additional crook and allows the wind to pass directly 
through the main tube. When the piston is pressed down, on the 
contrary, the direct passage is barred, and the wind is forced to make 
the detour through the additional crook before re-entering the main 
tube. 

In rotary valves y connection and disconnection are effected by a 
revolving cylinder. The player, however, does not need to make a 




Romanticism (1750—1900) 427 

rotary movement j he presses a key, the vertical motion of which is 
transformed into rotation. 

Rotary valves have always been favored by German players j 
most other countries have preferred pistons. 

The usual number of valves is three: 

( 1 ) lowering the original scale by 2 semitones 

(2) lowering the original scale by 1 semitone 

(3) lowering the original scale by 3 semitones 

The combination of any two, or of all three, of these valves can 
lower the original scale by three, four, five or six semitones. Thus, 




figure 145. Piston and rotary valve, both in rest and action. 



even the large gap between the second and third harmonics can be 
filled, and the range is increased downward six semitones beyond the 
lowest producible natural note. Some tubas, with a fourth valve 
lowering the original pitch by a major third or a fourth, can lower 
the original scale by ten or eleven semitones when all the four valves 
are functioning. 

The accumulation of valves, however, should be avoided j the 
note made by the use of two valves is a little too high and becomes 
more inaccurate with each additional valve. This is easy to com- 
prehend. If valve 3 is supposed to lower the original pitch by a 
minor third, its additional length must be a fifth of the original 
tube. But this is not long enough when valves 1 and 2 are already 
connected. The length, then, is 1 + % + Vis, or 14 %20, instead of 
the original 12 %2o- So the third valve is no longer in correct pro- 





428 The History of Musical Instruments 

portion with the increased tube, and the resulting note is a quarter- 
tone too high. 

The valve action made it possible to construct all sizes and shapes 
of chromatic brass instruments, thus giving an entirely new timbre 




figure 146. French horn. 



to the scores of the nineteenth century. Valves were first used on 
trumpets, French horns, flugelhorns and cornets, (fig. 146) 

THE CORNET FAMILY was created about 1825, when 
French makers gave piston valves to the 'post horn. The cornet has 
the range and pitch of a or C trumpet. Its shape, too, is neaily 
the same, except that it is slightly shorter and wider, and has a rela- 
tively longer conical part resulting in a broader and less brilliant 
tone. Because it is less noble than the trumpet, the Germans have 
never accepted it in the orchestra. But its greater agility has appealed 
to Italian and French composers j as early as 1829, Rossini scored 
cornet parts in his opera Guillaume Tell. (fig. 147) 

Some cavalry bands include a cornettino or sopranino cornet in 
E\) with the harmonic fifth e\)'-b[ / and the range e\f to <?b 3 > some- 
times it is popularly called piston or piccolo. 

The flugelhorn is a valve bugle, generally in B\) and in all re- 
spects like the valveless bugle except that it has a chromatic range 
down to e. The original German name (the instrument was first 
constructed in Austria between 1820 and 1830) is preserved in 
English-speaking countries j the French call it bugle , and the 
Italians flicorno soprano, (fig. 148) 




Romanticism (/750— 1900) 429 

Soon after the construction of the cornet and the fliigelhorn, a 
complete family was built in which some characteristic features of 
both instruments were combined. Its members are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 

The alto horn , called Altkornett in German, bugle alto in French 
and flicorno alto in Italian, is coiled either in the shape of a trumpet, 




figure 147. Post horn. 




figure 148. Cornet. 



or upright as a tuba, or circular as a horn. Its usual pitch is E\) or F, 
its harmonic fifth j-cf and its range B to or a tone lower. It is 
played in bands only. 

The American baritone corresponds to the German tenor horn y 
the French bugle tenor y the Italian flicorno tenor e and the Spanish 
baritono. It is built either in the usual upright form or oval with 
the bell facing backwards. Its pitch is C y its harmonic fifth c-g y its 
range F# to c" y or a tone lower. 

The American euphonium corresponds to the German baryton y 
the French basse a pistons, the Spanish bombardino y the Italian 
eufonio. Its shape, pitch and range are the same as those of the bari- 
tone j but a larger bore gives it a broader, mellower timbre and fa- 
vors the lower notes, (fig. 149) 

The bass tuba (called F or E\) bass when used in bands) is the 
Italian cimbasso or tuba and the French contrebasse a 'pistons. The 
harmonic fifth being F-c y its range is B x to f (or a tone lower). An 
additional major third beneath the lowest note can be obtained on 
tubas with a fourth valve. The first tuba was suggested by Wilhelm 
Wieprecht, musical supervisor of the Prussian Army, and con- 



430 The History of Musical Instruments 

strutted in 1835 by Johann G. Moritz in Berlin j but it was en- 
tirely different from ours. (fig. 150) 

The contrabass tuba (called BB bass in bands) is tuned to the 
lower fourth of the bass tuba. Its pitch is C in orchestras and B in 
bands j the harmonic fifth is C-G, the range F x to c' (or a tone 




lower) j a fourth valve advances the lower limit by a major third. It 
was invented ten years after the bass tuba (the first model of which 
had an additional valve that threw the instrument into contrabass 
C ) by V. F. Cerveny, a noted Bohemian maker of brass wind in- 
struments. 

Bass and contrabass tubas have been made both in upright form or 
as helicons (from Greek helikos ‘coiled’). This latter form, appar- 
ently invented in Russia, and imitated in 1 849 by Ignaz Stowasser 
in Vienna, is a spiral circular form wide enough to allow the player 




Romanticism ( 1750-1900 ) 



43i 




figure 1 5 1 . Helicon. 

to carry the heavy instrument over the shoulder. In the United 
States the helicon is built with a gigantic movable bell that was sug- 
gested by the late bandmaster and composer John Philip Sousa j 
it is called sousafhone in his honor, (fig. 1 5 1 ) 

All these cornets, flugelhorns, alto horns, baritones, euphoniums, 
bass and contrabass tubas were constructed in different countries by 
different “inventors” between 1825 and 1845 as they were needed 
in orchestra and band, but with no intention of forming a homo- 



432 The History of Musical Instruments 

geneous family. Following the general tendency of the nineteenth 
century, the Franco-Belgian instrument maker Adolphe Sax in Paris 
united them in 1843 tinder the name saxhorns and gave them a 
uniform model. They are upright. From the mouthpiece they run 
horizontally forward, then dip down in one or several coils, and 
end in an upright piece near the player’s body forming a bell at 
the top. The pistons stand on top of the horizontal part. Differing 
only in size, all pitches are represented from the suraigu , an octave 
above the soprano, to the bourdon, an octave below the contrabass, 
which had an actual length of thirty-six feet. (fig. 152) 

One must not confuse the saxhorns with the saxotrombas, a for- 
gotten family, also constructed by Adolphe Sax in 1845. In type 
and timbre, they were intermediate between the fliigelhorn-tuba 
and the trumpet-trombone family. 

Wagner-tubas. Anxious to obtain a solemn timbre of unfamiliar 
quality for his Ring des Nibelungen (which was first performed in 
1876), Richard Wagner suggested the construction of an instru- 
ment intermediate between a French horn and a tuba. It was conical 
throughout, had the outer shape of an oval tuba, a mouthpiece similar 
to that of the horn and four valves, which sometimes were arranged 
for the left hand because the instrument had to be fingered by a 
horn player who was used to having his right hand free for stopping 
the bell. A ‘quartet’ was composed of two tenors in the size of B\) 
horns (range B\) x to /") and two basses in the size of F horns 
(range B 2 to g'). Their notation is not always consistent, even in 
Wagner’s own scores. 

Wagner’s innovation has not been imitated as much as one might 
expect. The outstanding post- Wagnerian scores with Wagner-tubas 
are Felix Draeseke’s Symfhonia tragica, Bruckner’s Seventh Sym- 
phony (1884) and, most familiar, Strauss’s opera Electra (1909) 
where they are heard in sustained chords when Orestes enters the 
palace to avenge his father’s death. 

Inspired by this instrument, Fontaine-Besson in Paris (c. 1889) 
based a complete family of tubas on the same principle, from a so- 
prano down to a double bass, and called them corno'phones. 

VALVE TRUMPETS AND TROMBONES. The trumpet was 
given valves in about 1820$ five years later the Prussian regi- 
mental bands owned valve trumpets in B\) (soprano) and E\) (alto). 
By 1 840, valve trumpets were generally accepted in bands and, by 
1850, also in orchestras. The orchestral trumpet was tuned to F; 




Romanticism (175 0-1900) 



433 




figure 152. Saxhorn. 




but this instrument disappeared from the orchestra at the end of 
the nineteenth century in spite of its noble character, because com- 
posers used it more and more in its highest register so that the play- 
ers shifted of their own accord to the soprano trumpet, although 
its tone was less noble. This trumpet is either tuned to B\) with slide 



434 History of Musical Instruments 

change to A> or to C with slide changes to B\) and A. In the latter 
pitch, the harmonic fifth is c'-g', and the range /# to c 3 . (fig. 153) 

Tenor, bass and even contrabass trumpets were constructed in the 
eighteen twenties in Germany, but were soon abandoned, except for 
the instrument called bass trumpet today. It is actually a baritone 
trumpet in B or C, with c-g (or a tone lower) as harmonic fifth, in 
which the proportionate dimensions of a trumpet are replaced by a 
compromise between the trumpet and the tenor horn. It was used in 
Bavarian and Austrian cavalry bands and introduced by Richard 
Wagner into his Ring des Nibelungen (1876). 

Trombones have not changed appreciably since 1600. They are 
still made with slides, both for use in orchestras and in good bands. 
Players have clung to their easy adjustability that produces a sing- 
ing style unique among wind instruments. Yet, valves have been 
used on trombones and have made the instrument accessible to per- 
sons with short arms, and allowed trombonists to display a more 
brilliant technique. For the trombone with valves some makers have 
preferred a more functional upright or circular shape, since the 
traditional form of the instrument is meaningless without a slide. 
(% 154 ) 

MACHINE DRUMS. The old companion of the trumpet, the 
kettledrum, had also to undergo a vital change in order to become 
a permanent and reliable member of the modern orchestra. In its 
classical form it was good enough for both the army band and the 
early orchestra. The two drums of a pair were expected to con- 
tribute the tonic and the dominant of a tonality which rarely 
changed. As a member of the modern orchestra, however, the drum- 
mer had to modulate from one tonality to another and was forced 
to alter the pitches of his instruments right in the middle of a 
piece. Even an experienced artist needed a couple of minutes to 
regulate the fourteen or sixteen screws of his drums until the re- 
quired notes were found. As this enforced pauses that frequently in- 
terfered with the intentions of the composer, the drummers looked 
for some device to act upon all screws at once by means of a central 
screw. Gerhard Cramer was the first to construct such a system at 
Munich in 18 12. J. C. N. Stumpff in Amsterdam obtained the same 
result in 1821 by turning the drum itself instead of turning a central 
screw. The most recent system is the 'pedal drum y in which a pedal 
acts on the central screw. The more the pedal is pressed the higher 




Romanticism {1750—1900) 



435 




the tone is raised; in a few seconds the drummer can travel from 

F to /. (fig. 155) 

DRUMS. Along with the kettledrums, three kinds of cylinder 
drums entered the regular orchestra — the side drum, the tenor drum 
and the bass drum. 

The side drum has a shallow cylinder and two sheepskins, the 
rims of which are wound over small, circular flesh hoofs at either 
end. These concealed flesh hoops are pressed down and kept in place 
by outer rofe hoofs y which are connected and tightened either by 
ropes and leather braces or by metal rods and thumbscrews. The 
upper skin is the batter head y the lower the snare head } as its reso- 
nance is strengthened and sharpened by several gut (or coiled wire) 
strings stretched across it, which cause the specific rattling timbre of 
the side drum. 

This and its shallowness distinguish it from the deeper and 

snareless tenor drum. (pi. XX b, fig. 156) 

The bass drum is a big, rather shallow drum, carried so that the 
heads face sideways, and struck with a heavy, thick-knobbed stick ; 
its tone is low, powerful and indeterminate. Until the beginning 
of the nineteenth century it was called the Turkish drum , and all 
that is known about it indicates that the name was correctly given. 
The Italian painter, Vittore Carpaccio, first depicted it in a Turkish 
band at about 1505, and as late as the first half of the nineteenth 




436 The History of Musical Instruments 

century it was still struck in the oriental fashion, either with a stick 
on the right head and a split rod on the cylinder, or with a stick on 
each head. An early evidence of its use in the orchestra is in Mozart’s 
Seraglio (1782). 

THE TURKISH MUSIC. From the conquest of Constantino- 
ple by the Turks, in 1453, till the beginning of the eighteenth cen- 
tury, eastern Europe was continuously in contact with the Turkish 
armies j over and over again the occidental soldiers were exposed 
to the wild music that intoxicated the Turkish regiments, with the 







figure 156. Military drum. 

1 body, 2 counterhoops, 5 flesh 
hoops, 4 cord rope, 5 strainer, 6 
screw, 8 snare, p batter head, 
10 tug ear. 



shrill tones of oboes and triangles accented by clanging cymbals and 
rumbling drums. About 1700, after the military power of the Turk- 
ish Empire was broken, the victorious European armies began to 
imitate Ottoman bands. The Poles were the first to adopt Turkish 
music > or janissaries ’ music , a name taken from the sultan’s life 
guards. Following this example, the elector of Saxony, Augustus 
the Strong, who was king of Poland as well, organized a Saxon band 
with four cymbalists. The Austrians had their first ‘janissaries’ in 
1741, and the other countries followed. In a narrower sense, the 
Europeans called Turkish music a combination of bass drum, cym- 
bals and triangle, as, for instance, in Joseph Haydn’s Military Sym- 
phony (1794). In the bands a jingling crescent was also included. 

The introduction of Turkish instruments was accompanied by a 
predilection for Turkish motifs in the western arts. Examples of 
this mode can be found in the subjects of numerous comic operas, 




Romanticism (7750—1900) 437 

such as Gluck’s Cadi dufe (1761) and La rencontre imfrevue 
(1764), Mozart’s Seraglio (1781) and Gretry’s Caravane du Caire 

(1783). 

THE TRIANGLE is a steel rod bent into an equilateral triangle, 
suspended on a thread and struck with an iron stick. Many high, 
dissonant partials drown the fundamental and make the sound 
tinkling and shrill without a definite pitch. 

When the instrument first appeared, in the fifteenth century, it 
was not always triangular. Italian and English paintings of that 
epoch show it in a trapezoid form similar to the shape of a medieval 
stirrup. Accordingly, contemporaneous names indicate sometimes 
the triangular type, such as French trefie y and sometimes the stir- 
rup form, as Italian staff a and German stegereif. The term triangle 
occurs for the first time in a Wiirttemberg inventory of 1589. Be- 
sides these indicative names, triangles are sometimes hidden under 
the misleading name cymbal{e) y used even by such a careful scholar 
as Father Mersenne. 

Up to the nineteenth century jingling metal rings were usually 
strung on the horizontal section of the triangle j three was the usual 
number before 1600, and afterwards five. 

For three centuries the triangle was relegated to the so-called 
irregular music. In the eighteenth century it was given a place in. 
the orchestra. In the Hamburg opera it was employed as early as 
1710, and seven years later two triangles were bought for the Dres- 
den court orchestra. Further evidences are in Gretry’s opera, La 
jausse Magie (1775), Gluck’s If hi genie en Tauride (1779), Mo- 
zart’s Seraglio (1781). But in all these scores it was used to give 
local color. It finally became a permanent member of the orchestra 
at the beginning of the nineteenth century. An outstanding early 
example of its use purely as timbre is in the last movement of 
Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony (1823). 

THE CRESCENT was an upright pole with a fanciful, half- 
oriental headpiece of metal, composed of a crescent and several 
other symbols, from which bells, jingles and, generally, two long 
horsetails in different colors were suspended, (fig. 157) 

The crescent was descended from the Central Asian shaman’s 
staff, which could chase away evil spirits with the tinkling of its 
jingles. From its home in Central Asia it probably traveled both 
east to China and west to Turkey. In the time of the Chou dynasty, 
1 122-255 B.C., Chinese conductors gave the signal to start the music 




433 The History of Musical Instruments 

by lifting the dance staff, hui, which was ornamented with the sun, 
stars and two white oxtails. In Turkey these staffs had been given 
the Turkish crescent as their distinguishing feature, and by the 
epoch of the Turkish conquest in Europe had become the specific in- 
signia of the highest dignitaries. Like trumpets and kettledrums, 




they gradually passed from this position until they were mingled 
with other instruments in the military band. A number of crescents 
captured from Turkish regiments were brought home and sus- 
pended from the walls of European churches and palaces. The 
crescent did not become a European instrument before 1800. As 
such it was given various names, among which the French names, 
pavilion chinois and chapeau chinois y are the most curious. Possibly 
some of the fanciful, metal parts of the French crescents were in- 
spired by the eighteenth century French taste for chinoiserie rather 
than by Turkish models. The crescent was short-lived in the Occi- 




Romanticism (1750—1900') 439 

dent, except in Russia and Germany. In the latter country it is still 
in use. 

CYMBALS have rarely been made in the Occident; most of them 
have been, and still are, imported from China. The best cymbals, 
however, come from Turkey. These are slightly smaller, flatter, 
thicker and have more volume ; their alloy is said to consist of 
78.55% copper, 20.28% tin, 0.54% lead and 0.18% iron. 

Cymbals were not always connected exclusively with Turkish 
music. This book has discussed them again and again since the first 
mention of them in the chapter on the ancient Near East, and though 
they were never regular implements of European art music, neither 
were they entirely absent. The earliest evidence of their introduction 
into the orchestra is in Nicolaus Adam Strungk’s opera Esther 
(Hamburg, 1680). But here and elsewhere during the following 
century, they were used only to give a specific timbre to exotic sub- 
jects. After they were reintroduced with the Turkish music, they 
lost their atmospheric connotations. 

The cymbalist is sometimes omitted from smaller bands and his 
place taken by the drummer ; one of the cymbals is then fastened on 
the bass drum, while the drummer holds the other in his hand. This 
is a poor expedient as cymbals should rub each other in one violent 
sliding movement instead of being clashed together so that their vi- 
bration is deadened. 

XYLOPHONE. In describing these idiophonic instruments of a 
relatively recent Asiatic descent, a final section may be given to the 
xylophone; we have discussed it already in both the primitive and 
the Southeast Asiatic chapters. 

In Europe the xylophone was first mentioned by the organist 
Arnold Schlick in his book Spiegel der Orgelmacher und Organisten 
(1511) as hultze glechter y that is, ‘wooden percussion.’ From that 
date it can be traced on woodcuts and in literary sources, but it never 
became a genuine occidental instrument; wandering peoples only, 
most of them in eastern Europe and southern Germany, used it in a 
rather primitive form. It achieved importance when, around 1830, 
a Russian Jew, J. Gusikov, played it with virtuosity and made it 
known in the musical centers of the Continent. Felix Mendelssohn, 
who heard him in 1836, wrote: “With a few sticks, lying on straw 
and struck with other sticks, he does what is possible only on the 
most perfect instrument. How from such materials even the small 
tone produced — more like a Papageno-flute than anything else— 




440 The History of Musical Instruments 

can be obtained, is a mystery to me.” Afterwards the xylophone ap- 
peared not only in garden concerts and in variety shows, but even 
in symphony concerts. Hans Christian Lumbye (1810-1874) em- 
ployed it in his Traumbilder y and Camille Saint-Saens scored a part 
for it in his symphonic poem Danse Macabre (1874) to describe the 
dry rattling of skeletons. 

The modern form of xylophone that such compositions demand 
consists of a series of wooden slabs separated by wood or felt iso- 
lators resting on cylinders made of bundles of straw (hence the 
popular name straw fiddle). The slabs, comprising a range of three 
chromatic octaves, are arranged in two or more rows indented into 
each other. 

THE ORGAN, in this period too, summarizes the general mu- 
sical development of the time. Handel’s, Bach’s, Couperin’s power- 
ful polyphony yields to the poor two-voiced scores of a later 
generation j impersonal sublimity was abandoned for personal ro- 
manticism. But the organ was by nature polyphonic and impersonal, 
and thus, after being in the center of musical life, it became out- 
moded. Music moved outside the church although the organ was 
still confined there. 

Most makers continued in the old routine forms, now unrelated 
to musical needs. Others experimented in attempts to adapt it to 
the new musical ideals of power and expressiveness and, at least 
in the eighteenth century, simplicity. The desire for expression and 
simplicity led to the curious Simplifikationssystem of Abbe Georg 
J. Vogler at Darmstadt, about 1800. It consisted in an appreciable 
reduction of stops and pipes. The three manuals were grounded re- 
spectively on 32', 16' and 8'. But Vogler did not need an actual 
32'. He produced it acoustically by the difference frequencies re- 
sulting from the simultaneous touch of two higher keys. The notes 
c and g, for instance, being the second and third partials of C, 
produce the latter note in the listener’s ear as 1 is the difference 
between 3 and 2 j the same effect results from the combination of g 
and (f y since these notes are the third and fourth partials of C 
(4 minus 3 equals 1) j or from c and </, which are its fourth and 
fifth partials (5 minus 4). Pulling a fifth with an 8' stop produced a 
i 6 'j pulling a fifth with a 16' or a third with an 8' produced a 32'. 
Therefore, several ground stops were replaced by thirds and fifths 
in Abbe Vogler’s system. Mixtures were avoided as confusing. But 




Romanticism (7750—7900) 441 

expression was increased by a number of crescendo devices. His ob- 
ject was to give “a true picture of a well-organized orchestra.” 

The simplification system was a failure. Most organists disliked 
it, saying Vogler’s organ was a concert instrument rather than for a 
church. Not long after Vogler’s unsuccessful attempt, the organ 
in a different form did become a concert instrument. Submitting to 
the new ideal of a powerful orchestra rich in colors, the organ at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century entered the concert hall as 
a part of the orchestra. In this capacity it had to follow all the tend- 
encies of the real orchestra in the nineteenth century, expression, 
overwhelming power of sound, refined mixing of timbres, swift 
and continuous transition from shade to shade. The main inven- 
tions for the organ made in that time were reflections of orchestral 
tendencies. 

The principals, which in the middle ages had been the only stops, 
disappeared in a maze of imitations of orchestral solo stops, flutes, 
oboes, cors anglais, clarinets, trumpets and violins. Such organs were 
necessarily motley in sound. 

Special attention was given to expression, which was provided by 
two kinds of swells. One was the Venetian swell, a box including 
the pipe work or part of it, with shutters that opened or closed 
gradually when worked by a pedal ; Burkat Shudi in London had 
invented this swell for the harpsichord in about 1760. The second 
was the German Rollschweller, invented in the second half of the 
nineteenth century. A pedal set a big cylinder into rotation ; ledges, 
arranged on its surface, pushed all the stops one after another, thus 
causing a rapid crescendo from one weak stop to the full organ. 

Overwhelming power of sound was obtained both by increase and 
by intensification. By 1850 organs with a hundred stops were given 
to certain large churches j four manuals and two pedals occurred j 
the wind pressure was considerably increased in all countries j new 
stops with a particularly heavy wind were introduced, such as tuba 
mirabilis. 

Refined mixing of timbres depended partially on the quantity of 
available stops but even more on a well-organized system of couplers, 
which allowed the player to transfer stops, that is, to play a stop 
on one keyboard although its position was on another. 

Swift and continual transition from shade to shade was due to 
combination stop. The knobs that controlled the stops were dupli- 
cated once or twice at the side of the keyboards j before starting his 




442 



The History of Musical Instruments 




figure 158. Section of a mechanical organ. After H. Schmidt. 

I, 2. manual keys, 3. front board, 4. tap wire, 5. adjusting nut, 
6. trackers, 7. roller arms, 8. trundle, 9. roller board, 10. hooks, 

II. puffers, 12. soundboard spring, 13. pallet guides, 14. pallets, 
15. groove, 17. bearers, 18. sliders, 19. rack board, 20. rackboard 
holes, 21. pipes, 22. backfalls, 23. backfall frames, 24. draw stop 
rods. 25. stops, 26. pedal keys, 27. squares, 28. adjusting nut, 
A. windchest. 



piece, the organist could prepare a second and a third registration 
by connecting the knobs desired for later use, and then, by pressing 
a button, instantaneously replace the first by the second combination. 

All these complicated devices required a more reliable action. 
The action connecting the keys and stops with the pipes was gov- 
erned by a complicated system of wooden trackers, stickers and 





wmm. mmmm mmmm 



THE TRACKER ACTION 
I. windchest, 2. chamber common to 
all the pipes of the same note standing 
on the chest, 3. valve, 4. air chamber, 
5. slides, 6. key, 7. chain of action, 
8. spring. 



BARKER’S PNEUMATIC LEVER 
6. key, 9. motor, or pneumatic lever, 
IO. valve, 11. pressure box. 




THE TUBULAR-PNEUMATIC 
ACTION 

3. valve, 6. key, 9. pneumatic motor, 
10. valve, 11. pressure box, 12. tube, 
13. air chamber, 14. motor. 





THE ELECTRO-PNEUMATIC 
ACTION 

3. valve, 6. key, 9. motor, 10. valve, 
1 1. air chamber, 15. contact, 16. mag- 
net, 17. valve, 18. atmosphere duct, 
19. diaphragm, 20. link. 







figure 159. Evolution of the action. 

(Reprinted by permission from The Modern Organ by Ernest 
M. Skinner, New York, The H. W. Gray Company, Inc.) 




444 77f£ History of Musical Instruments 

rollers which were easily affected by heat and cold, humidity and 
dryness. It was unreliable, rather heavy to work and did not pro- 
duce a consistent pressure, (fig. 158) 

In 1 832, Charles Spackman Barker in London invented a pneu- 
matic lever to facilitate playing and equalize pressure j instead of act- 
ing on the valves {-pallets) directly, the trackers acted on small bel- 
lows which opened the pallets by wind pressure. 

An entirely pneumatic action had been invented five years before 
by Joseph Booth, but it was slow in being generally introduced. 
Each key and each stop was connected with its respective pipes, not 
by any mechanical action, but by a system of tubes and small bel- 
lows. A feeding trunk filled with wind under pressure ran along the 
keyboard and opened into the tube belonging to the key that the 
player was pressing down. The entering wind pushed the first bel- 
lows, which produced wind enough to act, over a certain distance, 
on a second bellows and so on, from relay to relay, until the final 
pallet was reached. This system provided not only reliability and 
evenly balanced pressure, but also the possibility of placing the key- 
board wherever desired, independent of the position of the pipes. 

The modern electro-pneumatic action, too, goes back to Barker. 
On January 22, 1868, he obtained a British patent for an arrange- 
ment of “detachable electro-magnet and pneumatic apparatus for 
operating the pallets” of organs. This meant, in his half-mechanical, 
half-pneumatic action, replacing the mechanical part by an electro- 
magnetic one, while the pneumatic part was kept. The depression of 
a key closed an electric circuit, but the pallet was opened by wind 
pressure. The reader must be referred to the special literature on 
the history of the modern action for studying the boundless quan- 
tity of systems and improvements, (fig. 159) 

It was the electric action that allowed the organ to reach the peak 
that the next chapter is to describe. 




Epilogue : The Twentieth 

Century 



K 



T FIRST sight the orchestra of our epoch seems to be continu- 
k ing in the same general course on which it started in the 
A. nineteenth century. Its outer aspect does not differ from 



that of Wagner or Beethoven. The instruments, too — violins, flutes, 
horns, harps, kettledrums, etc. — are the replicas of models made in 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and their roles have not • 
changed. 

The general tendencies of the nineteenth century have also been 
preserved and even exaggerated. The orchestras became larger, 
Schonberg scored some seventy parts in his Gurrelieder, and a man- 
ager was able in his advertising to boast that Mahler’s Eighth Sym- 
phony (1910) was Die Symphonic der Tausend. 

This tendency has been checked by economy as well as by taste. 
Schonberg and Schreker have written Kammersymphonien , Strauss 
gave his Ariadne auf Naxos (1912) a small orchestra, and the score 
of Stravinski’s Uhistoire du soldat (1918) includes only seven play- 
ers — six of them play clarinet, bassoon, cornet, trombone, violin and 
double bass, and a percussionist handles a bass drum, a tenor drum, 
two side drums, cymbals and a triangle. 

This total of four wind and two stringed instruments is an un- 
usual proportion when looked at from the point of view of the 
nineteenth century. However, Uhistoire du soldat is not a single 
case. Confining ourselves to Stravinski’s works, we find his Ragtime 
of 1918 written for flute, clarinet, cornet, French horn, trombone, 



445 





446 The History of Musical Instruments 

drums, cymbals, cimbalom, violin, viola, double bassj and in sev- 
eral scores, such as the Symphonies d* instruments a vent (1920) 
and the Octuor pour instruments a vent (1923), strings are en- 
tirely excluded. The same is true in jazz and swing bands. 

Though seeming to be a new departure, it is the logical continua- 
tion of a nineteenth century tendency. In the seventeenth century 
the normal orchestra consisted of stringed instruments only. Then 
wind instruments were added by degrees. At the beginning of the 
nineteenth century there were usually two members of each wind 
family in the orchestra, two flutes, two oboes, two trumpets j in the 
middle of the century three, and at the end four were not infre- 
quent. 

There was a similar increase in the importance given to per- 
cussion instruments j in Uhistoire du soldat we saw the unusual 
proportion of six melodic and six percussion instruments. Alarmists 
who fear that modern music is receding into a “savage, oriental” 
stage, because of its interest in percussion, should remember that this 
is only an advanced stage of a tendency which already manifested 
itself in the nineteenth century. It differed only by degrees from 
Haydn’s use of ‘Turkish Music’ in his Military Symphony, from 
Beethoven’s melodic kettledrums in octave tuning in the Scherzo 
of the Ninth Symphony, from Berlioz’s chime of sixteen kettledrums 
in his Requiem. These classic passages were related to Turkish and 
Indian practice rather than to European tradition, and the alarmists 
could have dismissed them, too, as “savage and oriental.” 

Today, even stringed instruments, such as the piano or the guitar, 
are often used in ensembles for stressing rhythm rather than for 
melody and harmony, and the American banjo (the body of which 
is simply a frame drum) has been especially added to bands for this 
purpose. Just as the seventeenth century constructed its music on the 
foundation of a ‘thoroughbass,’ the twentieth century seems to be 
veering toward a structure of ‘thoroughrhythm.’ 

Percussion, far from being a symptom of regression, indicates the 
revitalizing presence of a motor impulse that for centuries in the 
evolution of our harmonic style has been repressed and curtailed. 

Jazz and Swing, that have glorified rhythm and percussion, have 
brought with them as companion a cheap sentimentality. New in- 
struments have been created, which in their exaggerated emotional- 
ism caricature true sentiment j the singing saw whimpering under 




Epilogue: The Twentieth Century 447 

the gentle strokes of a hammer or a bow; the metal plate of a flex- 
a-tone whining under the pressure of the player’s thumb; swanee- 
saxes and jazzo-flutes sliding over the scale; the Hawaiian guitar 
gliding amorously from note to note. All these instruments produce 
ready-made sentimentality based on excessive vibrato and glissando. 

The same is true of the new electric instruments. 

ELECTRIC INSTRUMENTS are a departure from nine- 
teenth century tradition. Because they depend on physical discoveries 
of this century, they are often considered the most characteristic in- 
struments of our time. 

The term ‘electric instruments’ is loosely applied. It comprises 
three essentially different kinds of instruments: those with an elec- 
tric action taking the place of a former mechanical or pneumatic ac- 
tion, such as the electric organ; electromechanical instruments; and 
radioelectric instruments. Instruments with an electric action instead 
of a mechanical one will not be discussed in this section. 

In electromechanical instruments , vibrations are produced in the 
usual mechanical ways, by hammers striking piano strings in an ac- 
tual piano, or by a bow acting on the strings of a violin. The electrical 
piano has no soundboard; other electric stringed instruments retain 
their soundboards. But all of them are amplified by an electrical de- 
vice. Their sound vibrations are transformed into electrical vibrations . 
corresponding to the acoustical vibrations amplified by means of 
vacuum tubes and their associated circuits, and then transformed back 
again into sound by means of a loud-speaker. 

Serious attempts began in 1927 with E. Spielmann’s Superpiano ; 
here the key acts on a lamp, the light of which is transformed into 
electric vibrations by means of a photocell. Electromagnetic action 
had already been applied to stringed instruments, such as pianos, 
violins, cellos and guitars, where it superseded a soundboard and 
additional strings. On the basis of recent systems of this kind, Bizos, 
Boreau, Vierling, the physicist W. Nernst and the firm of Carl 
Bechstein in Berlin constructed the Neo-Bechstein in 1931, a piano 
containing eighteen microphones, making feasible a much longer 
tone, a crescendo and a great variety of timbres, despite its smaller 
size. 

None of these electromechanical instruments has become impor- 
tant in musical life. 

The principle of radioelectric instruments is an oscillating electric 




448 The History of Musical Instruments 

circuit with a distinct frequency, which can be altered by influencing 
the capacity of the circuit by any extraneous agent, for instance the 
player’s hand or a wire. 

The pioneers in making these instruments were W. Duddel 
(1899) and W. Burstyn (1911); F. E. Miller (1915) was the 
first to introduce the modern electron tube. Leo Theremin’s T here- 
minvox or Etherofhone ( 1924) is a small box containing the appara- 
tus with an antenna on top. The nearer the player’s hand comes to the 
antenna the higher will be the tone. To avoid an eternal legato and 
glissando, the left hand presses an interruptor after each note; a 
pedal regulates an interior resistance which controls the volume. 

If a wire is used instead of the hand, the player can control the 
position of the influencing medium more exactly and, in conse- 
quence, the exact pitch of each tone. Besides, it is then possible to 
play more than one note at a time on the same instrument. Conse- 
quently, we distinguish between two types of wire electrophones — 
monophonic instruments and polyphonic instruments. 

The most important monophonic instruments are Maurice Mar- 
tenot’s Ondes musicales (1928), N. Langer’s and J. Halmagyi’s 
Emicon (c. 1930), and Friedrich Trautwein’s Trautonium 
(1930). The emicon, built in this country, is the only monophonic 
instrument with real keys. All of them excel in imitating and creat- 
ing an indefinite number of timbres. 

Of polyphonic instruments it will suffice to mention four models: 
Jorg Mager’s S'pharofhon (1926) with keyboards; Helberger 
and Lertes’s Heller tion (1928) with movable ribbon manuals (simi- 
lar to those of the trautonium), on which the metric distances corre- 
spond to musical distances; P. Givelet and E. Coupleux’s Radio 
organ (1932) with seventy-six stops, three manuals and a pedal; 
Laurence Hammond’s Hammond organ and Novachord (1939), 
with keys. 

A general, though merely technical, distinction between all these 
systems is whether they use high or low frequencies. High fre- 
quencies cannot be made use of in music. But the superposition of 
two different high frequencies produces a low ‘difference frequency’ 
because of interference. The Thereminvox has high frequencies. 
Low frequency instruments are Hellertion, Trautonium, Emicon; 
the Spharophon uses both. 

We do not know the destiny of these engineers’ inventions, nor 
can we tell how much they will mean to the future of music. For 
the time being, they surely owe their existence to the experimenta- 




Epilogue: The Twentieth Century 449 

tions of electroengineers rather than to any musical need. Most 
eulogies of electric instruments emphasize their unlimited capacity 
for dynamic power and varied timbre. This is in line with the trend 
of the later nineteenth century. But are these the ideals of the fu- 
ture? 

Or is this a blind alley from which we must retrace our steps in 
order to return, not to the path of the nineteenth century, but to a 
much earlier style, in which our all too personal expression will be 
replaced by a greater objectivity? 

The desire to rediscover the treasures of ancient music began as 
early as the middle of the nineteenth century. In 1850, a society of 
conscientious historians and musicians started the gigantic publica- 
tion of Johann Sebastian Bach’s complete works. Many other com- 
plete editions were to follow: Handel in 1859, Palestrina in 1862, 
Mozart in 1876, Schiitz in 1885, Purcell in 1889, Lasso in 1894, 
and besides complete works, selected pieces in the official Monumenta 
and Denkmaler of various nations. 

The purpose was not so much to be complete as to be correct and 
to replace those numerous unreliable editions which left out, added 
and altered according to the personal taste of the “editor” or to the 
contemporary mode. 

Correctness also became more and more the password for the per- 
formance of ancient music. Ancient instruments were re\ived in 
order to avoid substitutions of inappropriate instruments; oboi 
d’amorey basset-horns and even cornets ( zinken ) came back; viola 
d’amore and viola da gamba y violino piccolo and violoncello piccolo y 
harpsichord and clavichord re-entered the orchestra and chamber 
music; high trumpets were constructed. 

It would be wronging the men who were responsible for this atti- 
tude to reproach them with sterile literalism. Correctness to them 
was neither orthodoxy nor pedantry. Their point was to be faith- 
ful, not to “history” but to art. They demanded harpsichords, gam- 
bas, ancient organs, because they knew that an organ of the nine- 
teenth century killed Bach’s severe architecture, that the thick and 
sensual tone of a violoncello destroyed the delicate line of a gamba 
composition, that a cross-stringed piano suffocated the unemotional 
melody of a harpsichord piece. They saw what to a painter would 
be self-evident, that design and color could not be separated, that 
an outline drawn by Raphael could not be colored with Cezanne’s 
palette. 




450 The History of Musical Instruments 

It must be admitted, however, that we are far away from color- 
istic authenticity, even with the resurrection of all these old instru- 
ments. Most of our “gambists” play the gamba in the position and 
in the manner of a violoncello, without frets, the fingerboard being 
too long and the bridge too high and arched, with a modern bow 
and modern strings, and there is so little difference in the result 
that the listener wonders to what purpose the player has taken the 
trouble to find his way between six or seven strings. Many of our 
harpsichordists (but they are usually better than the gambists) play 
on modern reconstructions which, having pedals instead of less con- 
venient hand stops, allow the lady to shift so rapidly from one 
combination to another that she occasionally indulges in the most 
astonishing coloristic excesses, to say nothing of her sixteen-foot de- 
bauches. Both gambists and harpsichordists believe that they play 
the ancient style. They rarely realize that such a thing does not 
exist. Style differed with every country, and in every country it 
changed continuously. A gambist should not play a recercada of 
Diego Ortiz from about 1550 as he plays Handel’s sonata and 
a harpsichordist ought to distinguish between a piece from the Fitz- 
william Virginal Book and a concerto of Bach. How extremely sel- 
dom is such discrimination found! But it would be unjust to speak 
of gambists and harpsichordists only; a modern violin, though 
identical with the violin of 1 700 and often the very specimen except 
for a few millimeters of additional neck length, is not played in the 
manner of Corelli. 

This is said not to discourage eager musicians, but to guide them; 
difficulties must be seen before they can be conquered. 

The reconstruction of ancient instruments as well as critical edi- 
tions of Complete Works were symbolic of a growing interest in the 
music of remote epochs. Also originally an outgrowth of the romantic 
period, the historical movement in music gradually became a leading 
force in neutralizing the excesses of the later romantic style, such as 
its decomposition of form, its obliteration of distinct outlines, its 
harmonic and coloristic superrefinement, its calculated effect on the 
listener, its exaggerated subjectivity. 

In about 1900 this neutralizing tendency found fertile soil in a 
young generation which came to despise sentimentality, individual- 
ism and overrefinement. Opposed to virtuosity and concert display, 
this generation took refuge in preromantic music, from Bach back- 
wards to the sixteenth and fifteenth centuries. Moreover, the old 
music and its instruments, such as the recorder, were particularly 




Epilogue: The Twentieth Century 451 

suited to small musical gatherings where youths and girls played 
themselves instead of listening to concerts or emulating virtuosi on 
the piano. 

An important group of young composers, too, took their in- 
spiration from the ancient music. They not only wrote fugues, toc- 
catas, concerti grossi, suites, passacaglias and chaconas, but their style 
emphasized transparence, severity and lack of sentimental features. 

The truest mirror of all these contradictory forces, of an exag- 
gerated nineteenth century style as well as of an archaic reaction, is 
the latest evolution of the organ. 

THE ORGAN, in the first third of the twentieth century, con- 
tinued to overwhelm the listener by its power and size. Walcker at 
Ludwigsburg in Wurttemberg gave five manuals to the organ of St. 
Michaelis in Hamburg (1912) ; twelve thousand pipes in 167 stops 
answered the player’s touch. Willis equipped the Cathedral at 
Liverpool with the same number of manuals and 168 stops in 
1926. The Century Hall at Breslau had even fifteen thousand pipes 
in 187 stops. 

These European organs were left behind by The World’s Great- 
est Organ at the World’s Fair in St. Louis (1904), which after- 
wards, in 1917, was brought to Philadelphia and, greatly augmented 
and increased, was set up in John Wanamaker’s store. It has five . 
manuals, 232 stops and eighteen thousand pipes. Running over the 
booklet issued when the organ was inaugurated, we read: 

The organ weighs over 375,000 pounds. More than 120,000 feet of 
lumber were used in its construction. Total space occupied by organ and 
blowers, 1 18,602 feet. The blowers furnish an aggregate column of air at 
varied pressures of 20,800 cubic feet per minute. The incandescent lights 
strung along the organ chamber would light the streets of a small town. 
The largest pipe is of wood, 32 feet long, 27 inches wide, and 32 inches 
deep in the middle, and weighs 1,735 pounds. It is so large that two men 
can crawl through it, side by side, on their hands and knees. 

The pipe of 1451 at Blois, of which we spoke on page 304, has 
been forgotten! 

The Philadelphia organ kept the blue ribbon for fifteen years 
only. In 1932 it yielded to Emerson L. Richard’s and Midmer- 
Losh’s organ in the Convention Hall at Atlantic City, New Jersey. 
Eighteen thousand pipes? The World’s Greatest Organ has 32,882 
pipes; it possesses 1,233 stops, including couplers, etc., and seven 
manuals; the wind pressure is forced up to a hundred inches. 




452 The History of Musical Instruments 

Is this the last word in building organ skyscrapers? We do not 
know. But we are aware of another fact — that the twentieth century 
is opposing a very different ideal to the adoration of size. 

In the first years of this century, Dr. Albert Schweitzer in 
Strasbourg and a group of Southwest German organists opened a 
campaign against the usual organ of their days, with the slogan: Back 
to Silbermann! The idea was that Bach is still the outstanding com- 
poser, even of modern organ playing, and that his compositions 
should be played in his style, on an organ of his time ; the roaring, 
turbulent and ununified organ of the nineteenth century kills Bach’s 
polyphony and structure. The ideal instrument would be the Franco- 
German organ of Gottfried Silbermann in Freiberg, or Andreas 
Silbermann at Strasbourg, the contemporaries of Bach. Back to Sil- 
bermann, back to a lower wind pressure to prevent the shrieking of 
the pipes, to a unity in the palette of timbres starting from Principal 
8', to a softer intonation of accessory stops up to T, and, altogether, 
to a clear transparency and a silvery radiance. 

Just as the complete editions of Bach and Handel were followed 
by a complete edition of Palestrina, so the Bach organ was followed 
by an organ in the style of 1600. In 1921, the organ builder Oscar 
Walcker in Wiirttemberg finished the so-called Praetorius organ 
which, at the suggestion of Dr. Wilibald Gurlitt, professor in the 
University of Freiburg, he had constructed after the specified plan 
in Michael Praetorius’s Syntagma musicum of 1618. In the follow- 
ing years both the Silbermann and the Praetorius movement spread 
over various countries. In Germany and Denmark old Schnitger 
and Silbermann organs have been discovered and carefully re- 
stored, and a quantity of modern organs has been copied from them. 
In Paris, the organ at Saint-Gervais, on which Couperin used to play, 
has attracted the attention of organists and organ builders, and one 
of the leading firms, Gonzalez, is substituting archaic scales, pres- 
sures and stops for those of the nineteenth century organ. 

A few years ago an outstanding builder in this country, G. Donald 
Harrison of the Aeolian Skinner Organ Co. in Boston, asserted: 
“The organ has been romanticized and its fundamental character 
has been lost. It is this character which we have tried to recapture.” 
His program has been realized in five remarkable organs. The first 
two were modern organs, but influenced by ancient principles. The 
first one was erected in 1935 at St. John’s Church in Groton School, 
Groton, Massachusetts. From one hundred inches in Atlantic City 
the pressure is lowered, varying between i x n and 3% inches j its 




Epilogue: The Twentieth Century 453 

Great Organ, devoid of reeds, is a complete flue-chorus, full and 
brilliant, the composition, scales, mouths and lips of which are such 
that it forms one gigantic mixture ; many stops can be traced back to 
Silbermann and Praetorius. As a whole, the tone, though powerful 
and dignified, has a remarkable homogeneity. The same principles 
are the basis of a second and a third organ, in the Church of the 
Advent at Boston, 1936, and in St. Mark’s Church, Philadelphia, 

I 937- 

The fourth and fifth organs (1937 and 1939), in the Germanic 
Museum at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and in 
the Westminster Choir School at Princeton, New Jersey, are real 
Praetorius organs, similar to the one erected in the University of 
Freiburg. Here the wind pressure does not exceed two and a half 
inches. 

Unlike these intentionally archaic instruments, built to play an- 
cient music, Harrison’s three first organs are intended for every kind 
of music, and, in their simplicity, purity and transparency, are per- 
haps the true expression of the twentieth century. 




Terminology 



T HE rough classification of our modern orchestra does not 
suffice for scientific purposes. Any classification demands 
a consistent principle of division, and this is lacking in 
the common classification. The usual division of the orchestra into 
stringed, wind and percussion instruments is based on three differ- 
ent principles instead of one: the sonorous material acted upon, in 
‘strings’; the activating force, in ‘wind’; the action itself, in ‘per- 
cussion.’ We might as well divide Americans into Californians, 
bankers and Catholics. 

The common classification is illogical, and is by no means com- 
prehensive even for recent instruments. Friction instruments, the 
glass harmonica for instance, or instruments with plucked tongues, 
like the jaws’ harp and the musical box, are neither stringed, wind 
nor percussion instruments; and if the endless world of historic, 
folk and exotic instruments are included — and no scientific history 
can exclude them — the disconcerting category, ‘Varia,’ grows dis- 
proportionately. 

The cornerstone of a logical as well as universal classification was 
laid in 1888 by Victor-Charles Mahillon, the memorable founder 
and first curator of the Brussels Musee instrumental. His system, 
however, had a weakness; it was conceived of not from a general 
point of view, but by a curator for the purposes of a particular mu- 
seum, out of the slowly increasing material of his collection. There- 
fore, a revision became indispensable. Twenty-five years after Ma- 
hillon, this rearrangement was undertaken by our late friend, Dr. 
Erich M. von Hornbostel, and the author of this book; in 1914, 
they collaborated on a new classification based as far as possible on 

454 





Terminology 455 

acoustical principles, which in its essential points has been universally 
accepted by anthropologists. But a completely logical classification 
is an impossibility because instruments are the artificial contrivances 
of man. They do not lend themselves to a consistent system as do 
plants and animals. 

The Hornbostel-Sachs classification has proved useful as a skele- 
ton. In this book, however, the reader will not be bothered with 
the complications of families, groups and species. Instead he will 
be given an informal digest of the classification, so that when con- 
fronted by an instrument he will be able to recognize its essential 
features. 

Unfortunately, some anthropologists still designate a xylophone 
as a ‘Kaffir piano,’ a slit-drum as a ‘gong,’ a drum as a ‘tom-tom.’ 
Museums still label lyres as ‘harps,’ lutes as ‘guitars,’ oboes as 
‘flutes.’ We dedicate this chapter to all people concerned with nam- 
ing and describing instruments, whether in actual use, in the show 
cases of museums or on paintings and reliefs. Definition and descrip- 
tion are reliable only on the basis of a consistent terminology. 



IDIOPHONES 

The first of the five main classes is called idiophones ; they are in- 
struments made of naturally ‘ sonorous materials not needing any 
additional tension as do strings or drumskins. In this class it is the 
player’s action that has shaped the instruments, because they have 
originated from extensions of striking or clapping hands or stamp- 
ing feet. Accordingly, the basic question is how they are set into 
vibration. 

1. IDIOPHONES STRUCK TOGETHER or concussion in- 
struments are pairs of similar instruments. They are either two- 
handed, if each hand holds one part (as with cymbals), or else one- 
handed (or clappers), if both parts are held in the same hand (as 
with castanets). Cymbals have rims and central bosses , or else are 
rimless. It should be indicated, if possible, whether they are violently 
clashed together or gently brought together in order to cause a 
tinkling sound (cf. p. 122). Clappers must be described according to 
their materials (metal, wood, bone, ivory), forms (strips, halved 
tubes, boots, chestnuts) and the number of their striking parts. A 
combined type is cymbals on clappers (p. 103). 




45 6 The History of Musical Instruments 

2. STRUCK IDIOPHONES consist of one or several pieces 
made of a sonorous substance and struck with a stick or a similar 
device with a rotary motion of the arm. Again they are distinguished 
by their materials (wood, bamboo, stone, glass, metal), forms (slabs, 
tubes, plates, vessels) and the number of struck parts. If there are 
sets of struck parts, they are called xylophones y lithophones , metal- 
lophones , crystallophones. Details on xylophones are on pp. 53, 
238, 439, on lithophones on p. 168, on metallophones on p. 239. 
The struck plate (e. g., the gong) differs from the struck vessel 
(e. g., the bell ) in that the center is sounding and the rim is dead. 
The gong is always made of bronze in circular shape j it may be 
either flat or bulging or provided with a central boss ; the bent-down 
rim may be shallow or deep. Bells may either be empty or clapper 
bells ; empty bells may be suspended or resting , clapper bells sus- 
pended or in the form of hand bells. The shapes vary greatly. Sets 
of bells or gongs, or even stones, are called chimes. 

3. STAMPED IDIOPHONES are pits, boards, pots, beams, 
mortars or slit-drums. 

4. STAMPING IDIOPHONES, hit on the ground in vertical 
motion, are sticks, tubes or gourds. 

5. SHAKEN IDIOPHONES are rattles (not to be confused 
with clappers). The material is important, but more important is 
the arrangement of the sounding parts that strike together when the 
implement is shaken. We distinguish between rattles strung on 
cords (p. 26) or on rods, as in the sistrum (p. 89) \ sliding up and 
down in the hollowed head of a pounding stick, as in some Malayan 
planters’ sticks, or in grooves of a frame (cf. the angklung p. 233) ; 
contained in a rattling receptacle (gourd, basket, box, tube, hollow 
ring or hollow ball). Instruments of the latter type, consisting of 
pebbles contained in metal balls or jingles , are often incorrectly 
confused with bells. 

6. SCRAPED IDIOPHONES in various forms (cf. p. 43). 

7. PLUCKED IDIOPHONES. The most usual is a flexible 
lamella or tongue attached to a frame, plucked by the finger and 
resonated by the mouth ( jaws * harp } p. 58). Sets of tongues, plucked 
by the thumbs and resonated by a small box, are found in a common 
African instrument, the zanza (in which it is important to indicate 
whether the tongues are of rattan or iron). In European musical 




Terminology 457 

boxes the tongues are cut in a steel comb and plucked by the pro- 
jecting studs of a revolving cylinder. 

8. RUBBED OR FRICTION IDIOPHONES. It is essential 
to distinguish between rubbing and scraping. The latter results in a 
series of beats caused by passing a stick over a notched surface ; 
friction is based on adhesion. There are many primitive friction 
instruments (p. 38). On a higher level we find Chladni’s friction 
rods (p. 403) and the glass harmonica (p. 404). 



AEROPHONES 

Aerophones or ‘air instruments’ include what are usually called 
‘wind instruments,’ with the addition of a few instruments with a 
different acoustical principle called ‘free aerophones.’ 

A WIND INSTRUMENT has two essential factors: a tube 
enclosing a column of air, and a device for setting that air into vibra- 
tion by interrupting into pulsations the steady breath of the player 
(or the wind of a bellows). This device may be the compressed lips 
of the player {trumpet) , or the to-and-fro movement of a reed 
( single reed in clarinet, double reed in the oboe), or the sharp edge 
of a flute. Both reed pipes and flutes may be included in the general* 
term pipes. 

Trumpets and horns cannot always be distinguished from one 
another. Horns generally betray their descendance from curved 
animal horns by their shape j they are supposed to have a relatively 
wider and more or less conical bore, and therefore a less brilliant 
tone. Trumpets, on the contrary, have come from, and are reminis- 
cent of, straight tubes of bamboo or branches of trees. They are 
supposed to have a relatively narrow and more or less cylindrical 
bore, and therefore a brighter tone. Though it is easy to distinguish 
between the extremes of the two types (for instance between the 
ivory horns and the metal trumpets of Africa, or between the shofar 
and the hasosra of the ancient Jews), the great number of inter- 
mediate forms have been so combined and mingled that there is 
no clear distinction between them. They can only be grouped to- 
gether under one large heading, ‘horns and trumpets.’ 

An important detail is the position of the mouth-hole \ it is either 
the upper orifice of the tube ( end-blown ), or it is pierced some- 
where in the side as in a transverse flute ( side-blown ). The same 




4.5 B The History of Musical Instruments 

distinction occurs in the mouth-holes of trumpets made of conch 
shells (p. 48). 

For the method of designating the pitch of trumpets and horns, 
see p. 419. Occidental devices for producing a complete scale (slides, 
keys, valves) are described in the text (pp. 425-428). 

PIPES. Reed fifes are of three kinds: with a single beating reed 
{clarinets), with a double reed (oboes), with a free reed (only in 
Southeast Asia). The tube is either cylindrical or conical or taper- 
ing toward the lower end. The material is usually wood, sometimes 
metal, sometimes cane; the term ‘reed,’ referring to material, is 
confusing and should be avoided. For the variety of double reed 
pipes see Chapter 15. 

In several families of reed pipes the reed is concealed in a wind 
caf preventing the player from grasping the reed directly in his 
lips (p. 320). The bagfife (p. 281) is an elaboration of the same 
principle. In describing a bagpipe it does not suffice to enumerate the 
number of pipes and to indicate their position} it is obligatory to 
designate the type of reed in both the melody pipe (or chanter) and 
the drone pipes, as well as the bore of each. 

Flutes are usually tubular} if they are globular , they must be 
designated as such. Flutes are vertical if the upper orifice is used as 
a mouth-hole } they are transverse or cross -flutes if the mouth-hole 
is cut in the sidej they are whistle flutes if the player blows from 
the upper end through a flue against the sharp edge of a hole cut 
in the side. If the sharp edge is formed by cutting a notch in the 
upper orifice, the instrument is a notched flute (p. 179). 

At the lower end flutes can be ofen, or they can be staffed by a 
natural node, a plug or a lid. They are the only wind instruments 
that can be made without an opening at the lower end. 

Pan-fifes are sets of flutes, each producing only one note, united 
either in raft or in bundle form (p. 177). 

In all wind instruments the end near the player’s mouth is the 
uffer end , the opposite the lower end , even if it is tilted upward 
in playing, as with the bassoon and the tuba. An expanding lower 
end is called a bell. ‘Right’ and ‘left’ are seen from the player’s 
point of view} the front is away from the player} the back is next 
to the player. 

Fingerholes are mostly in front and are counted beginning with 
the lowest. If all fingerholes are situated in the front, we speak of 
‘6’ or ‘7 fingerholes’} an additional back hole for the thumb should 




Terminology 459 

not be included in this figure but added with a plus: 6+1 holes. If 
we know the exact position of the thumb hole, the additional 1 can 
be replaced by a letter indicating its relative height: h (meaning 
English highy French haut, German hocli) if the hole is above the 
highest front holej e (meaning English even y Latin equaUs y French 
egal ) if the hole is at the height of the highest front holej b (mean- 
ing English below, Latin bassus, French bas ) if it is below the 
highest front hole. 

FREE AEROPHONES. In ‘wind instruments’ the sound and 
pitch are primarily determined by the enclosed column of air. ‘Free 
aerophones,’ on the other hand, have no enclosed column of air 5 
they act directly on the outer air. They cause a series of condensa- 
tions and rarefications by various means. In the primitive bull- 
roarer, for instance, the whirling movement makes eddies directly 
in the surrounding air. 

Another division of Free Aerophones produces sound by a reed 
which divides a wind current into pulsations. Such a reed may or 
may not have a tube connected with it, but in any case the air column 
enclosed in the tube is not a factor in determining the pitch. A 
clarinet and a reed pipe in an organ have both a beating reed and 
a pipe j in a clarinet the air column in the pipe is acoustically stronger 
than the reed and therefore determines the pitch j the pipe of an. 
organ reed is so devised that the reed alone determines the pitch, 
while the enclosed air column acts merely as a resonator to reinforce 
some partials. Harmoniums and accordions have reeds without any 
pipes attached. 

Thus, the organ belongs in either or both sections of aerophones. 
Ancient and medieval organs (except for the last part of the middle 
ages) were composed of flute pipes only. Re gals, in the later mean- 
ing of the word, were exclusively composed of reeds belonging in 
the category of free aerophones. Large organs of modern time con- 
tain both flute pipes and reeds. 

MEMBRANOP HONES 

The sound is produced by a membrane stretched over an opening. 
Most, but not all, membranop hones are generally called drums. 
They are classified according to a description of the following fea- 
tures. 

1. MATERIAL: wood, coconut, gourd, bamboo, clay, metal. 




460 The History of Musical Instruments 

2. SHAPE: Tubular drums: the solid part or body is a tube. It 
is deep if the body is longer than the diameter of the skin; it is 
shallow if the body is shorter than the diameter of the skin. We 
distinguish the following shapes of tubular drums. 

Cylindrical drums: the tube is straight 

Barrel drums: the tube is bulging 

Conical drums: the tube tapers toward one end 

Hourglass drums: the tube terminates in cup-shaped ends with a nar- 
rower waist between them 

Footed drums: generally large and not portable; one end is carved to 
form a foot or socle 

Goblet drums: portable footed drums 

Handle drums: with one or more loop handles 

Besides tubular drums, there are kettledrums and frame drums. 

A kettledrum has a vessel as a body. It is hemispheric if the largest 
diameter is at the top; it is egg-shaped if the largest diameter is 
somewhere below the top. The terms ‘deep’ and ‘shallow’ are used 
as in tubular drums. Extremely shallow kettledrums may be called 
bowl drums. 

A frame drum has a frame instead of a body. It is always shallow 
compared to a tubular drum. It is deep if the frame is deeper than 
a quarter of the diameter of the skin; it is shallow if the frame is 
less deep than a quarter of the diameter of the skin. 

3. SKINS or heads. There are one or two skins. Instead of saying 
‘drums with one (or two) skins,’ it is admissible to speak of ‘single- 




figure 160. Nailed skin. 



headed (or double-headed) drums.’ Strings stretched diametrically 
over one of the heads are called snares. 

4. FASTENING OF THE SKINS. The skins are glued or 
nailed or buttoned or neck-laced or braced. The terms need no ex- 
planation, except ‘neck-laced,’ which means tied with a circular cord 
near the head. (figs. 160, 161) 




figure 1 6 1 . Buttoned skin, figure 162. Braces directly attached. 

Braced (or laced) skins exist in numberless varieties, and only a 
monograph could deal with them exhaustively. Two questions must 
always be answered: how are the braces attached to the skins, and 
how are they stretched over the body? 

The braces are either directly attached, being laced through holes 
in the edge of the skin j or indirectly , the bracing cords being tied to 
circular hoofs. A hoop is made either of cord, twisted thongs, rattan 
ribbons or wood. It is either an outer hoof or a concealed hoof 
(rolled up in the edge of the skin). The combination of a concealed 
and an outer hoop is described on page 435. (figs. 162-166) 

The pattern in which the bracing cords or thongs are stretched* 




figure 163. Braces in N, figure 164. Braces in net form, 
directly attached. directly attached. 

along the body is either in parallel lines, or in the design of N, W, X 
or Y, or else in the form of a net. (figs. 163, 165, 167) 

S- THE PLAYING POSITIONS are standing (on the ground 
or on a stand), sus fended (from the ceiling, a stand, the player’s 
body) j the skins face sideways or uf and down . 



462 The History of Musical Instruments 

6. THE MANNER OF PLAYING is usually by percussion or 
by friction. Drums are struck with the bare hands, with two sticks, 
with one stick, with one hand and one stick, with a thong or with 
a bundle of twigs. Some drums are struck by grains inside them 
which rattle against the skins {rattle drums), or by clappers fastened 




outside and striking the skins when the drum is rapidly twirled to 
and fro {claffer drums) . It should be indicated whether, in a double- 
headed drum, one or two skins are struck. 

The various forms of friction drums are described on pp. 39-40. 

A third way is blowing. Though this does not occur with drums, 
it is used in mirlitons — that is, instruments in which the human 
breath or vibrating air is directed against a membrane j the same 




figure 167. Braces in W 
with double hoops. 



T erminology 463 

principle is used in connection with certain African xylophones 
(p. 54) and Far Eastern flutes. 

Finally, it should be mentioned whether drums are used singly 
or in pairs or sets. 



CHORDOPHONES 

Chordophones are instruments with strings. The strings may be 
struck with sticks, plucked with the bare fingers or a plectron, bowed 
or (in the Aeolian harp, for instance) sounded by wind. The con- 
fusing plenitude of stringed instruments can be reduced to four 
fundamental types : zithers, lutes, lyres and harps. 

A ZITHER has no neck or yokej the strings are stretched be- 
tween the two ends of a body, whether this body is in the usual 
sense a resonator itself, or whether it requires an attached resonator. 
They are played in many ways. Only a few types will be enumerated. 

A stick-zither has a stick in place of a resonating body and always 
needs an additional resonator, generally a gourd, sometimes the 
mouth of the player. In the musical bow (page 56) the stick is flex- 
ible. Siamese and Cambodian stick-zithers have only one end flexible. 
In another group of stick-zithers, of which the Indian vina (page 
156) is the most intricate member, the stick is entirely rigid. In* 
general the stick is round ; but in the Malay Archipelago, Madagas- 
car and Zanzibar, the round stick is replaced by a short lath which 
the player holds on edge ( lath-zither ). 

A tube-zither has a tube as a resonating bodyj the strings are 
stretched lengthwise. Most tube-zithers are round $ some are halved 
lengthwise (half -tube zithers'). The strings are usually cut from the 
surface of the bamboo without being detached ( idiochordic ) ; rarely 
the strings are of another material (rattan or wire), in which case 
we call them heterochordic. Several small idiochordic tubes with 
one string each, tied together in the shape of a raft, form a raft- 
zither. 

Board-zithers form the most important category from an occi- 
dental point of view because they include our stringed keyboard 
instruments. The strings are stretched over a board, which is rec- 
tangular or trapezoidal or in some other shape, and which is glued 
onto a shallow box. In the majority of cases the strings are open, that 
is, used in their entire playing length without being stopped by the 
fingers. In some board-zithers, however, particularly in those used 




464 The History of Musical Instruments 

as folk instruments in the Alps and northern and western Europe, 
one melody string is stretched over a fretted fingerboard ( stopped 
string). Most board-zithers are classified either as psalteries or as 
dulcimers. A 'psaltery is a plucked zither usually with gut strings, 
while the dulcimer has wire strings struck with two light sticks. 

Board-zithers are the prototypes of all our stringed keyboard 
instruments: clavichords , in which the strings are gently touched 
by tangents $ spinets and harpsichords , in which the strings are 
plucked by jacks j dulce melos and tangentenflugely in which the 
strings are struck by a kind of jackj pianos f in which they are struck 
by hammers. The different forms, upright, grand, square, are fully 
discussed in the text (Chapter 17). 

Long-zithers are intermediate between half-tube and board- 
zithers. They comprise the Far Eastern instruments of the she and 
chlin families and are described and classified on pp. 185-188. There 
are two main types, one with open strings only, and another with 
one stopped melody string beside the open strings used for accom- 
paniment. 

A LUTE is composed of a body, and of a neck which serves both 
as a handle and as a means of stretching the strings beyond the body. 
In most cases the strings are stopped. If played with a bow, it is a 
bowed lute or fiddle. The body of the lute was originally a fruit 
shell, and has preserved a bulging shape which was sometimes 
carved, sometimes composed of thin staves as in our modern lute. 
Only in a recent stage, shells were made shallow and flat and finally 
transformed into a box composed of a front, a back and connecting 
ribs, as in our violins and guitars. 

All our lutes, guitars, hurdy-gurdies and the entire families of 
viols and violins belong in the category of short lutes } in which the 
neck is, morphologically speaking, an elongation of the body (though 
of course it is added to the body in all recent specimens) .and seldom 
reaches the length of the body. For further terminology see end of 
the section. 

Most primitive and oriental lutes are long lutes } in which the 
neck or stick is longer than the body. We distinguish an older pierced 
lute y with a stick penetrating, or at least entering, the body (p. 102), 
and a less primitive long neck lute, with an attached neck instead of 
the piercing stick, for instance the Persian sitar-tanbur (p. 255). 

A LYRE has a body with a yoke in place of a neck, that is, two 
arms projecting upward, the upper ends of which are connected by 




T erminology 465 

a crossbar. The strings are stretched over the soundboard and are 
fastened to the crossbar at the top (p. 78). They are either plucked 
or bowed. There are two main types: 

Box lyre, solidly made of a joined box set on its side, with a sound- 
board of wood (cf. the Greek kithara on page 130). 

Bowl lyre , loosely made of a shallow bowl set on edge with a 
soundboard of skin (cf. the Greek lyra on page 1 3 1 ) . 

Lyres are symmetrical if the arms are of equal length so that the 
crossbar is horizontal j they are asymmetrical if the arms are of un- 
equal length so that the crossbar is slanting (page 78). For the 
European lyres see Chapter 14. 

THE HARP is the only instrument in which the plane of the 
strings is vertical, not parallel, to the soundboard j the strings are 
attached to the soundboard, but run vertically away from it, and not 
along it. As a rule the strings are numerous and open. All harps are 
plucked. 

In oriental civilizations, both ancient and modern, we distinguish 
two types: 

Arched barfs, in which the body is elongated at one end into a 
curved neck, forming an arch j 

Angular harfs , in which the body and the stick or neck form an 
angle. 

Description should distinguish between vertical harfs , which are 
held with the strings in vertical position and the body held against 
the player’s chest, and horizontal harfs , which are held with the 
strings in horizontal position and the body extending away from 
the player (p. 79). 

Occidental harps may be either diatonic , with seven strings to the 
octave, or chromatic , with twelve strings to the octave. The diatonic 
harp sometimes has no device for shortening the strings and raising 
their pitches, or sometimes has hooks and sometimes fedals for that 
purpose. The pedal harp may have a single or a double action (pp. 

399 - 407 ). 

THE PARTS of a stringed instrument are called by the follow- 
ing names in this book. 

The body is usually a soundbox or resonator j in rare cases it is 
only a stick or board. It is always structurally a part of the instru- 
ment. Therefore, the term cannot be applied to designate an attached 
gourd, as in the stick-zither. Shell is used by preference when the 
body is round and reminiscent of the shell, for instance, of a coconut. 




466 The History of Musical Instruments 

Rib is used in two meanings. It designates 1 ) the side walls, that 
is, the walls connecting the soundboard and the back of a violin or 
similar instruments, and 2) the thin flexible staves composing the 
shell of a lute. 

Soundboard is the usually flat front of the body, which receives 
the vibrations from the strings and reflects them. In practically all 
cases it is made either of skin or of wood. 

Soundholes are, as a rule, cut in the soundboard. Some serve to 
give the soundboard greater elasticity, some originated as painted 
or inlaid decorations and only later were perforated and cut out. 
Their acoustical value is doubtful. 

Neck y stick , handle. A stick is stuck through the body j a neck grows 
out of it as an organic part of the instrument. Either could be called 
handle. 

Fingerboard is the front of the neck in those instruments the 
strings of which are stopped by being pressed against the wood. 

Frets mark off the notes of the scale on the fingerboard. They 
are either loose and shiftable, consisting of loops of catgut, or sta- 
tionary, consisting of metal ridges inlaid in the fingerboard. 

Pegs , that is, turning pins used to tune the strings, are inserted 
either from the sides ( lateral 'pegs) or from the front ( front pegs) 
or from the rear ( rear pegs). A knob glued fast and unable to be 
turned should not be called a peg. 

The pegs, as a rule, are inserted in a headpiece on top of the 
neck. This may be 1 ) a hollow pegbox with either the front or the 
rear left open, 2) a solid pegblock or 3) a flat pegboard which may 
be called a pegdisk if it is circular or nearly so. 

The lower ends of the strings are attached to a stringholder. It is 
either inferior , that is, fastened to the lower rib or the lowest point 
of the body, in which case there must be a bridge on the soundboard j 
or it is frontal , being attached somewhere on the soundboard (as in 
our lutes and guitars), and then acts as a bridge as well. 

The bridge is usually a wooden crosspiece wedged on edge be- 
tween the soundboard and the lower part of the strings, in order to 
hold the strings away from the soundboard and to transmit the 
vibrations of the strings to the soundboard. It is an open bridge, if 
instead of being solid, or nearly solid, it is cut out to form a frame. 

Strings are made of various materials (fiber, gut, horsehair, silk, 
metal) and are arranged either singly, in pairs (as double strings) 
or in threes {triple strings), or more. In noting an accordatura, begin 




Terminology 467 

with the string corresponding in position to the lowest string of the 
violin, even if this is the string producing the highest note. 

The general orientation of stringed instruments is not determined 
by either the resting or playing position. The front is the side along 
which the strings runj the back is opposite; the top is the end of 
the tuning pegs, or of whatever tightening device is used; the op- 
posite is the lower end. ‘Left’ and ‘right’ should be avoided, or if 
they must be used, ‘left’ should designate what in occidental instru- 
ments is the treble side, and ‘right’ for the bass side. 

In the harp the terms ‘front’ and ‘back’ can be applied only to 
the body, not to the entire instrument. The front of the body is the 
soundboard. Notwithstanding this fact, the pillar connecting the 
foot and the neck of the occidental harp is universally called the 
front pilar. 

ELECTROPHONES 

ELECTROMECHANICAL INSTRUMENTS are based on 
vibrations produced in the usual mechanical ways and transformed 
into electric vibrations. 

RADIOELECTRIC INSTRUMENTS are based on oscillating 
electric circuits. Some have a gliding scale, others have a keyboard. 
Instruments with a gliding scale can be played with or without a. 
manual j keyboard instruments are either monophonic or polyphonic. 

A few details are given on pages 447-449. 




References 



i. EARLY INSTRUMENTS 

general: Curt Sachs, Geist und Werden der Musikinstrumente , Berlin, 
1929; Otto Seewald, Beitrdge zur Kenntnis der steinzeitlichen Musikinstru- 
mente Eurofas , Wien, 1934; Andre Schaeffner, Origine des instruments de 
musique, Paris, 1936 — Body movements: Curt Sachs, World History of the 
Dance , New York, 1937, passim — Vedda: Max Wertheimer, Musik der 
Wedda, in Sammelbande der Internationalem Musikgesellschaft XI (1910), 

p. 3 01 * 

gourd rattle: Stephen Powers, Tribes of California , Washington, 1877, p.» 
306 f. 

stamped pit: C. Sachs, Geist und Werden der Musikinstrumente y p. 39 — 
Treasury: Henry B. Guppy, The Solomon Islands , London, 1887, p. 143. 
stamping tubes: Alfred Mctraux, Le baton de rythme , in Journal de la So- 
ciete des Americanist es, 1927, pp. 1 17— 122; Sachs 1 . c., pp. 73, 74, 75. 
stamped mortars. Rice log: Sachs 1 . c., p. 206 — Siam: Anthrofos II (1907), 
p. 627 — Taro: W. G. Ivens, Melanesians of the South-East Solomon Islands , 
London, 1927, p. 75 — New Guinea: R. Neuhauss, Deutsch Neu-Guinea, Ber- 
lin, 1911, I 137. 

slit-drum: Sachs 1 . c., p. 44 — Uitoto: Konrad Theodor Preuss, Religion und 
Mythologie der Uitoto, Leipzig, 1921 , 1 13, 31, 32, 120, 150. 
sand drum. New Guinea: Paul Wirz, Die Marind-anim , Hamburg, 1922, p. 
80 — Ethiopia: Andre Schaeffner, Origine des instruments de musique , Paris, 
1936, pi. VIII 1. 

drum: Sachs 1 . c., p. 53 — Schaeffner 1 . c., pp. 166—176 — Africa: Heinz 
Wieschhof, Die afrikanischen Trommeln und Hire ausserafrikanischen Bezie- 
hungen , Stuttgart (1933). 

drum (continued). Chukchee: Bogoras, The Chukchee religion in Jesuf 
Pacific Ex f edition, VII — Banyankole: John Roscoe, The Banyankole, Cam- 
bridge, 1923, p. 44 (condensed) — Wahinda: Richter, Einige xoeitere ethno- 
grafhische Notizen iiber den Bezirk Bukoba, in Mitteilungen aus den deut - 

469 





470 The History of Musical Instruments 

schen Schutzgebieten 1900, p. 70 — Coronation: J. Roscoe, The Baganda , 
London, 191 1, p. 25 — Koryak: Waldemar Jochelson, The Koryak , in Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural History X (1908), p. 142. 

slit-drum (continued). Creator of the water: Konrad T. Preuss, Religion 
und Mythologie der Uitoto , Leipzig, 1921, I 32 — Fidji: Doucere, Notes sur 
les populations indigenes des N ouvelles-H ebrides , in Revue d' Ethnographic, 
1922, p. 238; Richard Thurnwald, Im Bismarckarchipel und auf den Salo- 
moinseln, in Z,eitschnft fur Ethnologie XLII (1910), p. 133 — Vulva: R. 
Thurnwald, Forschungen auf den Salomo-Inseln und dem Bismarckarchipel ’, 
Berlin, 1912, I 241 ; R. Parkinson, Dreissig Jahre in der Siidsee , Stuttgart, 
1907, P* 37 2 — Lips: W. G. Ivens, Melanesians of the South-East Solomon 
Islands , London, 1927, p. 169 — Language: Henri Labouret, Langage tam- 
bourine et sifjle , in Bulletin du comite d’ etudes historiques et scientifiques de 
I’A.O.F., 1923, pp. 120-158. 

ribbon reed: Sachs 1 . c., p. 19 — Taulipang: Theodor Koch-Griinberg, Vom 
Roroima zum Orinoco , Berlin, 1916, III 276 — Madagascar: Curt Sachs, Les 
instruments de musique de Madagascar , Paris, 1938, p. 24. 

friction instruments: Sachs, Geist und Warden, pp. 48, 90 — New Ireland: 
Augustin Kramer, Die Malanggane von Tombara , Munchen, 1925, p. 59 — 
Friction drum: Henry Balfour, The Friction Drum , in Journal of the An- 
thropological Institute XXXVII (1907) — Sachs 1 . c., pp. 136, 232. 

bull-roarer: I. D. E. Schmeltz, Das Schwirrholz, in V erhandlungen des 
Vereins fur naturwissenschaftliche Unterhaltung zu Hamburg, vol. IX— Sachs, 
1. c., p. 10. 

scraper: Hawley, Distribution of the notched rattle , in American Anthro- 
pologist XI (1898) — Capitan, V onnchicahuatzh mexicain et son ancetre de 
Pepoque du renne en Gaule, in XV l e Congres des Americanistes, Vienne 
(Autriche) , 1908 ( Resume ) — Sachs 1 . c., p. 16 — Mexico: Eduard Seler, Alt- 
mexicanische Knochenrasseln , in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie XLVIII (1916) 
— Michoacan: Kunike, Musikinstrumente aus dem alten Michoacan , in 
Baessler-Archiv II ( 1 91 1 ) — Cheyenne: George Bird Grinnell, The Chey- 
enne Indians , Newhaven, 1923, II 58. 

flute - Sachs 1 . c., p. 20 — Acoustics: Sir James Jeans, Science and Music , 
Cambridge, 1937 — Sentani: Paul Wirz, Dies und Jenes iiber die Sentanier, 
in Tijdschrift van het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
W etenschapen LXII 1 (1923) 1 — Mexico: Hubert Howe Bancroft, The Na- 
tive Races of the Pacific States of North America, London, 1875, 11 706 — 
Eduard Seler, Fray Bernardino de Sahagun, Stuttgart, 1927, pp. 96, 100 — 
India: Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Indians und Indonesians, 2 nd edi- 
tion, Berlin, 1923, p. 144 — Cheyenne: George Bird Grinnell, The Cheyenne 
Indians, Newhaven, 1923, I 134 — Abruzzi: Ernest Hemingway, A Farewell 
to Arms, ed. New York, 1929, p. 78 — Cuna: Narciso Garay, Tradiciones y 
cantares de Panama , s. 1 . 1930, p. 55 — Nose flute: Wilhelm Foy, Zur Ver- 
breitung der Nasenflote, in Ethnologica I (1909) ; Sachs, Geist und Warden, 
p. 1 16; Schaeflfner 1 . c., p. 246 — Ritual: Purbatjareka, in P. de Kat Angelino, 
Mudras auf Bali, Hagen, 1 923, p. 68 — Astrology: Hellmut Ritter, Piccatrix, 
in Vortrage der Bibliothek Warburg 1921—22, Leipzig, 1923, p. 104. 




References 471 

trumpet: Sachs 1 . c., pp. 31, 79, 84, 99, 100, 132; Andre Schacffner 1 . c., 
p. 261 — Babwende: T^eitschrift fur Ethnologic LXIV (1932), p. 162, fig. 3 — 
Rumania: Bela Bartok, Die Volksmusik der Rumdnen von Maramures, in 
Sammelbande fiir vergleichende Musikwissenschaft IV (1923), p. xxvi — 
Switzerland: Arnold Schering, in Sammelbande der International en Musik- 
gesellschaft II (1900), p. 699 — Amazon: Theodor Koch-Griinberg, 7 .wei 
Jahre unter den Indianern , Berlin, 1909, I 189 — Brook: ibid. I 314 — Hol- 
land: Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant , end of December, 1924 — Shell trum- 
pet: Wilfrid Jackson, Shell-trumpets, in Memoirs of the Manchester Literary 
Society , LX ( 1916), p. 8 ; Sachs 1 . c., pp. 49, 79, 80, 109; Schaeffncr 1 . c., p. 257 
— Kiwai: Gunnar Landtman, The Kiwai , London, 1927, p. 402 — Formula: 
Bronislaw Malinowski, Argonauts of the western Pacific , London, 1922, 
pp. 340—342 — Madagascar: Curt Sachs, Les instruments de musique de Mada- 
gascar y Paris, 1938, p. IO — Germany and Bohemia: Elard Hugo Meyer, 
Badisches Volksleben, Strassburg, 1900, pp. 364, 610 — New Ireland: Au- 
gustin Kramer, Die Malanggane von Tombara , Miinchen, 1925, p. 53. 
pottery: Quoted from Alexander A. Goldcnweiser, Early civilization. New 
York, 1932, p. 317. 

xylophone: Sachs 1 . c., p. 279; Siegfried F. Nadel, Marimba-Musik, in 
Sitzungsberichte der phil. hist. Klasse der Akademie der Wissenschaften in 
Wien CCXII, 3, Wien-Leipzig, 1931 ; Nadel, Zur Ethnographic des afrikan- 
ischen Xylophons , in Forschungen und Fortschritte VIII (1932), pp. 444—445 ; 
Schaeffncr, 1 . c., pp. 82—88 — Madagascar: Sachs, Les instruments de musique de 
Madagascar, Paris, 1938, pp. 62, 70, 75, 79. 

ground harp: Sachs, Geist und Werden, p. 60 — Portable: Sachs, Die Mu- 
sikinstrumente Indiens und Indonesiens , 2nd edition, Berlin, 1923, p. 77. 
ground-zither: Curt Sachs, Geist und Werden der Musikinstrumente, Ber- 
lin, 1929, p. 59 — Annam: Gaston Knosp, Rapport sur tine mission ojfcielle 
d’etude musicale en Indochine, Leyde, 1911, p. 64 — Madoera: J. S. Brandts 
Buys, De Toonkunst bij de Madoereezen, in Djawa VI (1926), p. 61 — Java: 
1 . c., p. 62 n — Bube: Gunther Tessmann, Die B., Hagen, 1923, p. 206 — 
Makua: Karl Weule, Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse, in Mitteilungen aus den 
deutschen Schutzgebieten, Ergdnzungsheft I, Berlin, 1908, p. 119. 

musical bow: Henry Balfour, The Natural History of the Musical Bow , 
Oxford, 1899; Sachs, Geist und Werden, p. 281; Percival R. Kirby, The 
Musical Instruments of the Native Races of South Africa, London, 1934, 
p. 198. 

jaws’ harps: Curt Sachs, Die Maultrommel, in Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie 
XLIX (1917); Mme. Alfred Heymann, La guimbarde, in Revue musicale 
(1923), pp. 236—246 — Austria: Karl Magnus Klier’ V olkstumliche Querfloten 
und die Maultrommel, in Kongressbericht der Beethoven-Zentenarfeier, Wien, 
1927, pp. 375—377; Id., 250 Jahre Maultrommelmacherzunft zu Molln, in 
Tagespost , Linz a. d. Donau, no. 226, 29. Sept. 1929. 

2. THE CHRONOLOGY OF EARLY INSTRUMENTS 

Curt Sachs, Geist und Werden der Musikinstrumente, Berlin, 1929; Erich 
M. von Hornbostel, Ethnology of African Sound-Instruments , in Africa VI 




47 2 The History of Musical Instruments 

(*933)5 cf. also C. Sachs, Towards a prehistory of music , in Musical Quar- 
terly XXIV (1938). 



3. SUMER AND BABYLONIA 

general: Carl Frank, Studien zur babylonischen Religion I, Strassburg, 191 1, 
pp. 229— 235 ; P. Anton Deimel, Sumerisches L exikon, Rome, 1925 ; Sumerisch- 
akkadisches G/ossar, Rome, 1 934.; Akkadisch-sumerisches Glossar , Rome, 1 93 7; 
Francis W. Galpin, The Music of the Sumerians , Cambridge, 1937 [with 
care] . 

idiophones. American sistra: Karl Gustav Izikowitz, Musical and Other 
Sound Instruments of the South American Indians , Goteborg, 1 93 5, pp. 150— 
151 — Rattles: Ernest Mackay, Report on the Excavation of the “A” Cemetery 
at Kish , II, Chicago, 1929, p. 213, pi. 47. 

pipes. En-lulim: Ira Maurice Price, The Great Cylinder Inscriptions of 
Gudea, Leipzig, 1927, cyl. B 10, 7— 10. 

horn and trumpet. Si: Price, 1 . c., cyl. A 28, 18, and B 15, 20 — Tush- 
ratta: J. A. Knudtzon, Die El-Amarna-Tafeln, Leipzig, 1915, I 208 ff. 

drums. Gudea inscriptions: Price, 1 . c., statue E 12, cyl. A 6, 21, A 28, 17 — 
Name-date: Francois Thureau-Dangin, Konigsinschriften, Leipzig, 1907, p. 
227 — “Bull’s voice”: Price, Cyl. A 28, 17 — Lilis: Thureau-Dangin, Rituels 
accadiens , Paris, 1921, p. 12. 

lyre. Pictures: Curt Sachs, Geist und Werden der Musikinstrumente , Berlin, 
1929, pi. 19; Galpin, 1 . c., pi. 7. 

harp. Pictures: Galpin, 1 . c., pi. 5, 6 — Classification: Marcelle Duchesne- 
Guillemin, La harpe en Asie occidentale ancienne , in Revue d’Assyriologie 
XXXIV (1937) — Chords: Curt Sachs, Zweikl'dnge im Altertum , in Festschrift 
fiir Johannes Wolf , Berlin, 1 929 — Symphona: Jacques Handschin, Musi- 
kalische Miszellen , in Philologus LXXXV 1 (1930), p. 54. 

lute. Pictures: Sachs, 1 . c.; Galpin, 1 . c., pi. 8 — Cappadocia: Julius Lewy, 
Kappadokische Tontafeln , in Max Ebert, Reallexikon der V orgeschichte, Ber- 
lin, 1926, VI 216. 

daniel orchestra. Sumponiah: E. B. Pusey, Daniel the Prophet , Oxford, 
1864, p. 29; Phillips Barry, On Luke XV 25, in Journal of Biblical Literature 
XXIII ii (1904), pp. 1 80-190; George F. Moore, Symphonia not a Bagpipe , 
ibidem XXIV ii (1905), pp. 166—175; P. Barry, ibidem XXVII ii (1908), 
pp. 99-127; Galpin, 1 . c., p. 6 7 — Symphonia: Athenaeus, The Deipnoso- 
phists , ed. Charles Burton Gulick, vol. II, London, 1928, pp. 376—377 and 
386-387; vol. IV, London, 1930, pp. 488-489 and 490-491 (liber V 193, 
195; liber X 439). 



4. EGYPT 

general: Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des alten A e gyp tens , Berlin, 
1921 ; do not confuse this book with C. Sachs, Alt'dgyptische Musikinstru- 
mente, in Der Alte Orient XXI (1920) Heft 3/4 — Interrelations: Frankfort, 




References 473 

Mesopotamia , Syria and Egypt and Their Earliest Interrelations , in Anthropo- 
logical Institute , Occasional Papers VI (1924). 

clappers: Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des alten Aegyptens , p. 12 — Hathor: 
Sachs, World History of the Dance , New York, 1937, p. 85. 
sistrum: Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des alten Aegyptens, p. 28; B. Bac- 
chinus, De sistris, Trajccti ad Rhenum 1696 — Thrice: Apuleius, Metamor- 
phoses, lib. 11 — Turba: Marcus Valerius Martial. 

flute. Madagascar: Sachs, Les instruments de musique de Madagascar, Paris, 
1 937 * PP- * 3 > 7 i> 76 , 78. 

harp. Vina: Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des alten Aegyptens , p. 68 — Tun- 
ing: Sachs, Zweiklange ini Altertum, in Festschrift fiir Johannes Wolf, Berlin, 
1929, p. 169. 

oboe. Drone: Carnarvon-Carter, Five Years' Explorations at Thebes , Oxford, 
1912, p. 84, pi. LXIX — Fingerholes: Francois- Joseph Fetis, Histoire generale 
de la musique I, Paris, 1869, p. 223; T. Lea Southgate, in Musical Times 
(1890) and Musical News XXV (1903), p. 103; Victor Loret, in Journal 
Asiatique XIV (1889), p. ill; Victor-Charles Mahillon, Catalogue du Musee 
instrumental de Bruxelles, Gand, 1900, III 292; Charles Kasson Wead, in 
Report of the United States National Museum for 1900, Washington, 1902, 
p. 427; Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des alten Aegyptens, p. 82. 

angular h*rp: Curt Sachs, Eine agyptische Winkelharfe , in Zeitschrift fiir 
dgyptische Sprache LXIX (1933), p. 68. 

lute. Gunbri: Henry George Farmer, Studies in Oriental Musical Instru- 
ments I, London, 1931, p. 37. 



5. ISRAEL 

English quotations from the Bible follow the King James Bible (Author- 
ized Version); from the Mishna: The Mishna, translated by Herbert Danby, 
Oxford, 1933. 

general: Josef Weiss, Die musikalischen Instrumente des alten Testaments, 
Graz, 1895; Sir John Stainer, Music of the Bible (new edition by Francis 
W. Galpin), London, 1914; Heinrich Gressmann, Musik und Musikinstru- 
mente im alten Testament, Giessen, 1903; Curt Sachs, Musik des Altertums, 
Breslau, 1924; Sol Baruch Fincsinger, Musical Instruments in the Old Testa- 
ment, Baltimore, 1926; Adolphe Lods, Les idles des anciens Israelites sur 
la musique, in Journal de Psychologie, 1926; C. Sachs, Geist und Werden 
der Musikinstrumente, Berlin, 1929. 

kinnor: Johann Gabriel Drechssler (d. 1677), Kinnor ledawid sive De 
cithara Davidica, Lipsiae — Coins: Sachs, Geist und Werden, pi. 23, fig. 160 
— Exile: Ps. 137; Flavius Josephus, Antiquitates, lib. VII, cap. 12, 3. 

tof. Wailing women: Mishna, Kelim XV 6 — Muhammad: Henry G. Farmer, 
History of Arabian Music, London, 1929, p. 28. 

paamon: Exodus 28: 23-25. 

shofar: B. Kohlbach, Das Widderhorn, in Zeitschrift des Vereins fiir Volks- 
kunde XVI (1916), pp. 113—128; Theodor Reik, Ritual, in The Inter- 




474 History of Musical Instruments 

national Psycho-analytical Library , vol. 19, transl. Douglas Bryan, London, 
1931, The Shofar, pp. 221—305 — Tuyuca: Theodor Koch-Griinberg, Zwe't 
Jahre untcr den Indiancrn , Berlin, 1909, I 314. — Holland: Nieuwe Rotter- 
iamsche C our ant, end of December, 1924 — Jericho: Book of Joshua, 6: 20. 
hasosra. Commandment: IV Mos. 10:1—10 — Elijah: I Kings, 18:27 — 
God awakened by the organ on the island of Rhodos at the beginning of the 
third century A.D.: Btilage zur allgcmeinen Zeitung , 1905, p. 45; Flavius 
Josephus, Antiquitates, lib. Ill c. 12, 6; J. Chr. Basing, Dissertatio de tubis 
Hebraeorum argenteis, Bremae 1745; Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des 
alten Aegyptens, Berlin, 1921, p. 89. 

the time of the kings. Consecration: II Chronicles 5: 12-14. 

nebel. Phoenicia: Athenaeus, The Deipnosophists, lib. IV, cap. 1 75d ; Flavius 
Josephus, Antiquitates, lib. VII, cap. 12, 3. 

asor. Phoenician ivory: R. D. Barnett, The Nimrud Ivories , in Iraq II 2 (1935) 
— St. Jerome: Hieronymi Opera, Antwerpiae , Plantini IX, 113. 

halil. Moses: Arachin, cap. II — Jairus: St. Matthew IX 23 — St. Thomas: 
Acta apostolorum apocrypha, ed. Lipsius-Bonnet II 2, 108 — Al-Hijaz: 
Henry George Farmer, Studies in Oriental Musical Instruments, London, 
, 93 I > P* 78. 

mnaanim. Rattles: Peter Thomson, in Max Ebert, Reallexikon der Vorge- 
schichte, vol. XII, Berlin, 1928, p. 345; vol. XIII, Berlin, 1929, p. 248; 
Curt Sachs, Musik des Altertums , Breslau, 1924, p. 30. 

selslim. Two kinds: Ps. 150, 5 — Apocalypsis: fol. 272 v. — Mantovan mscr.: 
Mantova, Bibl. Civ., ms. C III fol. 2 (facs. in Paolo d’ Ancona, La miniature 
italienne, Paris, 1925, pi. 6) — Fresco eleventh century in the cathedral of 
Kiev, comp. Prohorov, Materiali po istorii russkih odezd, Sanktpeterburg , 
1881, p. 60— Flavius Josephus, Antiquitates lib. VII cap. 12, 3. 

psalms. “Instruments” : Stephen Langdon, Babylonian Musical Terms, in 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 1921, p. 169 ff. 



6. GREECE, ETRURIA AND ROME 

general: Curt Sachs, Die Musik des Altertums, Breslau, 1924; C. Sachs, 
Die Musik der Antike, in Ernst Biicken, Hand buck der Musikwissenschaft , 
Wildpark-Potsdam, 1929; Hermann Abert, Antike, in Guido Adler, Hand- 
buck der Musikgeschichte, Berlin-Wilmersdorf, 1930, I pp. 35-67 (new 
edition by Curt Sachs); Louis Harap, Some Hellenic Ideas on Music and 
Character, in Musical Quarterly XXIV (1938), pp. 153-168; Otto Johannes 
Gombosi, Tonarten und Stimmungen der antiken Musik, Kopenhagen, 1939; 
Quotations from Homer after Pope’s translation; from Pindar: Poetae lyrici 
Graeci, rec. Theodorus Bergk, Lips. 1853; horn Plato, Laws: transl. by 
Taylor, London, 1 93 4 > from Strabo: The Geography of Strabo, transi. 
by Horace Leonard Jones, London, 1928, V, p. 107, 109. 

lyres: Helmut Huchzermeyer, Aulos und Kithara, Dissertation Munster, 
! 93 * > Guillemin and J. Duchesne, Sur Vorigine asiatique de la cithare 
grecque, in VAntiquiti Classique IV (1935); Gombosi, 1. c., Plato: Laws 




References 47 5 

669 C f — Egyptian: Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des alten A e gyp tens, 
Berlin, 1921, p. 49 — Four strings: Ludwig Deubner, Die viersaitige Leier , in 
Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archaologischen lnstituts , Athenische Abteilung 
LIV (1929), pp. 194—200 — Accordatura: Curt Sachs, Die griechische In - 
strumentalnotenschnft, in Zeitschrift fur Musikwissenschaft VI (1923), 
p. 289 — Ethiopia: M. Mondon-Vidailhet, La musique ethiopienne , in Albert 
Lavignac, Encyclopedie de la musique , sere partie , vol. V — Playing: Lucius 
Apulejus, Floridorum liber II 155 Camille Saint-Saens, Lyres et cithares, 
in Lavignac 1 . c. I, pp. 538-540 — Japan: Sir Francis Piggott, The music and 
musical instruments of Japan , 2nd edition, London, 1909, p. m. — Nete: cf. 
also Eberhard Hommel, U htersuchungen zur hebraischen Lautlehre , Leipzig 
P- 39 - 

harp: Reinhard Herbig, Griechische Harfen , in Mitteilungen des Deutschen 
Archaologischen lnstituts , Athenische Zweiganstalt ( Athenische Mitteilungen) 
LIV (1929), pp. 164—193 — Magadis: Alkman, Fragm. 99 D . — Odes of 
Anacreon , Boston (1903), pp. 15, 19. — Euphorion, in Athenaeus, The Deip- 
nosophists XIV 635. 

lute: Julius Pollux, Onomastikon IV 60. 

zither. Persian manuscript: Henry George Farmer, Studies in Oriental Musi- 
cal Instruments , London, 1931, frontispiece and p. 15. 

pipes. General: Caspari Bartholini Thom fil. De tibiis vetervm & earum 
antiquo vsu libri tres, Romae 1677, e ditto altera 1679; Albert A. Howard, 
The aulos or tibia , in Harvard Studies of Philology IV (1893); Kathleen 
Schlesinger, The Greek aulos , London, 1939 (the author has not yet seen 
this book) — Java-Madoera: Jaap Kunst & R. T. A. Wiranakoesoema, Een 
en ander over Soondaneesche Muziek, Bandoeng, 1921, fig. 5 — Playing: 
Marcus Terentius Varro, De re rustica I 2, 25 — The elegies of Propertius , ed. 
Butler & Barber, Oxford, 1933, p. 55 (lib. II, Elegy XXII A 6) — Plato's 
Symposium , transl. by Francis Birrell & Shane Leslie, London, The Fortune 
Press (1925) — Sakadas: The Geography of Strabo, transl. by Horace Leonard 
Jones, London, 1928, V 109. 

bagpipes. Nero: Suetonius, The Lives of the Caesars, Nero LIV. 

cross flute: Eugenio Albini, Instrumenti musicali degli Etruschi e loro 
origini , in V Illustrazione Vaticana VIII (1937), pp. 667—671. 

pan-pipes. Baumeister, Denkmaler des klassischen Alter turns, s. v. syrinx; 
Theodore Reinach, in Pro Alesia, May, 1907; in Revue archeologique I 
(1907), p. 322; Friedrich Behn, Eine antike Syrinx aus dem Rheinland, in 
Die Musik XII (1913). 

organ: J. W. Warman, The Hydraulic Organ of the Ancients, in Proceedings 
of the Musical Association, 1903—4; Francis W. Galpin, Notes on a Hydrau- 
lis, in The Reliquary, 1904; Hermann Degering, Die Or gel, Munster, 1905; 
Charles Maclean, The Principle of the Hydraulic Organ , in Sammelbande 
der International en Musikgesellschaft VI (1905); P. Tannery, L' invention 
de Phydraulis, in Revue des Etudes grecques XXI (1908); Carra de Vaux, 
ib; Henry George Farmer, The Organ of the Ancients from Eastern Sources , 
London, 1931 ; Lajos Nagy, Az Aquincumi orgona. Die Or gel von Aquincum , 
Budapest, 1934 — Nero: Suetonius, The Lives of the Caesars, Nero XLI. 




47 6 The History of Musical Instruments 

trumpets. Boston: L. D. Caskey, Archaeological Notes , in American Journal 
of Archaeology XLI ( 1 93 7) * pp. 525—527 — Rome: Friedrich Behn, Die 
Musik im romischen Heere, in Mainzer Zeitschrijt VII (1912) ; Curt Sachs, 
Lituus und Karnyx, in Festschrift fur Rochus von Liliencron y Leipzig, 1910 — 
Lurer: bibliography in Hubert Schmidt, Die Luren von Daberkow , in Pra- 
historische Zeitschrift VII (1915) — Tibet: Andre Schaeffner, Origine des 
instruments de musique , Paris, 1936, p. 262 n. 

idiophones: Friedrich Adolf Lampe, De cymbalis veterum libri tres y 1703 — 
(Sir Richard Ellys), Fortuita sacra quibus subjicitur commentartus de cym- 
balis y Rotterodami 1727. — J. Jiithner, Die Schelle im Thiasos , in Jahreshefte 
des Oesterreichischen Archaologischen Instituts y VII (1904), pp. 146 ff. — 
Hippasos: Hermann Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Berlin 1903, 
p. 12. 



7. INDIA 

general: Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Indiens und Indonesians , 2nd 
edition, Berlin, 1923; Claudie Marcel Dubois, Notes sur les instruments de 
musique figures dans Fart flastique de Plnde ancienne y in Revue des arts 
asiatiques XI (1937). 

indus civilization. Cymbals: Sir John Marshall, Mohenjo-Daro y London, 
1931, III pi. CXLII 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 — Drum: 1 . c., pi. XCIV 1, 3, and I, p. 346 
— -Shell trumpet: III, pi. CLV — Lyre: 1 . c., pi. CIX 206, CXIII 457, 459, 461, 
469 — Harp: 1 . c., pi. CV 46; G. R. Hunter, The Scrift of Haraffa and 
Mohenjo-Daro y London, 1934, pi. XXXIII, 146. 

vedic time. Bakura: Curt Sachs, Les instruments de musique de Madagascar , 
Paris, 1938, p. IO. 

dravida: Gilbert Slater, The Dravidian Element in Indian Culture , London, 
1924, p. 80 — Tiruchinnam: P. Sambamoorthy, Catalogue of the Musical 
Instruments Exhibited in the Government Museum Madras., in Bulletin of the 
Madras Government Museum y n. s., General Section, vol. II, part 3, Madras, 
1 931; Jaap Kunst, Hindoe-J avaansche muziek-instrumenten y Batavia, 1927, 
fig. 44 — Vina: Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente des alten Aegypens, Berlin, 
1921, p. 68. 

drums. Twin drums: Colin McPhce, Children and Music in Bali , in Djawa 
XVIII (1938), pi. 2 and 3; Andreas Eckardt, Koreanische Musik , Tokyo, 
1930, pi. XIII, fig. 23. — Drum harmonics: C. V. Raman, Sivakali Kumar, 
Musical Drums with Harmonic Overtones , in Nature CIV (1920), p. 500. 

short lute. Suza: J. de Morgan, Delegation en Perse , Paris, 1900, I pi. 8; 
the same in Kathleen Schlesinger, The instruments of the modern orchestra , 
London, 1910, II pi. 12 — Chinese conquest: The Cambridge Shorter History 
of India , New York, 1934, p. 75. 



8. THE FAR EAST 

general: Amiot, Memoire sur la musique des Chinois, Paris, 1779; A. C. 
Moule, A List of the Musical Instruments of the Chinese , in Journal of the 




References 4 * 7*7 

North-China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society XXXIXj (1908); Francis 
Piggott, The Music and Musical Instruments of Japan, 2nd edition, Yoko- 
hama, 1909; Maurice Courant, Chine et Coree and Japon , in Lavignac, En- 
cyclopedic de la musique I I, Paris, 1913, pp. 77—256; Andreas Eckardt, 
Koreanische Musik , Tokyo, 1930 — Six arts: l-li or Book of Etiquette and 
Ceremonial , transl. by John Steele, London, 1917, p. 275 — The finish: 
The Original Chinese Texts of the Confucian Analecta , transl. by J. Steele, 
London, 1861, p. 87 — Mencius: ib., p. 489 — Good government: ib., p. 210 
— Chwang Paou: ib., p. 427 — Female musicians: p. 237 — Reform: p. 99 — 
Lao-tsze: p. 929 — Pa yin: for a different arrangement cp. Otto Kummel, 
Neun chinesische Spiegel , in Ostasiatische Zeitschrift } N. F. VI (1930), 
p. 175. 

shang: Herrlee Glessner Creel, The Birth of China, New York, 1937 — 
Shih Ching: The Chinese Classics , vol. IV, transl. by John Legge, Hong 
Kong-London, 1871, p. 457. 

globular flute. Caffres: Henry A. Junod, The Life of a South- African 
Tribe , Neuchatel, 1913, II 249 — Bone: H. G. Creel, 1 . c., p. 99. 

stones. Mencius: The Original Chinese Texts, p. 729 — Confucius: ib., p. 185 
— Venezuela: Karl Gustav Izikowitz, Musical Instruments of the South Amer- 
ican Indians , Goteborg, 1935, p. 9 — Kawa music: Curt Sachs, Vergleichende 
Musikwis sense haft, Leipzig, 1930, p. 71. 

bells. Primitive: Curt Sachs, Geist und W erden der Musikinstrumente, Ber- 
lin, 1929, p. 279 — Blood: Louis Laloy, La musique chinoise, Paris (1910), 
p. 60 — Maiden’s blood: E. T. C. Werner, Myths and Legends of China, 
London, 1934, p. 394 — Chang Heng: Stefan Balazs, Die Inschriften der 
Sammlung Baron v. d. Heydt, in Ostasiatische Zeitschrift N. F., vol. X 
(1934), p. 28. 

drums. Early text: The Chinese Classics IV 2, Hong Kong-London, 1871, 
p. 457 — Rattle and clapper drums: C. Sachs, 1 . c., p. 156, 172 — Tso Chuan: 
H. G. Creel, 1 . c., p. 153. 
percussion-clapper. Book: Creel, 1 . c., p. 172. 
trough. Poem: The Chinese Classics, IV 2, p. 587. 

tiger. Tao: Richard Wilhelm, Das W esen der chinesischen Musik, in Sinica 
II (1927), p. 203 n. 

pitch and pan-pipes. Poem: The Chinese Classics IV 2, p. 587 — Peru: 
Raoul et Marguerite d’Harcourt, La musique des Incas , Paris, 1925, pp. 35— 
53 — Cuna: Narciso Garay, Tradiciones y cantares de Panama, s. 1 . (1930), 
p. 25 — Cents: Alexander John Ellis, Tonometrical Observations on Existing 
Non-Harmonic Scales, in Proceedings of the Royal Society, 1884, and Journal 
of the Society of Arts, 1885 — Karenni: Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Birmas 
und Assams, pp. 31, 32. — A. H. Fox Strangways, The Pipes of Pan, in Music 
and Letters X (1929), pp. 57—64. 

flutes. 9th century: The Chinese Classics IV, iii, ii 10. — Hsiao: ib., p. 588. 
— Yiieh: ib., p. 62, 397. — Measurement: Erich M. von Hornbostel, Die 
Massnorm als kulturgeschichtliches Forschungsmittel , in Festschrift fiir P. 
Wilhelm Schmidt, Wien 1928. — Madagascar: Curt Sachs, Les instruments de 
musique de Madagascar, Paris, 1938, pp. 66 , 77. 




478 The History of Musical Instruments 

mouth-organ. Acoustics: Dr. Kwang-chi Wang in a letter to the author, 
Dec. I, 1927. — Prototypes: C. Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Birmas und 
Assams, Munchen, 1917, p. 38. — Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Indiens uni 
IndonesienSy 2nd edition, Berlin, 1923, p. 163. — Laos: Madeleine Humbert- 
Lavergne, La musique a trovers la vie laotienne y in Zeitschrift fur verglei- 
chende Musikwissenschaft II (1934), p. I 4 ~I 9 > with the transcription of four 
pieces for the khen. — First mention: The Chinese Classics IV 245. — Voglcr: 
Hertha Schweiger, Abbe G. J. Voglers Orgellehre, Dissertation Freiburg i. B. 
1934, Vienna, 1938. 

long zither. Odes: The Chinese Classics IV, p. 4, 252. 

9. AMERICA 

general: Raoul et Marguerite d’Harcourt, La musique des Incas y Paris, 
1925; Eduard Seler, Mittelamerikanische Musikinstrumente , in Globus 
LXXVI (1899); Hugo Kunike, Musikinstrumente aus dem alten Michoacan , 
in Baessler-Archiv II (1911), pp. 282—284; Charles W. Mead, The Musical 
Instruments of the Incas , in Anthropological Papers of the American Museum 
of Natural History XV, part III, 1 924; August Genin, The Musical Instru- 
ments of the Ancient Mexicans , in Mexican Magazine III (1927), pp. 3 5 5 — 
362 ; Karl Gustav Izikowitz, Musical and Other Sound Instruments of the 
South American Indians , Goteborg, 1935. 

central American flutes: Diego de Landa, Relation des choses de Yucatan y 
Paris, 1864, p. 127; Hubert Howe Bancroft, The Native Races of the Pacific 
States of North America , London, 1875, II 293, 621, 713; IV 462; Koll- 
mann, Floten und Pfeifen aus Alt-Mexico , in Bastian~F estsch rift (1896). 
scraper: Eduard Seler, Altmexikanische Knochenrasseln y in Globus LXXIV 
(1898), pp. 85—93; Capitan, V omichicahuatzli mexicain et son ancetre de 
Pepoque du renne y Resume in XV I e Congres International des Americanistes , 
Vienne (Autriche), 1908. 

drums: K. G. Izikowitz, Le tambour a membrane au Perou y in Journal de la 
Societe des Americanistes , n. s. XXIII ( 1 93 1 ) , pp. 163-175; Daniel Casta- 
neda y V. T. Mendoza, Los percutores precortesianos , and Los teponazths en 
las civilizaciones precortesianas y in Anales del Museo Nacional de Arqueologta 
VIII (1933). 

pan-pipes: Erich M. von Hornbostel, Ueber ein akustisches Kriterium fur 
Kulturzusammenhange , in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie XLIII (1911); Mead, 
1. c., p. 326. 

south American flutes: Raoul d’Harcourt, V ocarina a cinq sons dans 
I'Amerique prehispanique y in Journal de la Societe des Americanistes XXIII 
( 1930 . PP- 189-228, pi. XXXV-XL. 

10. THE FAR EAST 

general: as in Chapter 8 — Mongolia: P. Jos. van Oost, La musique chez les 
Mongols des XJrdus y in Anthropos X-XI (1915-16) — Turkestan: Arno Huth, 
Die Musikinstrumente Ost-Turkistans, Diss., Berlin, 1928. 




References 479 

cymbals. Metal workers: M. A. Czaplicka, The Turks of Central Asia , Ox- 
ford, 1918, p. 71. 

gong: Heinrich Simbrieger, Gong und Gongspiele, in Internationales Archiv 
fur Ethnographic XXXVI (1939), 180 pp. 

gong chime. Iron workers: Czaplicka, 1. c., p. 70. 

reed pipes. Pibcorn: Henry Balfour, * Pibcorn * or ‘Hornpipe* in Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain XX (1891) — Bisa: Henry 
George Farmer, Studies in Oriental Musical Instruments I, London, 1931, 
p. 83 — Spanish influence: a detailed letter from Mr. Kenzo Sato, formerly 
my student in Berlin University. 

bowed instruments: Curt Sachs, Die Streichbogenfrage, in Archiv fur 
Musikwissenschaft I (1918), pp. 3—9. 

trumpet. Mongolia; Hammer-Purgstall, Geschichte der Golden Horde , 
Pesth, 1840, pp. 214—216 — Tibet: David Macdonald, Mceurs et coutumes 
des Thibetains, Paris, 1930, p. 261 — South America: K. G. Izikowitz, Musi- 
cal Instruments of the South American Indians , Goteborg, 1935, p. 232. 

11. INDIA 

general: C. R. Day, The Music and Musical Instruments of Southern India 
and the Deccan , London, 1891 ; A. H. Fox Strangways, The Music of Hindo - 
stan, Oxford, 1914; J. Grosset, Inde t in Lavignac, Encyclopedic de la mu- 
sique, first part, vol. I, pp. 257—376; Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente 
Indiens und lndonesiens y 2nd edition, Berlin, 1923; P. Sambamoorthy, Cat- 
alogue of the Musical Instruments Exhibited in the Government Museum 
Madras , in Bulletin of the Madras Government Museum, N. S. General Sec- 
tion, vol. II, Part III, Madras, 1931. 

pre-islamic times. Borobudur: Jaap Kunst, Hindoe-Javaansche Muziek- 
instrumenten, Batavia, 1927. 

stick-zither. Early evidence: Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, Frescoes at Elura, 
in Ostasiatische Zeitschrift, Neue Folge III (1926), p. 5. 

drums: M. Fredelis, Indian instruments , in The Times of India, Oct. 27, 
1920, and Nov. 10, 1920. 

12. SOUTHEAST ASIA 

general: Curt Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Birmas und Assams, in Sitzungs- 
berichte der Kgl. Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phil.-phil. Kl. , 
Jg. 1917, 2. Abh., Munchen, 1917; Gaston Knosp, La Birmanie, in A. 
Lavignac, Encyclopedic de la musique, iere par tie, vol. V, pp. 3094— 3099; 
Knosp, Histoire de la musique dans l*lndo-Chine , ibidem, pp. 3100—3146; 
C. Sachs, Die Musikinstrumente Indiens und Indonesiens , 2nd edition, Ber- 
lin, 1923; Daniel de Lange & Joh. F. Snelleman, La musique et les instru- 
ments de musique dans les Indes orientales neerlandaises, in A. Lavignac, 
Encyclopedic de la musique, sere partie, vol. V, pp. 3147—3178; Jaap Kunst 
en C. J. A. Kunst-v.Wely, De toonkunst van Bali, 2 vol., Weltevreden 
19-25; The same, Hindoe-Javaansche muziek-instrumenten, Batavia, 1927* 




480 The History of Musical Instruments 

J. S. Brandts Buys, De toonkunst bij de Madoereezen , in Djatva VIII 
(1928); Jaap Kunst, De toonkunst van Java , ’s-Gravenhage 1934, 2 vols.; 
Gaston Knosp, Rapport sur une mission ojjicielle d' etude musical e en Indo- 
chiney Leyde, 1911; Colin McPhee, A ngkloeng Gamelans in Bali , in Djatva 
XVII (1937), no. 5-6, 29 pp.; C. McPhee, Children and Music in Bali , in 
Djatva XVIII (1938), no. 6, 15 pp. 

tube zither: Curt Sachs, Les instruments de musique de Madagascar , Paris, 
1938 , pp. $h 7 l > 76 . 

drum gong: Franz Heger, Alte Metalltrommeln aus Siidostasieny Leipzig, 
1902; Victor Goloubew, Sur Porigine et la difusion des tambours metalliquesy 
in Prehistorica Asiae Orientalis I (1932), pp. 137— 1 50. 

xylophone. Panataran: ill. in Kunst, Hindoe-J avaansche muziek-instru - 
menteny pi. 50. 

gong: Heinrich Simbriger, Gong and GongsfielCy in Internationales Archiv 
fur Ethnografhiey vol. XXXVI (1939). 



13. THE NEAR EAST 

general: Villoteau, Description historiquey technique et litter air e y des in- 
struments de musique des Orientaux y in Description de VEgypte, Etat moderne , 
Paris, 1813, 1826; Erich M. von Hornbostel, Notizen iiber kirgisische Musik- 
instrumentCy in R. Karutz, Unter Kirgisen und Turkmenen , Leipzig, 1911, 
pp. 196—218} Jules Rouanet, La musique arabe, in A. Lavignac, Encyclopedic 
de la musiquCy p. I, vol. V, pp. 2676—28 12 •, La musique arabe dans le Maghreb , 
1 . c., pp. 2813-2844; Raouf Yekta, La musique turque y 1 . c., pp. 2945—3064; 
Cl. Huart, Musique persane , 1 . c., pp. 3065—3083 ; Curt Sachs, Geist und Wer- 
den der Musikinstrumente y Berlin, 1929, passim; Henry George Farmer, A 
History of Arabian Music to the Xlllth Century , London, 1929; Studies in 
Oriental Musical Instruments , I, II, London, 1931, 1939; Baron Rodolphe 
d’Erlanger, La musique arabe t 3 vol., Paris, 1930—38; Alfred Berner, Studien 
zur arabischen Musik auf Grund der gegenwartigen Theorie und Praxis in 
Aegypten, Leipzig, 1937; C. Sachs, Les instruments de musique de Madagascar , 
Paris, 1938; James Robson, Ancient Arabian Musical InstrumentSy Glasgow, 
19??. 

harp. Egypt: Pere Belon, Les observations de plusieurs singularitez 6? choses 
memorablesy Paris, 1554. 

kettledrums. Kus: Farmer, A History of Arabian Music , p. 38; Jaap Kunst, 
Hindoe-J avaansche muziek-instrumenten, Batavia, 1927, p. 134, 137, 142 — 
Miniature, Goloubew Collection: George Marteau et Henri Vever, Miniatures 
persanesy Paris, 1913, pi. II; Ph. Walter Schulz, Die persisch-islamische Minia- 
turmalerei, Leipzig, 1914, p. 2. 

short lute. Eleventh century: Mahmoud el Hefny, I bn Sina’s Musiklehre, 
Diss., Berlin, 1931, pp. 44-50. 

long lute. Al-Farabi: d’Erlanger I, pp. 217—262. 




References 



481 



14. EUROPE 

general: Frederick Morgan Padelford, Old English Musical Terms , Bonn, 
1899; Felipe Pedrell, Organografta musical antigua esfahola, Barcelona, 1901 ; 
Edward Buhle, Die musikalischen Instrumente in den Miniaturen des friihen 
Mittelalters, vol. I, Leipzig, 1903; Francis W. Galpin, Old English Instru- 
ments of Music , London, 1910; J. Levy, Die Signalinstrumente in den altfran- 
zdsischen Texten y Diss., Halle, 1910; Gustav Schad, Musik und Musikausdriicke 
in der mittelenglischen Literatur , Diss., Giessen, 191 1 ; Hortense Panum, Mid- 
delalderens Strengeinstrumenter, 3 v., Kpbenhavn, 1915— 193 1 ; Denise Parent, 
Les instruments de musique au XIV e siecle, in fccole Rationale des Chartcs, 
Theses four le diflome dJarchiviste faleografhe, Paris, 1925 (outline only) ; 
Fritz Brucker, Die Blasinstrumente in der altfranzdsischen Literatur , Giessen, 
1926; Curt Sachs, Handbuch der Musikinstrumentenkunde, 2nd ed., Leipzig, 
193O; Friedrich Dick, Bezeichnungen fiir fatten- und Schlaginstrumente in 
der altfranzdsischen Literatur , Giessen, 1932; Dorothea Treder, Die Musik- 
instrumente in den hdfischen Efen der Bliitezeit , Diss., Greifswald, 1933; 
F. W. Galpin, A Textbook of Eurofean Musical Instruments, London, 1937; 
Adam von Ahn Carse, Musical Wind Instruments , London, 1939 (the author 
has not yet seen this book) . 

harp. Stone crosses: plate in Galpin, Old English Instruments, p. 4; Miniature 
in St. John’s College: plate in Galpin, 1 . c., p. 218 — Planets: K. Bartsch, Alt- 
franzosische Romanzen und Pastourellen , Leipzig, 1870, XLIX, p. 58 — 
D’lnglcterre: La Prise de Cordres et de Sebille (thirteenth century), verse 29 
— Puntos doblados: Poema de Alfonso Oncetio, str. 410, in W. Giese, Anthologie 
der geistigen Kultur auf der Pyrenaenhalbinsel , Hamburg-Berlin, 1927, p. 163 
— Bas et haults: Erich Hertzmann, Studien zur Basse danse, in Zeitschrift fiir 
Musikwissenschaft XI (1929), pp. 40 1—405. 

lyre. Vesp. A i: plate in Galpin, 1 . c., p. 6 — Utrecht: E. T. de Wald, The 
Illustrations of the Utrecht Psalter , Princeton (1932) — Voguls and Ostyaks: 
A, O. Vaisanen. Die Leier der Ob-U grischen Volker, in Eurasia seftentrionalis 
antique , VI (1930) — Esthonia and Finland: Otto Andersson, Strdkharfan, Hel- 
singfors, 1923 — Otto Andersson, The Bowed Harf, transl. by Kathleen Schlc- 
singer, London, 1930. 

monochord: S. Wantzloeben, Das Monochord als Instrument und als System, 
Halle, 1911 — Scotus: Jacques Handschin, Die Musikanschauung des Johannes 
Scotus ( Erigena ), in Deutsche Vierteljahrsschrift fiir Literaturwissenschaft V 
(1927) — Muris: Martin Gerbert, Serif tores ecclesiastici de musica, St. Blasien, 
1784, III 283b; Berlin, Staatsbibl., Ms. theol. lat. fol. 358. 
hurdy-gurdy. Odo: Gerbert, 1 . c., I 303 — Semicircular movement: Percival 
R. Kirby, The Musical Instruments of the Native Races of South-Africa , p. 2 1 6 . 

lutes. Utrecht Psalter: E. T. De Wald, The Illustrations of the Utrecht Psalter, 
Princeton (1932) — Aureum: J. Rudolf Rahn, Das Psalterium aureum, St. 
Gallen, 1878, pi. VI, XIV — Stuttgart: E. T. De Wald, The Stuttgart 
Psalter, Princeton, 1930 — Spanish: the manuscripts themselves in the Biblioteca 
Nacional in Madrid; cf. also Antonio Blazquez, Los manuscritos de los comen - 




482 The History of Musical Instruments 

tarios al A focalifsis de San Juan , for S. Beato de Liebana , in Revista de Archivos , 
Bibliotecas y Museos XIV (1906), pp. 257—273. 

fiddle. Etymology: Curt Sachs, Reallexikon der Musikinstrumente, Berlin, 
1913, p. 139b — Fidlu: T. Hannaas, Hardingfela, in Bergen Museums Aarb. 
1916-17, 3rd series, p. 19 — Bowing: Hans-Heinz Drager, Die Entwicklung 
des Streichbogens, Kassel, 1937; H. Th. Horwitz, Die Drehbewegung in ihrer 
Bedeutung fur die materielle Kultur, in Anthrofos XXIX (1934), p. 123 — 
Geige: Daniel Fryklund, Etymologische Studien iiber geige-gigue-jig , in 
Studier i modern Sfrakvetenskaf VI (1917), pp. 101— no — Kit: id., Studien 
iiber die Pochette , Sundsvall, 1 91 7. 

chimes: Edward Buhle, Die Glockensfiele in den Miniaturen des friihen Mit- 

telalters, in Festschrift fiir Rochus von Liliencron y Leipzig, 1910, p. 51 ff. 

horns and trumpets: Buhle, 1 . c., pp. 1 2— 3 1 — Olifant: Ernest Closson, 

UOlifanty in Revue belge y dec. 1926, pp. 446—456. 

bagpipe. St. Jerome: Patrologia latina, v. 30, col. 214— 21 5. 

organ: Norbert Dufourq, Esquisse d y une histoire de Porgue , Paris, 1935; 

Buhle, 1 . c., pp. 52—101. 

portative organ: Hans Hickmann, Das Portativ , Kassel, 1936 — Arnault: In- 
struments de musique du XV e siecle. Les traites d* Henri- Arnaut de Zwolle et de 
divers anonymesy ed. G. Le Cerf et E.-R. Labande, Paris, 1932, p. XII. 

flutes: Buhle, 1 . c., pp. 32—44 — Aquamanile: ill. Georg Kinsky, A History of 
Music in ficturesy London, 1930, p. 41; M. Klier, Die volkstiimliche Quer- 
ffeife y in Das deutsche Volkslied XXV (1923) ; id., Volkstiimliche Querfloten 
und die Maultrommely in Kongressbericht der Beethoven-Zentenarfeiery Wien, 
1927, pp. 373—377; id., Neue Anleitung zum Schwegeln , Wien, 1931. 
reed pipes: Buhle, 1 . c., pp. 44—46. 

drum. Arbeau: German edition, 1878; French edition, 1888; English edition, 
1925. 

trumscheit: F. W. Galpin, Monsieur Prin and His Trumfet Marine , in Mu- 
sic and Letters , XIV, pp. 1 8-29. 

zithers. Dulcimer tuning: Nicola Podesta, The National Dulcimer Tutor , 
London, 19? ?. 



15. THE RENAISSANCE 

general, as in Chapter 14 — Massimo Trojano, Disc or si, Monaco, 1 568 ; Dialo- 
ghi, Venetia, 1569; German translation by Friedrich Wurthmann: Die Ver- 
mdhlungsfeier des H erzogs Wilhelm des Fiinften, Miinchen, 1 842 ; Hans Gerle, 
Musica Teuschy Nurnberg, 1532 and 1537; Sylvestro di Ganassi, Of era in- 
titulota Fontegaroy Venice, 1535; Diego Ortiz, Tratado de glosas , Roma, 
1 553 * reprint Berlin, 1913 — Virdung: facs. Berlin, 1882 — Agricola: reprint 
Berlin, 1896 — Praetorius: reprints Berlin, 1884, and Kassel, 1929 — Trasun- 
tinis: Curt Sachs, Sammlung alter Musikinstrumente zu Berlin , beschreibender 
Katalog, Berlin, 1922, p. 69 — Fugger: Adolf Sandberger, Bemerkungen zur 
Biografhie Hans Leo Hasslers , in Denkmaler der Tonkunst in Bayern V 1, 
Leipzig, 1904* p« Lf — Henry VIII: Galpin, Old English Instruments , pp. 
292—300 — Berlin: Curt Sachs, Musik und Ofer am kurbrandenburgischen 




References 483 

Hofe , Berlin, 19*0, pp. 205—207 — Vienna: Julius Schlosser, Alte Musikin- 
strumente , Wien, 1920. 

organ: Arnold Schlick, S fie gel der Orgelmacher , Heidelberg, 15x1 (only 
copy: Library Paul Hirsch, Cambridge) ; reprints Monatshefte fur Mustkge- 
schichte Heft 5-6, Leipzig, 1869, and by Paul Smets, 1937, in modern lan- 
guage, by Ernst Flade, Mainz, 1932; Raymond Kendall, Notes on Arnold 
Schlick , in Acta Musicologica XI (1939), PP* 136—143; Norbert Dufourq, 
Esquisse d'une histoire de Porgue en France , Paris, 1935. 
regals. Henry VIII: Galpin, 1 . c., p. 293. 

recorder: Christopher Welch, Six Lectures on the Recorder , Oxford, 1911. 

one-handed flute. Lippi: ill. in Curt Sachs, Reallexikon der Musikinstru- 
mente, Berlin, 1913, p. 146. 

transverse flute: Agricola, 1 . c., f. xiij (p. 25) ; Sylvestro di Ganassi, 
Of era intilulata Fontegara , Venetia, 1535. 

bassoon: Lyndesay G. Langwill, Notes on “ Three Bassoons ” in the National 
Museum of Antiquities of Scotland , in Proceedings of the Society of An- 
tiquaries of Scotland , v. 67 (1932-33), pp. 335— 340 ; Some Notes on the Bas- 
soon, in The Musical Progress, 1933, pp. 379-380; The Curtal (1550-1750), 
in Musical Times, April, 1937. 

rankets, etc.: Georg Kinsky, Doffelrohrblatt-Instrumente mit Windkafsel, 
in Archiv fur Musikwis sense haft VII (1925), pp. 253—296. 

rauschpfeifen: Curt Sachs, Sammlung alter Musikinstrumente zu Berlin, 
Berlin, 1922, pp. 281-282, pi. 28. 

cornet: Walther, p. 186. 

trombone: Francis W. Galpin, The Sackbut, in Proceedings of the Musical . 
Association, Session 33 (1907), pp. 1-25. 

trumpet: Werner Menke, History of the Trumfet of Bach and Handel , 
London (1934). 

kettledrums: Sir James Turner, Pallas Arntata , 1683. 

clavichord: Fr. A. Goehlinger, Geschichte des Klavichords, Diss., Basel, 
1910; Cornelia Auerbach, Die deutsche Clavichordkunst des 18. Jahrhun- 
derts, Kassel, 1930 — Cersne: C. Sachs, Die Instrumente der Minneregel, in 
Sammelbande der International en Musikgesellschaft XII (1913), pp. 484— 
486 — Arnault: Instruments de musique du XV e siecle. Les traites d'Henri- 
Arnaut de Zwolle et de divers anonymes , ed. G. Le Cerf et E.-R. Labande, 
Paris, 1932 — Shrewsbury: Galpin, Old English Instruments, fig. 20 — Ramis: 
reprint by Johannes Wolf in Beihefte der International en Musikgeselhchaft , 
Folge I, no. 2 (Leipzig, 1901), p. 16 — Short octave: G. Kinsky, Kurze Ok- 
taven, in Zeitschrift fur Musikwissenschaft II (1919), pp. 65—82 — Bund- 
frei: Galpin, 1 . c., p. 115 — Caressingly: Karl Philipp Emanuel Bach, V ersuch 
liber die wahre Art das Clavier zu sfielett, Berlin, 1753, Introduction § 15 
(reprint, 3rd ed., Leipzig, 1920) ; Christian Daniel Friedrich Schubart, Ideen 
zu einer Aesthetik der Tonkunst, Wien, 1806, p. 288 f. 

spinets and harpsichords: Eva Ursula Kropp, Das Zuffklavier , Diss., Ber- 
lin, 1925; Philip James, Early Keyboard Instruments, London, 1930 — Henry 
VIII: Galpin, Old English Instruments, p. 297 — Arabic: Henry George Far- 




484 The History of Musical Instruments 

mer, Studies in Oriental Musical Instruments I, London, 1931, pp. 17—24 — 
Cersne: Curt Sachs, 1 . c. — Upright: Hans Hickmann, Das Portativ , Kassel, 
1936, p. 160 f.; Arnault, 1 . c.; Scaliger, Poetique y Lyon, 1561, p. 127 — 
Single and double: Galpin, 1 . c., pp. 288—292 — Skinner: (Fanny Reed Ham- 
mond and Nils J. Ericsson), The Belle Skinner Collection of Old Musical 
InstrumentSy 1933, pp. 31—34; Josef Reiss, Pauli Paulirini de Praga tractatus 
de musica, in Zeitschrift fur Musikwissenschaft VII (1925), pp. 262—263 — 
Kefermarkt: Georg Kinsky, A History of Music in Pictures , London, 1930, 
p. 64. 

dulce melos: Arnault, 1 . c., pp. 19—23. — Tangentenfliigel: Die Regensburger 
Klavicrbauer Spath und Schmahly Diss., Erlangen, 1928. 

viols: Sylvestro de Ganassi dal Fontego, Regola Rubertina, Venezia, 1542— 
1543; reprint Leipzig, 1924; Gerald R. Hayes, Musical Instruments and 
Their Music II, Oxford, 1930, pp. 1 — 1 37. 

lute: Ernst Gottlieb Baron, Historisch-theoretische und praktische Unter- 
suchung der Lauten, Nurnberg, 1727; Karl Geiringer, Vorgeschichte und 
Geschichte der europaiscken haute } in Zeitschrift fitr Musikwissenschaft X 
(1928), pp. 560-603. 

cittern: Curt Sachs, Sammlung alter Musikinstrumente } pp. 151—162. 
lira da gamba: Hayes, 1 . c., pp. 144— 15 1. 



16. THE BAROQUE 

general: as in chapter 15 — Berlin: Curt Sachs, Musik und Oper am kur- 
brandenburgischen Hofe y Berlin, 1910, p. 205. 

violin. General: Willibald Leo Freiherr von Liitgendorff, Die G eigen- und 
Lautenmacher, 3rd edition, Frankfurt a. M., p. 192; Gerald R. Hayes, Musical 
instruments II, Oxford, 1930, pp. 160-209; Giovanni Maria Lanfranco, 
Scintille di musica , Brescia, 1533; Hans Judenkunig, Utilis et compendiaria 
introductiOy Vienna, 1523; Pedro Cerone, El melopeo y maestro , Napoles, 
I 6 I 3— Silver strings: Jean Rousseau, Traite de la viole , Paris, 1687, p. 24; 
Friedrich Zamminer, Die Musik und die musikalischen Instrumente , Giessen, 
*855, p. 4; Heinrich Welcker von Gontershausen, N eu-erdfnetes Magazin 
musikalischer Tonwerkzeuge t Frankfurt, 1855, p. 241. 

viola d am ore: Francis Bacon, Sylva Sylvarum , 1648, Century III, no. 280; 
Werner Eginhard Kohler, Beitrage zur Geschichte und Literatur der Viola 
d'ainorey Diss., Berlin, 1938. 

viola pomposa. E. T. Arnold, Die Vtola pomposa t in Zeitschrift fur Musik- 
wissenschaft XIII (1930), pp. I 4 I-I 45 5 Georg Kinsky, ib., pp. 325-328; 
Arnold, ib. XIV (1931), p. 35; F. W. Galpin, ib., pp. 35-38; Hans Engel, 

p* 3 8 > Galpin, Viola pomposa and violoncello piccolo , in Music and 
Letters XII (1931), pp. 354-364. 

baryton: Daniel Fryklund, Viola di Bar done, in Svensk Tidskrift for Musik- 
forskning IV (1922), pp. 129-152. 

bow: Henry Saint-George, The Bow , 3rd edition, London, 1922; Hans- 
Heinz Drager, Die Entwicklung des Streichbogens, Kassel, 1937. 




References 485 

archlutes. Kanz al-Tuhaf: Farmer, Studies in Oriental Musical Instru- 
ments , London, 1931, 1 , p. 14 f. 
citterns: Galpin, Old English Instruments , p. 25 ff. 

guitar. Espinel: Revue hispanique XLI (1917), p. 219; Pablo Minguet y 
Yrol, Reglas y advertencies generales fora toner la guitarra , tiple y vandola , 
Madrid, 1754. 

harpsichord, as in Chapter 15. 

carillon: William Gorham Rice, Carillon Music , New York, 1925; Frank 
Percival Price, The Carillon , London, 1933 — Change-ringing: Ernest Morris, 
The History and Art of Change-ringing , London, 1931. 
flute: Mauger, Les Hotteterre , Paris, 1912. 

oboe d’amore. Mahillon: Victor-Charles Mahillon, Catalogue descriptif, 
Gand, 1893, I, 231. 

slide trumpet: Curt Sachs, Bach’s tromba da tirarsi, in Bachjahrbuch, 1908. 
horns: Fritz Piersig, Die Einfiihrung des Hornes in die Kunstmusik, Halle, 
1927; Charles Sanford Terry, Bach’s Orchestra , London, 1932; Johann Ernst 
Altenburg, Versuch einer Anleitung zur heroisch-musikalischen T romfeter- 
und Pauker-Kunst, Halle, 1795. 

organ: Ernst Flade, Der Orgelbauer Gottfried Silbermann, Leipzig, 1926. 

pitch: Alexander John Ellis, The History of Musical Pitchy in Journal of 
the Society of Arts , 1877, 1880, 1881, and in his translation of Helmholtz, 
On the Sensations of Tone , 1885. 

17. ROMANTICISM 

« 

general: Curt Sachs, Handbuch der Musikinstrumentetikunde, 2nd edition, 
Leipzig, 1930; Die modernen MusikinstrumentCy Berlin, 1923; Johann Georg 
Albrechtsberger, Griindliche Anweisung zur Composition, Leipzig, 1790 — 
acoustics: Edward Gick Richardson, The Acoustics of Orchestral Instruments , 
London, 1929; Sir James Jeans, Science and Music , Cambridge, 1937 — Eng- 
land: Francis W. Galpin, Old English Instruments of Music , London, 1910 — • 
France: Constantin Pierre, Les facteurs d’instruments de musique, Paris, 1893. 
piano: Jacob Adlung, Musica mechanica organoedi, Berlin, 1768; Anleitung 
zu der musikalischen Gelahrtheit , Erfurt, 1758 and Dresden-Leipzig, 1783; 
Curt Sachs, Das Klavier , Berlin, 1923; Rosamond E. M. Harding, The 
Piano-forte, Cambridge, 1933; Eva Hertz, Johann Andreas Stein , Wurzburg, 
1937. — Upright: Walter Pfeiffer, Fliigel oder Klavier , Stuttgart, 1940. 

aeolian harp: J. G. Kastner, La harpe d’Eole , Paris, 1856; James Thomp- 
son, Castle of Indolence, 2nd edition, London, 1748, p. 21. 
harp: Hans Joachim Zingel, Harfe und Harfenspiel, Halle, 1932. 

friction rods: Ernst Florens Friedrich Chladni, Beytrage zur praktischen 
Akustik, Leipzig, 1821. 

harmonium: Auguste Mustel, L’orgue expressif , Paris, 1903. 
glass harmonica: C. F. Pohl, Zur Geschichte der Glasharmonika , Wien, 
1862; O. G. Sonneck, Benjamin Franklin’s Musical Side , in Suum cuique. 
New York (1916). 




486 



The History of Musical Instruments 

boeiim flute : Christopher Welch, History of the Boehm- fiute , London, 
1896; H. C. Wysham, The Evolution of the Boehm Flute , Elkhart, 1898; 
Theobald Boehm, Flutes and Flute- flaying, London, 1910; The same, 2nd 
English edition by Dayton C. Miller, Cleveland-London, 1922. 
clarinet . Zoroastre: Lionel de la Laurencie, Rameau et les clarinettes , in 
Revue musicale S.l.M. IX (1913), p. 2. 
saxophone : Jaap Kool, Das Saxofhon, Leipzig (1931). 

valves . Clagget: Patents for Inventions. Abridgments of Specifications Re- 
lating to Music and Musical Instruments. A.D. 1694—1866. 2nd edition, 
London, 1871, p. 22. 

machine drums : Pcrcival R. Kirby, The Kettle-drums , London, 1930. 
organ : Ernest M. Skinner, The Modern Organ, New York (1917); Hertha 
Schweiger, Abbe G. J. Voglers Orgellehre , Diss., Freiburg, 1934, Wien, 
1938; Walter and Thomas Lewis, Modern Organ Building, 3rd edition, 
London, 1939. 

EPILOGUE: THE TWENTIETH CENTURY 

electric instruments . T. Cahill, Electrical Music as a Vehicle of Expres- 
sion, in Music Teachers National Association Studies , 2nd series, Annual Meet- 
ing 29th in 1907, Hartford, Conn., 1908; Michel Adam, A propos des instru- 
ments de musique radio-electrique> et photo-el ectriques, in Revue generate de 
P electricite XXIII (1928), pp. 46—51 ; Julien, Applications du courant elec - 
trique, des oscillations radio-el ectriques et des phenomenes photoel ectriques a 
la realisation d' instruments de musique, in Conservatoire National des Arts & 
Metiers , conferences d'actualites sctentifiques et industrielles, 1929, pp. 1 41 — 
1 89 ; Joseph Schillingcr, Electricity, a Musical Liberator , in Modem Music 
VIII (1931), pp. 26—31; R. Raven-Hart, The Development of Electrical 
Music , in Nineteenth Century CXI (1932), pp. 603-611 ; Peter Lertes, Elek- 
trische Musik, Dresden-Leipzig, 1933; John Mills, A Fugue in Cycles and 
Bells , New York, 1935; Carlos Chavez, Toward a New Music , New York, 
1937; Arno Huth, Les instruments radio-el ectriques, in La Nouvelle Ency- 
clopedia franqaise (1935), 16, 38-1 ; Mr. John G. MacKenty (RCA) had 
the kindness to look over the electrical section of the book. 
organ : W. H. Barnes, The Contemporary American Organ, 1933 — Atlantic 
City: T. Scott Buhrman, The Greatest Organ in the World, in The American 
Organist XV (1932), p. 467 — Philadelphia: The World's Greatest Organ, 
John Wanamaker, Philadelphia (1917) — Harvard: The American Organist 
XX (1937), p. 165 — G. Donald Harrison, The classical organ in the Ger- 
manic Museum , in Germanic Museum Bulletin I (1938), p. 36. 

TERMINOLOGY 

Victor-Charles Mahillon, Essai de classification methodique de tons les in- 
struments anciens et modernes , in his Catalogue descriptif et analytique du 
Musee Instrumental du Conservatoire Royal de Musique de Bruxelles , 2nd 
edition, Gand, 1893, pp. 1-89 — Erich M. von Hornbostel & Curt Sachs, 




References 487 

Systematik der Instrumentenkunde , in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, XL VI 
(1914) pp. 553-590 — George Montandon, La genealogie des instruments de 
musique et les cycles de civilization, Geneve, 1 91 9 — Andre Schaeffncr, Pro jet 
d'unc classification nouvelle des instruments de musique, in Bulletin du Musee 
d'Ethnologie du Trocadero, no. 1 (1931), pp. 21—25 — A. Schaeffncr, D'une 
nouvelle classification methodique des instruments de musique, in Revue Mu- 
sicale 1932, pp. 21 5-231 — Erich M. von Hornbostel, in his Ethnology of 
African Sound-instruments , in Africa VI (1933), pp. 303— 31 1 — Schaeffner, 
Classification des instruments de musique , in his Origtne des instruments de 
musique, Paris, 1936, pp. 37 I ~ 377 - 




Index 



Aba (oboe), 248 
A bub, 1 19 
Accordion, 406 
Accorl , 303 
Achilliaca , 261 
Aeolian harp, 402-403 
Aeoline, aeolodicoti, 406 
Aerophones, 457 
Jgbafi, 152 
Ajabeba , 247 
Ala; 293, 342 
75, 76 

i Al- t alamot, 116-117, 125 
Albisi, 410 
Albisifono, 410 
‘ytf l-hasminit, 116-117 
Alphorn , 47-48 
Al-saqtra, 337 
Altkornett , 429 
Altobasso, 312 
Alto clarinet, 414 
Alto flute, 410 
Alto horn, 429 
Alto oboe, 383 
76 

Amati, 358 
Atnbubaiae, 119 
“American organ,” 406 
Amulets, 26, 170 
Anafil, 281 
y / nanda lahart , 5 5 
Angklung , 233 
Anna fir, 281 

Anthropology and prehistory, 60-62 
Archlute, arciliuto, 370-372 
Ardablis, 124 



Arficordo, 339, 342 
Ascaules, 141 
y^ror, 117-118 
Aste, 424 
Astor, 422 
Aulos, 138-140 
Axabeba, 247 
Ayacachtli, 194 
Ayelit-haiahar, 125 
Ayon chicuaztlt, 194 
Ayotl, 195 

Babcock, 396, 397 
Bach trumpet, 329, 449 
Baganna , 134 
Bagpipes 

Babylonia, 84 
Israel, 120 
Rome, 141 
India, 154 

Europe, 281-284, 303, 352 
Types, 283 
Bajon, 317 
Bakora, bakura , 152 
Balag-di, 75 
Balag(gu), 75-76 
Balag-lul, 73 
Balalaika, 273 
Bamm, 254 
Bamya, 223, 230 
Battdair, 247 
Banjo, 134, 190, 446 
Barbaf, 135, 161, 253 
Bar biton, 135 

Baritone, Baryton (tuba), 429 
Barker, 444 





Index 



490 

Baryton (viol), 368 
Bassanello, 315 
Bass clarinet, 414 
Bass drum, 435-436 
Basse a -pistons , 429 
Basse- cor, 422 
Basse de viole, 360 
Basse guerriere, 4x4 
Basse-orgue , 414 
Basset-horn, 415, 449 
Basse-tromfette , 422 
Basse-t-ube, 4 1 4 
Bass flute, 410 
Basshorn, 422 
Bassklarinette, 414 
Bassone, 3x7 
Bassoon, 3x5-319, 352 
Bassoon (piano stop), 395 
Bass trumpet, 434 
Bass tuba, 429-430 
Bathyfhon, 414 
BB bass, 430 
Bebung , 334 
Bechstein, 447 
Bell 

Assyria, 71 
Israel, 109 

Far East, x64, 169-170, 209 
Peru, 200 
India, 222 
Southeast Asia, 235 
Europe, 279, 299, 456 
Magics, 109, 170 
Hand bell, 169, 222, 456 
Wooden bell, 200 
Resting bell, 209 
Bell chime 

China, 1 71-172 
Europe, middle ages, 279-280 
— , Baroque, 378-380 
Bergonzi, 359 
Bertolotti, 358 
Bible- regal, 309 
Bin (Egypt), 94 
Bin (India), 224 
BVsa, 2 1 2 
Bis/iur, 212 
Bi<wa, 189 
BiZOS, 447 
Bladder pipe, 283 
Bleyer, 397 
B lock fid te, 309 
BlOhmel, 426 
Board-zither, 463 



Body (stringed instruments), 465 
Body, rhythmical movements of the 
man, 25-26 
Boehm, 408-410 
Boehm flute, 407-410 
Bombarde, 314 
Bombardino , 429 
“Bones** 

Sumer, 69 
Europe, 278 
Bonnang, 241 
Booth, 444 
Boreau, 447 
Bottesini bow, 363 
Bow, 277, 363, 369-370 
Bowed instruments, earliest, 216-2x7 
Bowed organ stops, 386 
Bowing, 277 
Bowl lyre, 465 
Bow-lute, 94 
Box lyre, 465 
“Brass instruments,” 417 
Bridge, 350, 466 
Broadwood, 394, 395 
Bubbolo , 279 
Buccina, 281 
Buffet, 414 
Bugaku bi<wa, 190 
Bugle, 48, 420, 428 
Buisine , 281 

Bull-roarer, 40-43, 53, 61, 63 
Forms, 40-42 
Connotations, 42 
Toy, 43 
Bundfret, 333 
Bunt, 94 
Burt, 210, 228 
Burstyn, 448 
Buschmann, 406, 407 
Busine, busune , 281, 326 
Butt, 315 

Cat dan bao, 54 
Cat dan nguyet, 2 1 8 
Calandrone , 322 
Calpdra , 207 
Campanella, 379 
Cane flute, 390 
dank, 259 
Cano, 258 
Cafistrum, 138 
Caramillo, 288 
Carillon, 378-380 

Tower carillons, 378-379 




Index 



491 



Carillon ( continued ) 

Chamber and orchestra carillons, 379 
Change-ringing, 379-380 
See also Bell chime 
Tartar, 257 
Cascabeles , 308 
Castanets, 103, 455 
Catterini, 414 
Celesta, 379 

Celestial music (India), 159 

Celestina stop, 403 

Cembalo (drum), 289 

Cervelas, 319 

Cerveny, 430 

Cha chiao, 147, 210 

Chalemele , 288 

Chalumeau , 4 1 x 

Change-ringing, 379-380 

Chanot, 361 

Chafeau chinois, 438 

Charamela ( charumela ), 213 

Chekker , 336 

C/ielys , 261 

Cheng, 186 

Chest, 303, 348 

Chicuzen btvja, 190-191 

Chifotiie, 272 

Ch'ih, 178, 213 

Children; see Toy 

Chilitli, 194 

Chime, 456 

Ch l in , 185, 187-188 

ChUng, 168, 209 

Chirimia , 193 

Chitarrone , 370-372 

Chladni, 403 

Chnoue , 100 

Choraula , 141 

Chordophones, 463 

Choristfagolt, 317 

Chorton , 386 

Chorus , 281 

Chromatisches bass horn, 422 
Chrotla , 261, 262 
C/m, 175 
C/&«£, 175 
Chung, 169 
Ch l ung tu, 175 
Ch ( un kuan , 212 
Cimball, organ, 308 
Cimbalom, 258, 293, 446 
Cimbasso, 429 
Cinfonta, 272 
Cinquiesme, 262 



Circumcision, 36, 47, 50, 248 
Ctthara , 262, 263 

Cittern, 345 ’ 347 > 372-374 
Clab't6rgano y 342 
Cl-ACGEl , 403, 426 
Clapper 
Sumer, 69 
Egypt, 88-89, 103 
Greece, 149 
China, 1 74-1 75 
Burma, 236 
Europe, 278 
Terminology, 455 
Clapper drum, China, 173 
Clareta y 328 
Clarinet 

Egypt, 9 1 ~ 9 2 

India, 154 
China, 212 
Europe, 410-415 
Double clarinet, 91-92, 154, 212 
Transpositions, 411 
Organ stop, 441 
Clarinette d? amour, 415 
Clartno , 412 
Clarm trumpet, 328 
Clauss, 347 
Clavecin, 335 
Clavicembalo, 335 
Clavichord, 303, 33 °- 334 , 33 8 , 449 
Wrest plank, 330 
Earliest evidences, 331 
Fingering, 332 
Bundfret, 333 
Character, 334 
Modern, 449 
Clavicylindcr, 403-404 
Clavicymbalum , 339 
Clavicyterium, 342 
Claviorgan, 342-343 
Clavisimbalum, 338 
Clein getgen, 356 
Clubs, 69 
Coqoloctli, 192 
Cohabitation; see Penis 
Cohuilotl , 194 
Colascione, 257 
Color, 48, 50, 164 
Combination stops, 441-442 
Concussion club, 69 
Concussion instruments, 455 
Concussion sticks, 88-89 
Consort, 303 
Contrabasset-horn, 4x5 




Index 



492 

Contrabass tuba, 430 

Contrebasse a fistons, 429 

Contrebasse guerriire , 414 

Cor allemand, 384 

Cor anglais , 384 

Cor anglais (organ stop), 441 

Cornet (valve), 419, 428-432 

Cornet (Zink), 303, 323-325, 449 

Cornet a bouquin, 323 

Cornettino (piston), 428 

Cornettino (Zink), 324 

Como, 384 

Como da tirarsi, 385 

Cornon, 324 

Comop honty 432 

Como tortOy 324 

Cornu, 147 

Cors sarrazinois, 280 

Cortholy 317 

Cosmology and music, 163-164, 171 
Coupler, 441 
Coupleux, 448 
COUSINEAU, 400 
Cramer, 434 
Crescendo pedal, 386, 441 
Crescent, 437*439 
Cristofori, 391-393 
Cromorne, 303, 320-322, 352 
Crook, 426 
Cross flute 
Primitive, 64 
Etruria, 141-142 
India, 159 

Europe, 303, 314, 352, 380-381 
Boehm, 407-410 
Cross-stringing, 397 
Croty 262 
Cruit, 262 
Crvith, 268 
Crystallophone, 456 
Cuiraxezaqua, 192 
Curtaly 315 

Cymbal (organ stop), 306 
Cymbal (triangle), 437 
Cymbals 
Assyria, 71 
Egypt, 103-104 
Israel, 121-123 
Greece, 149 
India, 151, 222-223 
China, 207 
Java, 235 
Burma, 236 



Cymbals ( continued ) 

Europe, 436, 439 
Terminology, 455 
Cymbals (piano stop), 395 
Cymbal-castanets, Egypt, 103 
Cymbals on clappers, 10 3- 104, 123 
Cy mb alum, 279 
Cythara , 262, 263, 274 

Da daikoy 75, 214 

Daera , 229 

Dafy 229 

Dd'ira, 246 

Damamdy 230, 251 

Damaru, 159 

Dafari tappaffai, 149 

Da satin, 254 

Davandai, 159 

Debain, 406 

Denner, 412 

Desfontenelles, 416 

Dessus de viole , 359 

Diapason, 305 

Discus, 149 

Disk, 149, 223 

Dokaku, 210 

Dolcian, 317 

Dombra, 273 

Domed forms, 36 

Dominicus Pisauriensis, 340 

“Double” (virginals, etc.), 308 

Double bass, 363-364 

Double bass clarinet, 4 14-4 15 

Double escapement, 396 

Doucine, 288, 317 

Dragonetti bow, 363 

Drehleier, 273 

Drone 

On reed pipes, 120, 140, 154, 230, 
281-282 

On stringed instruments, 188, 191, 
231, 254, 268, 272, 275, 312, 350 
Drum 

Primitive, 31-36, 53, 62, 63 
Forms, 31-33 
Tubular drums, 31 
Cup-handle drum, 32 
Footed drum, 32 
Goblet drum, 32 
Pottery drum, 3 z 
Frame drum, 33 
Double-headed drum, 33 
Connotations, 34 
Rituals, 35-36 




Index 



493 



Drum ( continued ) 

Legends, 36 
Sumer, 73-78 
Frame drum, 76 
Goblet drum, 77 
Egypt* 9<>-97 
Greece, 148-149 

India, 151-152, XS4-I55> * 57 -* 59 > 
221, 223-224, 229-230 
Axillary, 151-152, 157 
Frame, 154, 229 
Barrel, 154-155, 157-158 
Cylinder, 157-158 
Pair, 158 
Paste, 158 
Clapper, 158, 159 
Hourglass, 158-159 
Java, 235, 236 
Burma, 236 

Far East, 164, 172-174, 214-216 
Grain filled, 172-173 
Barrel, 173, 214 
Braced, 214 
Hourglass, 215-216 
Mexico, 195-196 
Peru, 200-201 
Near East, 246-247, 249 
Europe, middle ages, 288-290 
Barrel, 289 
Cylinder, 289 
Frame, 289 
Lansquenets', 290 

Europe and America, present, 435-436 
Drum chime, 224, 236 
Drum-gong, 233-235 
Drum sticks, 31, 33, 36, 51, 64, 157 
Hooked, 157, 250 
Piano stop, 395 
Dub , 73 
Duddel, 448 
Duff , 246 

Dulce meloSy 343-344 
Dulcian, 352 

Dulcimer, 219, 258-259, 292, 343, 391 

Dulzaina , 288 

Dulzian, 317 

Dumas, 414 

Dundubhih, 153 

Dung, 210 

Du tar, 257 

Earth, 31, 36} see also Pit 
Ebubuy 73 

Echo (organ), 386 



ElCy 293 

Electrophones, 447-449, 467 

Electropneumatic action, 444 

Elymoi, 139 

Emicon, 448 

English action, 394 

English basshorn, 422 

Eptgoneion, 137 

Epinette, 335 

Erard, 396, 400 

Erh huy 217 

Enisy 109 

Escapement, 391 

Eschaquetly 336 

Eschequtery 336 

Espinel, 374 

Esrar, 232 

Estey, 407 

Etherophone, 448 

Ethics and music, 162-163 

Eufonio, 429 

Euphone, 403 

Euphonium, 419, 429 

Evltte & Schaeffer, 415 

Exaquier, 336 

“Extensions,” 28 



Fabfr, 333 
F agotcontray 3 1 7 
Fagotto, 3 1 7 
Fandir, 274 
Fandur , 275 
Fang hiang, 208 
Far pa t 264 
F arrant, 349 
“Father,” 53 
Fean dir, 274 
Fedtlo, 275 
Feldtrompeter , 328 
Fele, 275 
Felttrurhety 328 

Female connotations, 29, 36, 37, 51, 56, 
112, 169, 172, 176, 198, 214, 241. 
See also Vulva. 

Fertility rites, 29, 44, 88, 112, 170. 

See also Rain 
Fiddle 

China, 217-218 
India, 226-227, 2 3 2 
Java, 242 
Near East, 255 
Europe, 274-278 
Etymology, 274-275 




Index 



494 

Fiddle ( continued ) 

Earliest evidences, 275 
Tuning, 276 
Bowing, 277 
Rebec, 278 
Fiddle , 276 

Fidele, 275 
Fidlti, 274, 275 
Fife, 288, 314 
Figuren , 308 
Fingerboard, 466 
Fingerholes, 99-100, 181-182, 458-459 
Fish, 175-176 
Flageol , 287 
Flageolet, 3 13-3 14 
Flajolez, 313 
Flajos , 287 
Flauste , 287 
Flauta, 288 
Flautino, 313 
Flauto , 381 
Flauto dolce, 309 
Flauto ftccolo , 313, 381, 410 
Flex-a-tone, 447 
FltcornOy 428, 429 
Flue, 44, 94 
Flugelhorn, 419, 428 
Flute 

Primitive, 44-47 
Sumer, 71-72 

Egypt, 9°-9« 

Israel, 106 

India, 151, 159, 227-228 
China, 164, 166-167, 178-182, 213- 
214 

C. America, 19 2- 194 
S. America, 198-199 
S. E. Asia, 235 
Near East, 247-248 
Europe, middle ages, 287-288 
— Renaissance, 309-314 
— Baroque, 352, 380-381 
— Present, 407-410 
Beaked flute, 159, 192-194, 248, 309- 
3i4 

Cross flute, 44, 142, 179, 213, 227, 
235 * *87, 3 U, 352 , 380-381, 407- 
410 

Double flute, 228 

Globular flute, 72, 164, 166-167, 199 

Nose flute, 46-47 

Notched flute, 179, 199, 213 

One-handed, 312 

Triple flute, 228 



Flute (< continued ) 

Vertical flute, 44, 71-72, 90-91, 106, 
227, 247 

Whistle flute, 44, 72, 159, 1 92-1 94, 
213, 227, 309-314 
Flute (organ stop), 305, 441 
Flute douce , 309 
Flutety 312 

Fontainf.-Besson, 415, 432 
“Foot,” 304 
Formant, 354-355 
ForfeXy 338 

Forte (piano stop), 394 
Frame drum, 33, 76, 96-97, 148-149, 
154, 229, 246-247, 289 
Franco Ungaro, 341 
Franklin, 404-405 
Free aerophones, 459 
Free reed, 183 

French horn, 424-425, 426, 384, 420 
Fret, 466 
Frichot, 422 
Frick, 405 

Friction idiophones, 457 
Friction instruments 
Tortoise shell, 38-39 
Drum, 39-40, 64 
Rubbed wood, 39 
Friction rods, 402-404 
Friderici, 397 
Fritz, 4 1 3 

Funeral, 36, 39, 43> 45> 47> 5 °, ”9> 
147, 175, 183, 194, 195, 210 
Furniture, 304 
Fuye t 213 



Gaita, 248 
Galoubety 312 
GamakaSy 221 
Gamba; see Viol 
Gambang, 238 
Gamelariy 236 
C rank, 259 
Gargara , 152 
6 a<waq, 248 
Gekkin , 218 
Gemshorn, 306 
Gender , 239 
Genkwan, 218 
Geographic method, 62-63 
German action, 394 
German flute, 287 
Geyer, 363 




Index 



495 



Ghanfdy 222, 235 
Gharty 223 
Ghdtdy 223 

Gi-gid, 72 

Ginera , 102 

Giraffe piano, 398 

Girbal, 246 

Gittit, 125 

Givelet, 448 

Glass harmonica, 404-405 

Glicibartfono, 4x4 

gLtngbu t 228 

Glockenspiel, 379 

Go km, 187 

Gong, 30, 200, 208, 223, 240-241, 456 

Gong chime, 208-209, 236, 241-245 

Gonzalez, 452 

Gopi y antra, 49 

Gourd bow, 57 

Grain measure, 175 

Grand, 334 

Gravicembalo col plan e forte , 393 
Grelle , 288 
Greloty 279 

Grenser, 317, 414, 415 
Grosbotiy 382 
Grosse get gen, 356 
Grosszink, 324 
Ground-harp, 54 * 55 ) 6 3 
Ground-zither, 55-56, 63 
Guarneri, 359 
Guitar, 303, 374*375 
Gunbri, 102 
Gunibri, 103 
Gurlitt, 452 
Gusla , 369 

Hat lo, 210 

Halary, 424 

Halbbass, 363 

Half-zither, 292 

Halhallatu, 72 

Halil, xi 8-1 20 

Halliday, 422 

Halmacyi, 448 

Hammond, 448 

Hammond organ, 448 

Hampel, 424 

Handle, 466 

Hao-Pung, 210 

Hard tilis , 124 

Harmonic fifth , 420 

Harmonics, 134, 140, 188, 290 

Harmonium, 405-407 



Harp 

Sumer, 79-82 
Egypt, 92-96 
Israel, 115-117 
Greece, 135-136 
India, 152, 156 
China, 2x9-220 
Java, 235 
Near East, 259 

Europe, middle ages, 260, 261-264 
— Renaissance, 303 
— Baroque, 352 
— Romanticism, 398-402 
Angular, 79-82, 95 96, 115-117, 135- 
136, 219-220, 259, 263, Europe 
Arched, 79-82, 92-95, 135-136, 15*) 
156) 235 
Chromatic, 401 
Double action, 400 
Footed, 94 
Hooks, 398 

Horizontal, 79-82, 152, 156 
Pedal, 399 
Shoulder, 94 

Vertical, 79-82, 92-96, 115-117, 152, 
156, 219-220, Europe 
Harp (piano stop), 394 
Harpa (Swedish), 268 
Harpichordum , 339 
Harpsichord 

Until 1600: 302, 334-344 
Types and terms, 335 
Earliest evidences, 336 
Echiquier, 336-337 
Scaliger, 338 

Harpsichord in a narrower sense, 337- 
339 ) 34 ° 

Single and double strings, 340-341 
Stops, 341 
Combinations, 342 
After 1600: 375-378 
The Antwerp School, 375 
The two keyboards, 376 
The pedals, 377-378 
Modern, 449 
Harrison, 452-453 
HafOfra , 112-113 
Hautbois, 382 
Hautbois d* amour, 383 
Hautbois du Poitou, 323 
Hautecontre , 362 
Hawaiian guitar, 447 
Hawkins, 396, 398 
Hayward, 377 




Index 



496 



Healing t 50 

Hebenstreit, 19 x 

HeckeL) 41 5 

HELBERGER) 448 

Helicon) 430-431 

Hellertion, 448 

Hi mat haliltm, 121 

Hersumper , 290 

Hessel, 405 

Heteroglottic, 58 

Hichiriki, 212, 323 

Hieronymus Pisauriensis, 341 

H inter satz, 306 

Hirdolis , 124 

Hochrucker, 400 

Hooked trumpet, 146 

Hopkinson, 405 

Hopper, 391 

Horn, 210 

Horn, 73, 83, 1 10-112, 228, 280, 303, 
384, 419 
Hornpipe, 212 
Hotteterre, 381 
Hsiao, 178 
Hstian, 1 66 
Hutmcar, 200 
Huayra-puhura , 197 
Hu Min, 2 1 7 
Huehuetl , 195 
Hu hu , 217 
Hui, 438 
Hut hu, 217 
Huilacapitztli, 192 
Hultze glechter, 439 
Hurdy-gurdy, 271-273 
Oldest type, 271 
Later type, 272 
Hydraulis, 143-145 



lba, 89 

I chi-gen-kin, 186 
Idiochordic, 56 
Idioglottic, 58 
Idiophones, 455 
Idutun, 125 
Imhubu, 73 

Initiation, 40, 42, 45, 56. See also Cir- 
cumcision 

Instromento piano e forte, 341 
Instrumento in Ottawa, 341 
Instruments bas et hauts, 264, 382 
“Invention” of instruments, 25 
Inventionshom, 426 



* Irdqla , 212 

Iron frame, 396 

Jack, 334, 33*> 343 
Jamisen, 219 
Janissaries' music, 436 
Janssen, 414 

Jar» 

Jataga, 186 

Jaws’ harp, 58-59, 64, 210, 299 
Jazzo-flute, 447 
Jews' harp} see Jaws’ harp 
Jhinjha, 223 

Jingle, 109, 200, 279, 456 
Jingles (organ stop), 308 
Jordan, 386 
JUVICNY, 313 

Kaca vtna, 232 
Kacchapi vtna, 232 
Kakko, 214, 215 
Kal ko, 215 
Kamanga a'guz, 255 
Kamanga farh, 255 
KamSnga rumt, 275 
Kamanga sogair , 255 
Kammerbass, 363 
Kammerton , 386 
Kammertrompeter, 328 
K antsy a, 223 
Kanon, 257 
Kao, 75 
Kapsel, 393 
Karkari , 153 
Kamyx, 147 
Kartdl, 71 
Katral, 71 
Kenthorn, 421 
Kerar, 134 
Keren, 110 

Kettledrum, 229-230, 249-251, 329 
330, 434-435 

Key (flute), 310, 407, 414 
Key (keyboard), 285 
Keyboard, 332, 375 
Key bugle, 420-421 
Keyed guitar, 347 
Key trumpet, 420 
Khol, 155 
Khoradhak, 251 
Kin, 187 
Kinnari, 225 
Kinnari vtnd, 232 




Index 



497 



Kinnor , 106-108 
Kinyra , 107 
Kirckman, 395 
Kit, 178 

Kithara, 130-135 

Kit harts , 130 

Klaffenhorn, 424 

Kleine geigen, 356 

Kleinztnk, 324 

Klose, 414 

Klotz, 359 

K nrvr, 102 

Koboz, kobus , 252 

Kobyz , 227 

Kolbfl, 422 

Ko-pffltn-regal, 309 

Kohl, 4 1 5 

Kombu, 148 

Kontunko, 187 

Kortholt, 317 

Koto, 133, 187 

Krotalon , 149 

Kroufalon , 149 

Krummhortt , 320 

Ku (drum), 172 

Ku (lute), 218 

Kuan , 176, 178, 179-180, 212 

Ku Min, 210 

Kum, 187 

K'ung hu , 2x9 

Kyo fang ko, 75 

Labor and music, 88-89 
La Min, 217 
Lamnascah , 125 
Lancer, 448 

Languages of instruments, 37, 50, 240 

La fa (clarinet), 212 

La fa (trumpet), 210 

Lath-zither, 463 

Launedda, 91 

Lazarus, 317, 416 

Lefebvre, 414 

Leier, 272, 276 

Leierkasten, 273 

Lertes, 448 

Lilts, 77 

Ling, 169 

Lira, 275 

Lira da braccio, 350 
Lira da gamba, 350 
Lirone, 350 

Lithophone; see Stone chime 
Lituus , 146 



Liuto ( at)tiorbato , 372 
Lo, 208 

Long joint, 315 
Long octave, 333 
Lot, 414 
Love, 45 
Lovelace, 361 
Lit , 176-177 

Lunar, see Moon ceremonials 
Lupot, 359 
Lur, 147-148 
Lute 

Babylonia, 82-83 
Egypt, 102-103 
Greece, 136-137 
India, 159-161, 231-232 
China, 189-191, 218-219 
Java, 235-236 
Near East, 251-256 
Europe, 273-274, 303, 344-345 
Lute-stop, 376 
Lyra, 276 
Lyraflugel, 398 
Lyra viol, 348 
Lyra-<vuay, 348 
Lyre 

Sumer, 78-79 
Egypt, 1 00- 1 02 
Israel, 1 06-1 08 
Greece, 129-135 
Europe, 260, 264-268 
On Irish crosses, 262 
Area, 264-265 
Types, 266 

Alemanmc and Sibeiian, 267-268 
Survivals, 268 
Lyro-viol, 348 

M’abuba, 119 
Magadis, 136 
Macer, 448 
Macgini, 358 
Magrefha, 124 
Magudi, 154 
Mahalat , 125 
Mahillon, 383 

Male connotations, 36, 50, 53, 112 
169, 172, 176* *98, 2 i 4 > 141 
See also Penis 
Maltlu, 72 
Mandira, 223 

Mandola , mandora, 252-253 
Man’s taboo, 50 
Marimba, 54 




498 



Index 



Marius, 391, 397 
Marriage, 50 
Martenot, 448 
Martin, 406 
Masak, 154 
Mason & Hamlin, 407 
Masroqita, 83 
Ma't, 90, 98 
M aflat, 254 
Matna, 254 
Mayuri, 232 
Mazhar, 246 
Mazucchi, 405 
Media ala , 342 
Medicinale , 258 
Medio cano, 292 
Megaphone, 47 
Melophone, 406 
Membranophones, 459 
Men , 107 
Meo canno, 258 
Mefi, 73 

Metallophone, 149-150, 208, 239, 456 
Micanon, 258, 292 
Midmer-Losh, 451 
Milk, 36 
Miller, 448 
Minritm, 107 
Mirliton, 462 
Mixture, 304 
Mizhar, 246 
M na < an‘im, 1 2 1 
Mo kugyo , 1 75 
Mollenhauer, 414 
Monochord, 268-271 
Test instrument, 268-270 
Musical instrument, 270-271 
Polychordic, 270-271 
Moon ceremonials, 30, 36, 37, 50, 51, 
110 

Moritz, 430 
Mortars, 29 
“Mother,” 37, 53 
Mouth bow, 57 
Mouth organ (Asia), 182-184 
Chords, 183 
Prototypes, 183-184 
Mouth organ (Europe), 62, 406 
Mouthpieces, 418 
Mrdanga , 155, 235 
Mfiltayim, 121-122 
MOller, I., 413 
MOller, M., 398 
Mugnt, mughni, 138, 258 



Mu ko, 75 
Mundharmonika, 406 
Musette (bagpipe), 283 
Musette (oboe), 384 
Musical bow, 56-57, 63 
Separate resonator, 57 
Gourd bow, *7 
Mouth bow, 57 
Musical box, 456-457 
Musical glasses, 404 
Musiqal, 247 
Mustaq sini, 183 
Mustel, 397 
Mute (trumpet), 328 
Mute (violin), 354 
Mut-leben, 125 
Mu yii, 175 

Nabla , 115 

Nacaires , naccheroni , 251 
Nachthorn , 386 
Nafir , 281 
Ndgard , 230, 251 
N agasuram , 230 
Nag’s head swell, 386 
Nahabat , 229 
Nailing, 173 
Nail piano, 403 
Nail violin, 403 
NakerSy 251 

Naqqar ( y ) a , 251 
Naqrazdn , 251 
Naresyuh , 268 
N*V, 2 47 
N ebel ■ see Nivel 
Neck, 466 
Neo-Bechstein, 447 
Nernst, 447 
Neuschel, 322 
Nivel , 11 5-1 17 
Ngina , 125, 127 
Nhilot , 125 
Nicholson, 407 
Nicolai, 405 
Nicolo , 314 
Ni - daiko , 159 
Ni - gen - kin , 186 
Night, 36 
Niqafmon , 109 
NkungUy 57 
Nolan, 407 
Norman, 359 
Nose flute, 46-47, 64 
Novachord, 448 




Index 



499 



Nuzha , 138 
Nvalim , 1 1 5 

Oboe 

Sumer, 72-73 
Babylonia, 83 
Egypt* 9 8 ‘ 100 

Israel, 118-120 
Greece, 138-140 
China, 212-213 
India, 230-231 
Burma, 236 
Near East, 248-249 
Europe, 352, 382-384, 449 
Oboe (organ stop), 441 
Oboe da caccia , 383 
Oboe d'amore , 383, 449 
Ocarina, 167 

Octave (organ stop), 304 
Octobasse, 363 
O daiko , 75 
Olifhant, 280 
Olmaitl , 195 
Omichicahuaztli , 194 
Omnitonic horn, 426 
Ondes musicales, 448 
Ophicleidc, 424 
Orchestras, 236-237 
Organ 

Israel, 124 
Greece, 143-145 
Europe, middle ages, 284-286 
Until 1000 a. D., 284 
After 1000 A. D., 285 
Keyboard, 286 
Renaissance, 303, 304-308 
Mixture organ, 304 
Solo stops, 305 
Pitch, 306 

English and Italian organs, 307 
“Figuren,” 308 
Baroque, 386 
Choir organ 
Great organ 
Pedal 

Praetorius organ 
Romanticism, 440-444 
Twentieth century, 451-453 
“The World’s Greatest Organ,” 451 
The new ideals: Silbermann and 
Praetorius, 452 
Organistrum, 271, 272 
6 rgano lleno , 305 
Orpharion, Orphcoreon, 374 



Ottava stesa , 333 
Ottu , 230 
Overblowing, 418 
Overstrung scale, 397 

Pa'amon, 109 
P l at hsiao , 177 
Pairs, 52-53 
Pakhavaja, 230 
Pamphilon, 359 
Panctar , 257 
Pandore, 352, 373-374 
Pandur, 274 
Pandura , 137 
Panduri, 275 
Pandurion, 252 
Pang, 209 
Pang ku, 149 
Pan-pipes 

Primitive, 62 
Greece, 142-143 
China, 164, 177-178 
Peru, 197-198 
Near East, 247-248 
Europe, 288 
Types, 177 
Pan-tur , 82 
Pavilion c/iinois, 438 
Pedal 

Harpsichord, 377 
Organ, 304 
Piano, 394 
Pedal drum, 434-435 
Pedal-Klavtztmbel, 378 
Peg, 466 
Pektis, 136 
Pelog, 237-238 

Penis, 29, 36, 37, 40, 43, 44, 47, 50, 

5U 56* >75 
Penna, 293 
Pcnorcon, 374 
Perrot, 336 
Pestle, 29 
Phallic ; see Penis 
Phorbeia, 138 
Phorminx, 130 
Phys harmonica, 406 
Pianino, 398 
Piano, 391-398 
Invention, 391 
Diagrams, 392 
The German School, 393 
Stops, 394 

The English School, 395 




500 

Piano ( continued ) 

The Viennese School, 395 
The French School, 396 
The American School, 397 
The upright, 398 
Piano (stop), 394 
Piano droit , 398 
Pibgorn , 212 
Piccolo 

Flute, 410 
Cornet, 428 
Pien ch*ing , 169 
Pien chung , 172 
Piffero, 288 
P*in, 224 
P*i f'a, 189 

Pipes, oriental manner of blowing, 91 
Pirouette , 319 
Pisa , 2 1 3 

PlSAURIENSIS, D., 340 
PlSAURIENSIS, H., 341 
Piston 

Cornet, 428 
Valve, 426 
Pit, 28, 29, 36, 37, 39, 43, 52, 53, 54, 
561 63 

Pitch, 165, 349, 386-387, 390-391 

Pitch-pipes, 176-177 

Pizzicato, 357 

Planters* sticks, 1 94 

Plectra (spinet), 338 

Plectrun (harp), 263 

Plein jeu, 305 

Plucked idiophone, 456 

Pneumatic action, 444 

Pneumatic lever, 444 

Po, 207 

Pochette , 278 

Po fu, 172 

Polische geigen , 356 

Pommer , 314 

Pomposa, 367 

Portative organ, 286-287 

Posaune, 281, 326 

Positive organ , 308 

Post horn, 428 

Pottery, 51 

Praetorius organ, 452-453 
Prasarini vina, 232 
Prellmechanik , 393-394 
Prestant, 306 
Principal, 305 
Principal trumpet, 328 
Progress and Regression, 60 



Index 

Psalterion , 136 

Psalterium, 262. See also Nevel 
Psalterium decachordum, 1 1 8 
Psaltery, 292 
Psantrin , 83, 116 
P sill, 1 01, 108, 134 
Pungacuqua, 194 

Pungiy 154 

Pyramid piano, 398 

Qanun y 138, 257 
Qarndy 83 
Qarnuy 73 
Qasa'y 249 
Qafabay 91, 247 
QatroSj 83 
Qisaby 247 
Qi tardy 253 
QithorOy 257 
Quinte y 362 
Quinton, 361 
Quiquiztlty 194 
QufuZy 252 
Qua&bay 91, 247 

Rababy 242, 253 
Rabab al-moganniy 255 
Rabdb assaHr , 255 
Rabiy 278 
Raboby 161 

Rack, 334 
Rackety 319 

Radioelectric instruments, 467 
Radio organ, 448 
Rain, 38, 42, 50, 170, 175, 194 
Rana srnga } 1 44, 228 
Rang, 208 

Ranket, 319-320, 352 
Ranket (organ stop), 386 
Rafa , 210 
Rattle 

Primitive, 26-28, 61, 63, 64 
Strung, 26-27, 61 
Bunch, 26-27 
Gourd, 27-28 
Basket, 28, 64 
Sumer, 70, 71 
Israel, 121 
India, 151 
Mexico, 194 
Peru, 200 
Terminology, 456 
Rauschpfeife, 323, 352 




Index 



501 



Rauschquinte, 323 
Ravalement, 376 
Rebab , 242 
Rebec, 356 
Rebec , 277 

Recorder, 287, 303, 309-312, 381, 450 

Reed pipes , see Clarinet and Oboe 

Regal, 308-309 

Regibo, 422 

Register (organ), 305 

Rejong y 242 

Req, 247 

“Rheita,” 248 

Rib, 466 

Ribbon reed, 38, 63 
Rice ceremonials, 29, 38 
Richard, 451 
Rigol, 308 
Ring-key, 407, 414 
Rollic, 405 
Rollschweller , 441 
Rommelpot, 40 
Ronker , 40 
Rorphije, 288 
Rose, 373 
Rota , 262 
Rotta, 262 
Rotumbes , 289 
Round forms, 36 
Rubab, 138 

Rubbed idiophonc, 38-40, 457 
Rubebe, 277 
Ruckers, 375-376 



Sabbaba, 247 
■ Sabka, 83 
Sackbut , 326 
Sacqueboute , 326 
Sadtu, 224 
Sage-koto , 186 
Sa/iib-nahabat, 229 
Saldfil, 1 2 2 
Salend.ro , 237 
Salistm, 123 
Salo, 358 
Salpinx, 145 
Salterio tedesco, 292 
Saltirsanch , 262 
Sambuca, sambyke, 83, 136 
Sanayt , 230 
Sand drum, 31 
259 

San-gen-kin, 186 



Sangkultap, 268 
Sa» hsien, 219 
Sank/ta, 153, 157, 235 
Santir, 258 
Santig, 123 
Sarangi , 226-227 
Sarinda, 226 
Sarod , 1 6 1 
Saron, 239 
Sa to/, 242 
Satsuma biiua, 190 
Saukttka vina, 232 
Sautermeister, 414 
Savart, 361 
Sax, 414, 416, 432 
Saxhorn, 432 
Saxophone, 41 5-417 
Saxotromba, 432 
Scabellum, 149 

Scale (organ), 3051 (piano), 397 

Schachtbret, 337 

Sc be lien, 279 

Schlotter , 279 

SCHNITGER, 452 

SCHNITZER, 315 

SCHREIBER, 317, 326 

Schreyende pfeiffen, 322 

SCHROTER, 391 

Schryari , 322-323, 352 

SCHUNDA, 417 

Schweitzer, 452 

Schweizer pfeiff, 314 

Scraper, 43, 61, 63, 176, 194-195* 2 99 

Sehetn, 89 

Sei teki, 213 

Selfltm, 1 2 1-122 

Sent, Semsal, 7 2 

Semanterion, 278 

Semitones, 332 

Serpent, 420-422 

Serranae , 139 

Seseset, 89 

Setar, 257 

Sex connotations, 51-52. a/jo Fe- 
male, Male, Penis, Vulva 
Shaken idiophones, 456 
Shaku hachi, 213 
S kalis him, 123 
Ska lo, 208 
Shamanic rites, 27, 33 
Shamisen , 219 
Shawm, 303, 314-3*5 
She, 185-186 
Shell, 465 




502 



Index 



Shell trumpet 

Primitive, 48-50, 53, 62, 63 
Assyria, 73 

India, 151, 152, 156-157 
Mexico, 194 
Peru, 201 
Far East, 210 
Java, 235 
Sheng, 182 
Sho, 182 
Shofar, 110-112 
Short octave, 333 
Shuang c/i'in, 218 
Shudi, 395, 441 
Sibs, 248 
Side drum, 435 
Signals, 37 
Si-itrty 73 
Silbador, 199 

SlLBERMANN, 386, 387, 393, 452 
Sil-sily 122 
Stmikion, 137 
Simiot, 414 

Simpli filiations system, 440-44 1 
Swipunta, 120 
Singing saw, 446 
“Single,” 308 

Sistrum, 69-70, 89-90, 121, 456 
Sitdr , 231 

Sixtccn-foot, 377, 450 
Skorra, 414 

Slafaly 1 21 
SlendrOy 237 
Slide (trombone), 325 
Slide trumpet, 384-385 
Slit-drum, 29-31, 37, 53, 63, 175, 1 
Prototype, 29-30 
Forms, 30 
Connotations, 37 
Snare, 289 
Snb, 100 
Sobaba, 247 
Sodi, 375 
Sodtna , 182 
So far, 1 10-t 12 
Solar; see Sun 
Sotta, 213 
So-no-koto, 186 
Sonorous stone; see Stone 
Sordone, 317-318 
S or dun, 319 
Sosantm, 125 
Soundboard, 466 
Soundholes, 350, 466 



Sourdine, 319 
Sousa, 431 
Sousaphone, 431 
Spharophon, 448 
Spielmann, 447 
Spike fiddle, 242, 255 
Spinet, 302, 334-344 
Types and terms, 335 
Earliest evidences, 336 
Echiquier, 336-337 
Scaliger, 338 

Spinet in a narrower sense, 339-340 
Combinations, 342 
Spinettino, 340 
Square piano, 393, 395, 397 
* r , 97 

Sruti , 154, 230 
Staff a, 437 
Stainer, 359 

Stamped idiophones, 29, 456 
Stamping idiophones, 28-29, 53, 63, 
456 

Stegereif, 437 
Stein, 390, 393-394> 395 
Steinway, 390, 397 
Stick (neck), 4 66 
Sticks (concussion), 88-89 
Stick-zither, 224-226, 235 
Stimmwerk, 304 
Stodart, 398 
Stolzel, 426 
Stosser, 394 

Stone, 164, 168-169, 200 
Stone chime, 169 
Stop 

Organ, 144-145, 286-287, 305, 440- 
441 

Harpsichord, 341, 376-377 
Piano, 394 

Stopping (French horn and trumpet), 
424-425 

Stossmechanik, 393, 394 

Stowasser, 430 

Stradivari, 358-359 

Strata of primitive instruments, 63-64 

Straw fiddle, 440 

Streicher, 395 

Streitwolf, 414, 422 

Stringholder, 466 

Strings, 107, 131, 226, 466-467 

Stumpff, 434 

Su gu galli, 73, 74 

Su hu, 217 

Sultng, 182 




Index 



503 



S umber , 289 
tumponia, 121 
Sumponiah, 84 
Sun, 47 

Superpiano, 447 
Surle, 249 
Suma, 213, 230 
Surndy, 213 
Surndy a, 248 
Suru-nai, 213 
Sutri-nahabat , 229 
Swanee-sax, 447 
Swegel, 287 
Swell, 394 

Sympathetic strings, 227, 255, 272, 366 

Symphonei , 341 

Symphoneia, 84, 120 

Symfhonia (hurdy-gurdy), 272 

Symphonia (drum), 288 

Syrinx , 142 

Tabid (India), 223, 230 
Tab l al-gavuig , 251 
Tabl al-markab, 250 
T abl al-saivts, 251 
Tabl b a la dt, 248 
Tabl tnigri , 251 
Tabl sdmi, 25 1 
7'a*/ turkiy 249 
Tabor , 289, 312 
Tabourtn, 329 
“Tab rets,” 109 
Tabul (=tabl), 249 
Ta hu ch { in y 217 
Taille, 362 
T ( ai ping Hsiao , 213 
Ta*. 247 
Tdl, 71 

Tala , 223, 235 
Tambaffam y 154, 229 
Tambourin , 289, 312 
Tambourin du Bearn , 312 
“Tambourine,” 33 
Tamburi, 232 
Tanbur y 255, 256 
Taw 217 

Tangent, 330 
Tangentenfliigel, 344 
T‘«o A«, 173 
Tar, 256 
Tdrogato , 417 
Tar(a), 250 
Taskin, 396 



Tavil, 215 

Tayus, 232 

Tbn, 97 

,< Tebuni y ,> 94 

Tecciztli, 194 

Temmeffama, 154 

Temperament, 332 

Temple , 289 

Tenor clarinet, 414 

Tenor drum, 435 

Tenor horn, 429 

Tenoroon, 317, 416 

Tenor violin, 357, 362, 368 

Teponaztli , 195 

Tepuzquiquiztliy 194 

Theewes, 342 

Theorboe, 372 

Theremin, 448 

Thereminvox, 448 

Ti, 178 

Tibbu, 76 

Tibia, 138 

T i i ch l in y 217 

Tielke, 366 

Tiger, 176 

Ti-gi, 7 1 
Tigiiy 72 
Ttkdra , 230, 251 
Timbre(t) y 289 
Timbutu, 76 
Tirucinnam, 153-154 
Ti /rtf, 213 
Tjangkun , 209 
Tjapara , 207 
Tjtng, 208 
Tlalpa huehuetl , 196 
Tlapitzalli , 192 
To/, 108-109 
To*, 175 
“Tom-tom,” 30 
Torban , 372 
Toumebout , 322 
TOURTE, 3S9, 370 

Toy, 28, 38, 43, 71, 151, 166, 167, 
1 73 > 299 

Transposing instruments, 411 

Transverse flute; Cross flute 

Trautonium, 448 

Trautwein, 448 

Traversa , 381 

Tremulant, 306, 386 

Trepie, 437 

Triangle, 437 

Triangle (piano stop), 395 




504 



Index 



Trtchordon, 137 
Trigonon , 136 
Tro khrner , 242 
Tromba, 326 
Trotnba da tirarsi , 385 
Trombetta , 281 
Trombone, 303, 325-327 
Organ, 306 
Trombone, 4x9, 434 
Trontpe (organ stop), 306 
Trompette marine , 292 
Trough, 164, 175 
Trumpet 

Primitive, 47-50, 63, 64 

Babylonia, 83 

Egypt, 1 00 

Israel, 112-113 

Greece, 145-148 

India, i 53 -i 54 » * 56 -i 57 » 228 

Mexico, 194 

Peru, 201-202 

China, 2 10-2 12 

Java, 235 

Europe, middle ages, 280-281 
Renaissance, 328-329 
Baroque, 384-385 
Present, 419, 43 *"434 
Transverse trumpet, 48, 64 
See also Shell trumpet 
Trumpet (organ stop), 306, 441 
Trumpet marine , 292 
Trumscheit, 290-292 
Tshaing vaing, 224 
Tsuri daikoy 214 
Tsuzumi, n$ 

Tuba (Roman), 145 

Tuba, 419, 429-430 

Tuba mirabilis, 441 

Tubecta, 281 

Tube-2ither, 186 

Tui hsiaOy 212 

Titnava, 153 

Tung hsiaOy 180, 213 

Tuning forks, 403 

Tuning paste (India.), 155 

Tupim, 108 

Turkish drum, 435 

Turkish music, 436-437 

Turkish music (piano stop), 395 

Turya, 228 

Tympana y 329 

Tympanon, 148 

Tympanum t 290 



Uby ub-tubur } ub-zabar } 73 

‘ Od, 253 

Udukkai, 159 

'Ugdby 106 

Una corda t 394 

Unda marisy 92 

Ungaro, Franco, 341 

Upright harpsichord, 334, 341-342 

Upright piano, 397-398 

Urquhart, 359 

Utricularium, 141 

Valves, 425-428 
Invention, 426 
Inaccuracy, 427 
V amity 159 
Vana, 152 
Venetian swell, 441 
Vena, 152 
Vetter, 400 
Vibrato, 191, 357 
Viele, 275 
Viele a roue , 272 
Viennese action, 394 
ViERLING, 447 
Vihuela , 274, 345 
V*nd, 94> *53> *5 6 > 224-225, 235 
Viol, 303, 347 - 35 °, 449 
Families, 347 
Sizes, 348 

Manner of playing, 349 
Soundholes and bridge, 350 
Viola, 356, 361-362 
Viola, 274 
Viola bas tarda, 348 
Viola da braccio , 347 
Viola da gamba; see Viol 
Viola da gamba (organ stop), 386 
Viola d'amore, 364-367, 449 
Viola da spalla, 363 
Viola paredon, 368 
Viola pomposa , 367-368 
Viole d? amour, 3 66, 367 
Violetta , 356, 362 
Violin, 302, 352, 353-361 (364) 
Parts, 353-354 
Sound, 354-355 
Origin, 355-357 
Pizzicato and vibrato, 357 
Italian School, 358-359 
French School, 359 
English School, 359 
German School, 359 




Index 



505 



Violin ( continued ) 

Struggle against the viols, 360 
Innovations, 361 
Violin (organ stop), 441 
Violino alia francese , 358 
Violino or dinar to, 358 
Vtoltno piccolo , 358, 449 
Violino fomfoso, 368 
Violoncello, 360, 362 
Violoncello a cinque corde , 362 
Violoncello piccolo , 362, 449 
Violoney 362 
Virginal, 303, 335 
Virginity test, 45-46, *43 
VOGLER, 440*44* 

Vuhudendung, 57 
VUILLAUME, 363 
Vulva, 29, 36, 37, 50, 51 

W alsche geigen, 356 

Wagner-tuba, 432 

Wagon y 186 

Walcker, 451, 452 

Waldhorn, 375 

Waldteufely 40 

Walkingstick flute, 390 

Water, 37, 42, 50, 52. See also Rain 

Water organ, 143**45 

Weidincer, 422 

Whistling pot, 199 

Wieprecht, 429 

Wilde, 402-403 

Willis, 451 

Wind instruments, 457 

Wing, 315 

With horn, 38 

Wol kunty 218 

Women as players 

Primitive, 28, 29, 36, 50, 51, 53, 
54, 56 

Egypt* 94* 97* *0* 

Israel, 108 

Greece, 135, 136, 149 
India, 151, 156, 157 
China, 163 



Women as players ( continued ) 

S. E. Asia, 238 
Near East, 246 
Europe, 401, 405 

Women’s taboo, 36, 38, 42, 48, m 
Wood ham, 385 
Wurubumba , 57 

Xylophone, 53-54* 64* *38**39* 439 
440, 456 

Xylophone (organ stop), 306 
Ya chengy 217 

Yaky 181 

Yarnato fuye , 213 
Yamato koto , 186 
Yang cb'in, 219, 259 

Yo, *78 

Yoko fuye , 213 
Yondt illem rhaqim, 125 
Yu, 176 
Ytiehy 178 
YiieJt ck‘in, 218 
Yun lo, 208 

Zakina, 254 
Zanza, 456 
Zaqqal, 268 
Ziehharmonika , 406 
Ztl, 122 
Zimbely 279 
Zink , 323-325 
Zir, 254 
Zither 

Israel, 117-118 
Greece, 137-138 
China, 133, 164, 185-188 
Near East, 247-249, *57**58 
Europe, 292-293 
Terminology, 463 
Zummara , 92 
ZUMPE, 395 
Zuqra , 248 
Zy mb els tern, 308 




'Books That J^ive 

The Norton imprint on a 
book means that in the 
publisher’s estimation it 
is a book not for a single 
season but for the years. 



W • W • NORTON fc? CO • INC. 

70 FIFTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK 





