Good crowd here tonight. Good crowd.
&gt;&gt; Robbie, you've been here several times
with us before and now you've you've
brought your friend Cornell. Tell us
just a little bit how did the two of you
&gt;&gt; meet and become friends. Just give us a
little bit of the background on that.
&gt;&gt; Well, I'd be very happy to do that, uh,
Paul, but first I want to say what a joy
and a blessing it is to be back at
Brigham Y Young University. Um, as I
said to Elder Cook and uh, Sister Cook
at uh, dinner, when I come to this
university, I feel like I'm coming home.
And uh, I want to thank you for for
that. That is just such a precious thing
uh, in my life. Uh and of course I uh
come at a time uh when this university
and the entire Latter-day Saints
community is grieving the loss of two
towering towering men who I'm very proud
to say were friends of mine. of course,
President Nelson, uh the first church
authority I ever met
&gt;&gt; uh when he uh came to Princeton, he was
serving at that point on the quorum of
the 12 uh came to Princeton to a meeting
that I had called on marriage and
rebuilding the marriage uh culture. And
I could tell straight away that this uh
medical man was a man of profound
wisdom, learning of course, but also
wisdom. Not just smart, wise.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. and I appreciated very much uh the
honor of his friendship. And then of
course dear dear dear Jeffrey
&gt;&gt; Jeffrey Holland who I got to know
through his son Matt when Matt and Paige
were with us at Princeton for a year
when now Elder Holland.
It's kind of hard for me to say because
I think of him as a kid. Elder Holland
was a visiting fellow of the James
Madison program American ideals and
institutions. And we were so delighted
to have Matt with us for a year and then
to see him, you know, go on to such
great things, including the presidency
of one of your sister universities, Utah
Valley University, and of course now to
his role on the uh on the 70. And this
is also a very special place, the
Wheatley Institution, because it has
given me a couple of my dearest friends
in the world. talking about Emily
Reynolds and Richard Williams, dear dear
dear people and great defenders of the
family and uh comrades in in arms really
for me and I'm just so blessed by their
friendship and blessed to be back. Then
there's so many others. I probably
should not name a lot of names because
then you always forget people. But of
course, my beloved former student Danny
Frost uh is is here and it was such a
pleasure having him as one of my
doctoral uh uh mentees and it's a super
special treat to be able to bring my
beloved brother Cornell West out here
with me uh this time.
&gt;&gt; I'm blessed. I'm blessed to be here. I'm
blessed. I appreciate you.
Now, Brother Cornell and I first met, I
want to say the early 1990s, or could it
have been the late 80s? So, I was
already at Princeton, but I was just a
very junior, very obscure person just
starting out. Cornell West, who had been
at Yale, was was recruited by Princeton,
and he was already Cornell West, so he
wasn't some obscure figure. uh so uh he
came along to Princeton he joined our uh
faculty brought luster uh to our faculty
and uh because he is interested in the
same subject matters that I'm interested
in
&gt;&gt; moral and political philosophy religion
ethics and so forth uh we ended up in
faculty seminars together sponsored by
our politics department our philosophy
department our religion department our
university center for human values as we
call it at uh at at Princeton
And uh I always admired brother Cornell
as I said in the podcast uh today um
even when I thought he was getting the
wrong answers
which was most of the time.
He was the brother. He was the guy in
the room who was asking the right
questions. We academics
&gt;&gt; Matt you tell me if I'm lying. We
academics,
we get so specialized and so deeply into
the arcana of academic things that we
can get hung up on little issues, little
things, the the details, you know, how
you translate a particular word in this
paragraph of Aristotle's Nikamakian
ethics or something like that. But these
seminars that we were in jointly were
supposed to be on the big topics. After
all, they're sponsored by the Center for
Human Values. We were supposed to be
talking about justice and human rights
and human dignity and we ended up
talking about arcane little translation
issues and so forth. But it was always
Cornell who would bring us back to the
subject matter because he knew that's
what really mattered. How we treat each
other as human beings, how we lead our
lives, do we have a relationship with
them more than merely human with a
transcendent source of meaning and uh
and value. So I always admired Cornell
although we were for more than a decade
I would think it's fair to say friendly
acquaintances rather than friends much
less brothers and then one day
in my office hours
a student who was both Cornell's student
and my student Andrew Pormother
&gt;&gt; Brother Andrew
&gt;&gt; came to visit me and he said professor
George I have a favor to ask and I said
well certainly Andrew what is it? He
said, "Well, some of my fellow students
and I are starting a new magazine. It's
going to be called The Green Light, and
it's going to be a magazine of culture,
arts, politics, literature, a kind of
campus version of The New Yorker."
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; I don't know if Brigham Young kids do
this. Princeton kids do this kind of
stuff.
&gt;&gt; And I said, "Well, that sounds very
interesting." And he said, "Well, in
each issue, we want to have a feature
that is one professor interviewing
another professor. We'd like to begin
with the inaugural issue.
And so we've reached out to Professor
Cornell West to ask him if he would be
the interviewer for the first
edition of this feature.
&gt;&gt; And we asked, he said he'd be willing to
do that. And then we asked him who he'd
like to interview. And he said he'd like
to interview you. So would you be
willing to be interviewed by Professor
West?
And I said, "Now Andrew, let me get this
straight. You told Professor West that
he could choose anybody on our entire
fac all these Nobel Prize winners, all
these big you could anybody on the
faculty to interview and he would like
to interview me. And Andrew said, "Yes,
he would." And I said, "Well, I want you
to send a message back to Professor
West. I want you to tell Professor West
that Professor George says, "But it is I
who should be seeking baptism from you."
To which Andrew says, religion major by
the way. to which Andrew says, "Huh,
brilliant." You know, 1560 SATs, A, but
we got a little biblical outside of
Brigham Y Young, we have little biblical
literacy problem with our young. It's
all right. We're working on it.
&gt;&gt; True.
&gt;&gt; So, so he said, "Well, okay, I'll tell
him that, but but will you do it?" And I
said, "Of course I do. I'm very honored
to do it." Well, the day came and u it
was at my office and here came Andrew.
He had a photographer with him. must
have snapped 2,000 pictures. And uh
those are the days when you had
photographers. You didn't have these
cameras. And uh uh Andrew had a
cassette. You remember the kids? You
have to explain to the youngsters
cassette tape recorder.
And it had a little tape in it and uh it
would go for a half hour then you'd have
to flip it over. So we were planning an
hour interview. So we started into it.
Cornell started asking me questions.
This was not an interview. This was a
rockom sacum roll rock and rolling
debate about every issue you can think
of contemporary political issues
issues in the history of philosophy
history of ideas religious issues. So
after a half hour we hear that tape go
click and goes off and Andrew jumps up
and waves and says stop. Stop. Don't say
anything. Don't say anything. Flips that
thing over. Go. And uh so we went back
at it another half hour. The tape
flipped but kicked off but this time it
we were in it too hot and heavy. We
weren't going to stop. Now, this
interview began at 2:00. That tape
clicked off at 3:00.
I looked down at my watch. It's 6:00.
I said, "Brother Cornell,"
I said, "You know, my wife is expecting
me for dinner. I'm going to have to go
home. This has been such a wonder. Can
you believe it's 6:00? And it's been
such a wonderful conversation. We got to
know each other. Get to know each other
better. Let's have lunch. Let's have
another convers. We have to continue
this this dial." They said, "Oh, brother
Robbie, that's right. we really need to
get together. Let's plan to do that."
And I said, "Well, I've got my car
parked down here on William Street next
to the Princeton uh University Press. Um
uh you want to walk me down? We can
continue to talk on the way." And he
said, "Sure." So, we we walked down to
my car and then I stood there with my
hand on the car latch for another 45
minutes.
And then I saw my watch again at 6:45
and I said, "Brother Cornell, my wife
Cindy's going to go to the police and
put out a missing p person's room.
Well, just later that week, as
Providence would would have it, later
that week, some of the senior
professors, the endowed chair holders,
you know, uh were um got a note from our
dean, uh the dean of the college saying,
"We need more of the senior professors,
uh to offer freshman seminars. We we we
compete with our competitors with Yale
and Stanford, Harvard, so forth for
freshmen. We tell them, well, you know,
don't go to Yale, don't go to Stanford,
don't go to Harvard. If you go there,
you'll be taught by graduate students.
But if you come to Princeton, you'll be
taught by faculty, and you'll be taught
by faculty even when you're freshman,
and you'll be taught by some of the most
famous faculty members in the world.
Only problem is nobody's doing it.
Nobody's volunteering to teach these
courses, so we need some volunteers.
Well, the light bulb went off over my
head and I thought, "Well, gosh,
wouldn't it be wonderful for Cornell and
me to continue that conversation with 16
or 18 of these brilliant, enthusiastic,
eager freshman Princeton freshman?" So,
I got in touch with Cornell and he said,
"Oh, Robbie, that'd be a wonderful thing
to do." So, we volunteered to teach the
seminar and that's how it all began. And
we decided we'd teach a seminar with a
great books approach that we teach 12
texts, no secondary sources, make the
kids engage with Plato, St. Augustine,
Sophocles, John Stewart Mill, John Henry
Newton uh and uh and so that's exactly
uh what we did and it was magical. I
mean I was the greatest blessing of my
academic career teaching with brother
Codics. This guy is a master teacher and
so every Wednesday I couldn't wait for
Wednesday evening to come along. We'd go
have dinner together, we'd start the
conversation, then 7 o'clock go over to
the uh uh to the classroom and we'd
teach teach until until 10. And so we
were rocking and rolling and that's how
it all began.
&gt;&gt; Well, so Cornell,
&gt;&gt; yes.
&gt;&gt; Why Why did you choose to interview
Robbie? What what was it that stood out
in your mind that said, "I want to
interview this this professor, this
colleague?" Well, he's a very special
brother, but I won't go into that right
now. I want to say I'm blessed to be
here. This is a consecrated space.
Chase Peterson, who comes out of the
great tradition that shaped this
institution,
was the dean of admissions at Harvard
when I was 17 years old.
and he fundamentally
empowered and enabled me in a way I
don't have a language for. And when I
met Sister Greta and I think Erica is
here somewhere,
&gt;&gt; right there,
&gt;&gt; she's right there.
&gt;&gt; Just stand up, Sister S. This is the
daughter of Chase Peterson, who's one of
the towering figures in the history of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints. And I say that because
you see I was raised in a tradition in
which the primacy and the gravity of
integrity and honesty and decency always
cut deeper than politics and ideology.
Soul craft character formation
from the faculty at Harvard Divinity
School. Remember who had the most
integrity and honesty? Dave Holland
that Holland family of Mormon nobility
jazz I see we can go on and a page is
part of it
brother Paul meeting you in the car felt
the same spirit same spirit in the
captain of the ship Shane
Ree and then to break bread with elder
cook and his beloved wife birthday
yesterday. Oh yeah, we won't mention it.
But still magnificent.
In fact, the president, you just had a
grandchild, too, right? See, the
tradition goes on. But I say that to say
that I noticed,
Brother Robbie, over time at Princeton,
he's very much
marginalized as a conservative in a
deeply liberal institution.
who always had much to say. Intellectual
sophistication,
a moral sensitivity, but most
importantly, integrity and sincerity. He
says what he means. He means what he
says. No posing, no posturing,
no saying something just to be part of
group think. socratic thinking for
himself
and then at the same time a deep
openness to those who he disagreed with.
And so I had a chance over time, it's
been now 20 years that our families and
are like one, you know, his precious
wife Cindy and my wife Anna Heat and my
daughter Zetun is like a niece. Exactly.
uh that I just have a deep love for my
brother. Even when he's wrong,
I love him when he's right. I love him
when he's on the way to being either
wrong or right.
It's that level of common humanity, not
talked about in the abstract, but
fleshified and concretized in lived
experience over time and place. and he's
tried and true. And that makes all the
difference in the world. It really,
really does. And I don't know, I I got
prejudice when I met Brother Chase. I
said to myself, there's something so
special about this Mormon soul craft.
&gt;&gt; Mormon soulcraft. Yay.
&gt;&gt; I like this. this Mormon character
formation where you it's not just polite
and kind but it's a sense of joy on the
inside and openness of willing to serve
being tied to something bigger than you.
So the relation between eternity and
temporality is always held in creative
tension and then the smiles
and it's not superficial smiles. I'm not
talking about those cheap chuckles. I'm
talking about a Mormon laugh
all the way down.
It reminds me of the laugh on the
chocolate side of town
that I'm used to. The black laugh that
goes all the way down
and it's it's a beautiful thing. Now,
Robert, you know, he's Catholic and I'm
Baptist. So, you ought to pray for both
of us.
So I I actually, you know, Mormon
soulcraft is a term I think just got
coined here and I want to build on that
just a little bit. So and you know we
were talking as we were driving down
here a little bit about Brigham Y Young
University. So the aims the aims of a
Brigham Y Young University
are that a BYU education should be and I
bet students out here should be able to
repeat it back to you but spiritually
strengthening,
intellectually enlarging,
character building,
&gt;&gt; leading to lifelong learning and
service. Those are the four aims that
have been stated.
What council would you give? And I'm
going to have two groups that'll talk to
here, but talk to our faculty who are
out here about
how you think they could approach those
aims in a effective way. I'm not saying
that they're not doing this well in any
way, but to have these master teachers
here from Princeton Union Theological
Seminary,
give some thoughts about how you would
approach a classroom with these kinds of
aims.
&gt;&gt; That's a profound Mormon question.
&gt;&gt; For those of you who are professors,
we have a vocation. We don't just have a
job. We don't have just a career. We
don't have just a profession. We have a
vocation. What's the difference between
a vocation and a job? A career.
Profession.
At the center of it is a calling to
serve. A vocation is a calling to serve.
When we try to discern our vocation,
we're trying to figure out how God is
calling us to serve. I can actually talk
bluntly with the faculty here about that
in a way that would sound very alien if
I said it which I do for the Princeton
uh faculty but you know what I'm talking
about when I distinguish vocation from
career or profession right now how do we
serve first of all who do we serve we
serve our students we serve each other
of course helping to support each other
as scholars and as teachers but we serve
our students now when it comes to that
aspect of our vocation ation, the
teaching aspect of our vocation. What is
it that we're called to do? Well, it
seems to me that we are called to help
to form the young men and women
entrusted by their families to our
charge
to be determined truth seekers
and courageous truth seekers.
Both of those things are very hard in
today's general culture.
And there's no community, including the
LDS community, that is immune from that.
In this day and age, our young people,
whether they're Baptist, whether they're
Mormon, whether they're Catholic,
Lutheran, they're all subject to forces
that press against being a determined
truth seeker and a courageous truth
speaker. So, how do we do that?
We do that in two ways.
They're both very important. They're
both necessary. Neither can be
neglected, but one is even more
important than the other. First, we do
it by exhortation.
We encourage with words our young men
and women, those entrusted to our charge
to be determined truth seekers and
courageous truth seekers. To love truth
more than their own opinions.
To love truth even when it's unpopular
truth. To speak truth even when it's
hard, risky,
requires sacrifice.
But the second is the even more
important way.
We help to form our young men and women
to be determined truth seekers and
courageous truth speakers by modeling
it. By showing them what it is to be a
determined truth seeker and a courageous
truth speaker. Our students learn more
from our example than they do from our
words. Now that doesn't doesn't excuse
anybody from using words, not writing
permission slips to my fellow
professors. not to exhort, teach, even
preach a little.
But even more important is the example
that we set, including the example of
being open to criticism, open to
challenge. The example of acknowledging,
not merely notionally, but in a deep
existential sense, our own fallibility,
a willingness to engage others who
deeply disagree with us in a truth
seeking spirit, not with a will to
victory.
When we debate, when we discuss, the
goal shouldn't be victory. That's
something for debate club.
It should be a partnership with your
dialogue partner with whom you disagree
in the pursuit of truth. Now, the other
side of our vocation, of course, is the
vocation of scholarship.
And there's where we have to really be
determined truth seekers and courageous
truth speakers. We have to follow the
evidence and the argument. Whether it's
in sociology, psychology, chemistry,
political science, philos, it doesn't
matter. Follow the evidence. Follow
argument. The best arguments wherever
they lead. Even if they lead us to
places maybe we'd rather not go. Even if
they lead us to conclusions that are
unpopular, maybe in general, maybe
within our community. But that's what it
means to be a scholar. And then we need
to be willing to take the slings and
arrows that will come and and believe me
they will come. Cornell and I can tell
you all about it. See those holes? You
know, they will come when you speak
truths that are unpopular. Especially
truths that are unpopular with people
who are quote on your own side. Cornell
and I both have a lot of experience with
this. You know, people who want us to
just rah get on board with whatever our
tribe, our group, our political party,
our our ideological camp wants. They go
for this Tuesday. So, we're supposed to
be on board with this. When they say
zigg, we're supposed to zigg. They say
zag, we're supposed to zag. Trouble with
Cornell and me being we zig when we're
supposed to zag.
&gt;&gt; And we got in trouble. It's what you got
to do if you're going to be faithful to
your vocation.
&gt;&gt; Cornell, speak to this.
&gt;&gt; Indeed. You know, there's a magnificent
essay written by the great Rabbi Abraham
Joshua Hessha. first essay he wrote in
English languages. This is about his
fifth language when he wrote this about
1942 called what is piety
and this is something crucial for all
religious folk and even some of our
secular brothers and sisters who have
various versions of piety. Piety is not
blind obedience or uncritical deference
to dogma.
It is the courageous and virtuous
acknowledgment
of the sources of good in your life from
your mama's womb to tomb.
And the three pillars
are remembrance,
reverence,
and resistance.
So when I think for example of Mormon
soulcraft,
I think of just how intrical
memory
of persecution,
memory of perseverance,
memory of persistence.
And what are the ways that sustain those
memories?
family,
congregation,
temple,
various stories circulated, interpreted,
inculcated,
internalized.
Then I think of reverence,
something bigger than one's ego,
getting out of one's narcissistic
predicament, and learning how to
cultivate what the great George Elliott
in Middle March would call empathy. But
we Christian would say love,
following Jesus.
Love in all of its various forms. So we
got a remembrance. You've got reverence.
Then you've got resistance. Being in the
world but not of the world. Cutting
against the grain. I was think we were
talking with sister Sarah in her
wonderful interview we had. Uh what's
the name of
&gt;&gt; Desert News.
&gt;&gt; Desert News. I know that Desert used to
be the name for the territory. Is that
right?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; What means honey something?
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; Honey what?
&gt;&gt; Beehive.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Lord I don't want to touch that. Jesus
Christ.
Oh, I'm not ready for that aspect of
Mormon soul crap.
Oh, good God almighty. Remembrance,
reverence for something bigger
outside of time, beyond time, grounded
in time. You see, and then over against
the grain. We were talking about John
Bun's the pil pilgrim's progress, which
the second most popular book in the
English language other than King James
version. Yeah. And
&gt;&gt; he happened to be Baptist. I just throw
that in there.
But it's powerful because it's about
what it means to be a souljourer, a
pilgrim in space and time, but tied to
something grander.
And so for teachers and professors, the
question is how do we both fuse a
socratic spirit which is critical,
but it doesn't fetishize
critique.
&gt;&gt; It doesn't limit education to just
critique. But keep in mind, Socrates,
who exemplifies intellectual integrity,
never cries. He never sheds a tear.
Anybody's never cried, never sheds a
tears, never loved anybody.
&gt;&gt; He loved wisdom. He loved abstract
argumentation.
But when you love your mama or your wife
or your child, you can't help but shed
some tears. With Shakespeare, who coined
the word in Hamlet called heartache.
And there's a history of heartache and
heartbreak in the history of Mormons.
And yet somehow remembrance, reverence,
and then forms of resistance. And of
course, there's various ways of defining
that that resistance. I mean, some of
the overlap here in terms of a Martin
King vis Joseph Smith, they both hated
enslavement of black people.
Brighgam had some challenges. He's very
complicated in that regard.
I mean sometimes he's against us, other
times he's not. But that's just a
footnote in Brigham Brigham University
univers Brigham Young University. But
all of us wrestling with the challenges
of being a genuine pilgrim
rooted in the sources of good holy
beauty and truth and all of us will fall
short. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; I believe that all of us in many ways
are just cracked vessels trying to love
our crooked neighbor with our crooked
hearts. We fall short, but we try to
sustain it with family, tradition,
community,
conversation,
and then keeping that joy and smile that
is so fundamental in a a world that is
so shot through with so much greed and
hatred and
&gt;&gt; envy and resentment. We've got to be
very honest about just how grim and dim
the world has always been. Not just now.
It's not just a contemporary moment in
which people are down and out. The world
has for the most part always been shot
through
with organized greed and weaponized
hatred and routinized cruelty and
institutionalized indifference. And
indifference the evil is more insidious
than evil itself.
And that's why we in the world but not
of it. And to be able to keep that kind
of pedagogical possibility as we've, you
know, respond to all of the various
challenges in the scientific,
intellectual, artistic discourse. And we
do want to salute brother Ben.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah.
&gt;&gt; Piano.
Because art and the arts are not
ornamental or decorative entertainment.
They're constitutive of who we are.
They're intricral to the shaping of our
souls. And so often times we just having
the musicians play a little music at the
beginning. Oh, that's nice little
background music. Now let's move to the
real stuff. No, no. Ben was part of the
real stuff when he's playing that piano.
And it's continuous with our
conversation.
Very important. Now,
you were speaking
uh powerful truths there that apply to
faculty and to students, but I'd love
for you to say just a few words to the
opportunities students have. What's
what's the responsibility of a student
in this process of soul formation
at this moment in their lives? Late
adolescence, early adulthood,
they're part of a university community.
What are their obligations?
How would you talk to our students? And
and much of what you've said applies,
but
&gt;&gt; Right. Right.
&gt;&gt; Talk to the students for a minute.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I hear you. I don't know if my my
dear brother Charles is still here or
not, but from Brave Braver Angels. Where
is he? There he is. I'm saluting you,
brother. Why? Why am I saluting you?
Because what I have to say is directly
connected to the organization that you
lead. Brother Mari Robbie and I tell our
students when they enter our room, you
are here to learn how to die. when they
say, "Well, I thought I just wanted a
grade and
trying to get my diploma and my
credential."
No, no, no. That's connected to your
career. Just like Robbie said, we're
talking about Beirut, your calling.
We're talking about your vocation.
We're talking about what God has called
you to do
with an international
vision. Thank God for the missionary
work of Mormon Soulcraft. a global
perspective in a moment in which there's
such narrow chauvinistic frenzy as if a
baby in Ethiopia or a baby in Guatemala
or a baby in Utah or a baby in Tran or
baby in Gaza or a baby in in in in in
Tel Aviv all do not have the same value.
They all have the exact same value,
sanctity and dignity made in the image
of a loving and a mighty God.
And that kind of internationalism and
universalism always cuts against the
grain. So we tell our students learn how
to die. They say well professor George,
Professor West, we how do we do that?
Well, Plato says philosophy itself is a
meditation on preparation for death.
Montaigne says to philosophize is to
learn how to die. Cynica says he or she
who learns how to die unlearns slavery.
&gt;&gt; Paul
Christian New Testament Christians must
learn how to die daily. The great
Dorothy Day, the vanilla Catholic
prophetic sister
when she wrote the eulogy for a
chocolate brother named Martin Luther
King Jr. on the front of Catholic
worker. Martin Luther King Jr. learned
how to die daily. What does that mean?
To learn how to think critically for
yourself. Find your voice. And don't
just be an echo.
And then muster the courage to love your
neighbor as yourself and love your God.
And then last but not least, be able to
call into questions certain assumptions
and presuppositions you have. And when
you let some of them go, that's a form
of death. And there is no rebirth
without death.
Just like in love, when you really fall
in love, the way the cooks did
so and so years ago, you was just
talking about the wonderful journey
you've had with her.
Something died in brother Elder Cook
when something was reborn.
He had been by himself. Now he's
intertwined with a magnificent sister.
And it transforms him. He's in a new
space with a new sense of what it is to
be human. Is that a fair
characterization of it, brother?
Absolutely.
Learning how to die, reborn, and
educationally, pedagogically, the same
thing happens in a different zone.
That's why when you graduate from the
university, the question we ask our
seniors is, did you really learn how to
die?
What were the forms of rebirth,
maturation, growth, development
over time, which is endless. Professors
are doing the same thing. And uh Robbie
is just magical in the class. And so a
lot of people come in and say, "Oh, we
can't wait to see this this conservative
and progressive go at each other's
throats and both of them are telling us
to learn how to die and we want to so
see them conquer each other."
You in the wrong class.
&gt;&gt; Robbie, tell us tell us what um what
what are students obligations
&gt;&gt; with their education?
&gt;&gt; First, I'm giggling because Gornell
reminded me of a event in our lives. A
few years ago, uh, Princeton's top brass
invited us to be the featured speakers
for freshman families weekend. Now, I
don't know if you have an equivalent
thing here at BYU. Comes in October and
the freshmen are invited to invite their
father and mother and brothers and
sisters to come along and there's a
weekend of activities and there's a main
event. Well, Cornell and I were the main
event and they the administration asked
us if he would talk about the purpose of
a liberal arts education. Well, they
asked.
So we took the stage or this evening and
uh we did a little preaching and we said
look you know
there are some things that are going to
help you in your Princeton education
there that in getting this Princeton
education the credential is going to
help you to get a great job make a lot
of money and have a great career and be
an important person
but that's not fundamentally what the
purpose of the education is it's great.
You know, if you go on to Harvard Law
School, Sullivan and Cromwell, Goldman
Sachs, if you do, remember the James
Madison program at American Ideas.
But that's not the fundamental reason.
The fundamental reason is to learn to
live the examined life.
&gt;&gt; It's to learn to be a determined truth
seeker and a courageous truth speaker.
The fundamental reason is to engage with
others in the pursuit of truth, not
knowing where that's going to lead you,
where your goal is to swap out whatever
falsehoods are in your head. And you
know you've got some,
and replace them with truths, even if
they're unpopular truths, even if
they're truths that you'd rather not be
truths.
Well, all this stuff about the examined
life and so forth, I could tell I wasn't
making the sale.
Those parents weren't so interested in
examined lives. They thought Goldman
Sachs, you know, so I finally kind of
gave up and I said to Brother Cornell,
Cornell, you you you give your
perspective on this. And he leans in
just like he did a moment ago and he
said, "You young people here, you
freshman here?" And you want to say to
the parents, your ch sons and daughters,
they have come here to learn how to die.
I saw every dad in that room, 500, every
dad in that room turned to every mom and
say $78,000.
But you notice Paul that uh that I said
when I was talking about the faculty
that the faculty's vocation with respect
to the teaching aspect of the vocation
is to form the help to form the young
men and women. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh in their charge to be determined
truth seekers and courageous truth
speakers. Notice the help. M
&gt;&gt; all we can do faculty, friends, Cornell
and myself, all we can do
&gt;&gt; is to encourage, support,
model,
help students to form themselves to be
determined truth seekers and courageous
truth speakers. There are some things
nobody can do for you. There's some
things you just have to do for yourself
or they don't get done at all. One of
those is learning to lead the examined
life. One of those is leading the
examined life. I can't say, "Hey, Matt
Holland, you're good at it. I'm not so
good at will you lead the examined life
for me." That's not going to work,
right?
Great as Matt is, he's not going to be
able to lead the examined life for me.
And I can't lead it for my students, you
know, if they're going to lead such
lives, such lives of integrity,
intellectual integrity, marked by the
virtues of intellectual humility,
intellectual courage, genuine love of
truth, they're going to have to do it
for themselves. So what is the students
responsibility?
It's to do precisely that to form
themselves. We're here to help. This
whole structure is here to help. the
administration, the leadership, the
captain of the ship, he's here to help.
The deans, they're here to help.
Everybody who works here, kitchen staff,
&gt;&gt; that's right.
&gt;&gt; You know, the support staff, they're
here to help these young men and women
do something that those young men and
women can only do at the end of the day
for themselves. It's it's really
analogous to having integrity.
Nobody can have integrity for you.
No one can make you a person of
integrity. We can take over your mind.
We know we know how now know how to do
mind control, brainwashing. We can take
over your mind and force you to act like
a person with integrity. Force you to do
the things that a person with integrity
would do. You still wouldn't be a person
of integrity because you're only a
person of integrity if you are choosing
to do the right thing for the right
reason. Well, that's true generally with
the examined life. So, that's what young
men and women are here to do. Now, it's
not easy because there's everything in
the world now pushing against it.
Everything in the world is telling you
to value, to really value
&gt;&gt; the things
that matter,
but at the end of the day, not that much
over the things that really matter. by
the things that matter but not all that
much. I mean wealth, status, power,
influence, prestige, celebrity. It's not
wrong to want those things. It's not
wrong to aspire to those things. It's
not wrong to want to graduate Suma Lada
and go on to Stanford Law School and to
get that job at Sullivan and Cromwell or
Goldman Sachs or or whatever it is. It's
not wrong to want those things. But
remember,
those things are not things that are
good in themselves. They're good only as
means to other ends. You make a lot of
money, there's a lot of great things you
can do.
You can employ people with great jobs at
businesses you build. You can provide
people with goods and services that they
need and want. If you make a a lot of
money, you can be a philanthropist. You
can give money to very important and
worthy causes. All that's good. But
wealth, power, status, influence are not
good in themselves. If the extent
they're good, they're good as means to
other ends. So they're not the things
that really matter. They matter but not
all that much. The things that really
matter are faith, family, friendship,
knowledge, beauty, integrity, honesty,
decency, things that you can only really
want for their own sakes.
Integrity is not good as a means to some
other end. It's good, if it's good at
all, in itself, as something
intrinsically
worthwhile. So what the job of our young
people is and what our job is in helping
them is to form them to understand the
difference and to honor the difference
between the things that matter but not
all that much and the things that really
matter so that they will prioritize the
things that really matter.
&gt;&gt; So as
as you say that and I want a kind of
quick response on this one but
and
I know. I know it's difficult.
&gt;&gt; Remember,
&gt;&gt; pray for us.
&gt;&gt; Their first conversation was 4 hours.
That will put us here till 11:30.
&gt;&gt; 4 hours and 45 minutes by the time we're
done.
&gt;&gt; So, but um
here I'm going to read you a quote that
was shared in the news last week by a
prominent official within our current
administration.
And I'd just like to get sort of a quick
response to this.
Uh uh we live in a world in which you
can talk all you want about
international nicities and everything
else but we live in a world in the real
world that is governed by strength that
is governed by force that is governed by
power. These are the iron laws of the
world since the beginning of time. That
was Steven Miller.
Is are those the iron laws? What as
you're reading the classics, as you're
reading the scriptures,
tell us about how students might respond
when that's what's being told to them
from senior government leaders in our
country today.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, we've got to really pray for
brother Steven Miller. He's uh we got to
pray for the brother. I'm telling you.
But we do have to make a description, a
a distinction between descriptive claims
and normative claims.
You see, his description
of the dominant ways of the world.
&gt;&gt; That's true. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; he's right. Hegel said history is a
slaughter bench.
The great Edwin Gibbons said it's the
register of human crimes and follys.
Most of human history is the history of
the power, the strength, the crushing of
the weak, the trashing of the
vulnerable, the triumph of those who
have military might, that's descriptive.
But when that description
becomes an ought claim, when that
description says that's the world,
that's the way the world ought to be.
We say, "Oh, so he's siding with
Thrmicus and Plato's Republic rather
than Socrates." Mike makes right. He's
siding with Pontius Pilate rather than
my sweet Jesus.
He's siding with Bull O Connor in Jim
Crow Gut Bucket Alabama
rather than Sister Rosa Parks and
Brother Martin Luther King Jr.
He's siding
with the US Army
in 1857
rather than with a persecuted and
subjugated people trying to create their
own ways of life. Let me see. So that I
give him some credit in terms of reading
slices of Thusidities.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
Hobbes's favorite historian
translated by Hobbs who agrees with
Stephen Martin or Carl Smith.
He was even worse. We're talking about
the Nazi legal theorists. Power. Power.
Power. military power and here we come
along saying spiritual power,
moral power and the Hobsians, they laugh
at us because what he was doing, he was
mocking Jay
&gt;&gt; in that CNN interview. How naive you are
to think that history could ever be
anything different than just the might
dominating the world. Dom the might
shaping right in the mighty dominating
the world. And then here come we naive
Christians,
naive
forces for good saying truth forever on
the scaffold, wrong forever on the
throne. Yet that scaffways the future
and behind the dim unknown standeth God
within the shadow keeping watch above
his own. What makes us think that the
last shall be first and the first shall
be last? What makes us think that the
sermon on the mount actually will ever
have any efficacy any consequence
whatsoever. The world has never fully
conformed or tried to conform to that
that sermon on the mount. And yet that
sermon on the mound sits at the center
of who we are. and we try to remain true
to it against the grain. And so there's
a certain sense in which you know,
brother Miller is just being very honest
about some of the most uh truncated,
spiritually empty and morally deficit
conceptions of the world.
Do you want to jump in on this or?
&gt;&gt; Well, only to say that um Steven Miller
is not the outlier. We are.
&gt;&gt; Say more.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Where does Miller get this idea? Right.
&gt;&gt; He's working out the conclusions of the
premises of secular modernity. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; He's just being rigorous about it in the
way that Hobbes was,
&gt;&gt; and the way that Nietze was.
&gt;&gt; He's not trying to live off the capital
of Christian civilization or
Judeo-Christian civilization the way
most people,
including many people who would
hammer Miller for those comments, are
trying to do.
They want the fruit of Christian
civilization when it comes to the stuff
they like in it,
&gt;&gt; but they don't want the premises. And
they certainly don't like the stuff that
they don't like
&gt;&gt; about Christian moral teaching.
So I'd class him with Hobbes and with
Nze.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; I mean, he's saying look and and and and
he's right. If you eliminate the
transcendent horizon, just take it out
of the picture.
Would we really say Hobbes is wrong when
he says in the state of nature life is
poor, solitary, nasty, brutish and
short?
Would we gain say Hobbes when he says
that the way reason works, the way our
moral faculties work is the thoughts are
to the desires as scouts and spies to
range abroad and find the way to the
thing desired. In other words, all
reason can do is tell us how to get what
we want. Can't adjudicate between wants.
It can't tell us what we should want and
not want, what's good and bad, right and
wrong.
So guys like Hobbs,
Nietze, Miller are in a sense realists
and they're very rigorously consistent.
But their consistency generates
conclusions only because the conclusions
that they do reach only because they
have fundamentally essentially erased
the transcendent horizon.
&gt;&gt; And there's where you end. There's where
you end up. So, I'm in a certain sense
reluctant to jump down the guy's throat,
right? I'm a critic,
but I'm a critic who understands
that unless you substitute for premises
that are very widely shared in our
culture today,
all we can say about him is he's a
rigorous thinker.
&gt;&gt; Let's get back to Mormon soulcraft. Hey,
there we go.
&gt;&gt; So,
&gt;&gt; there we go.
&gt;&gt; This audience is involved in a general
curriculum that we have in the church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints where
throughout this year we're studying the
Hebrew Bible, the Old Testament.
&gt;&gt; And every week, this week, they will
have been reading in Genesis. We've just
been reading through about Genesis 5.
Okay, the month of January. and uh some
associated restoration scriptures as we
call it. And throughout the year they'll
be reading
so the Torah, the prophets, some of the
histories, you know, the Psalms and so
on. What shouldn't we miss as Latter-day
Saints this year in our study of the Old
Testament?
Well, you're starting at the right place
at the beginning with Genesis
because
this Western civilization, this
Judeo-Christian civilization that I'm
talking about and hoping that we can
protect and restore and rebuild
the basic foundations are right there in
Genesis 1 and Genesis 2. You don't even
have to get to five.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Genesis 1, the human being, man, though
mere dust of the earth, material stuff
that will is mortal, one day will just
die and dissolve,
is nevertheless made in the very image
and likeness of the divine creator and
ruler of all that is the very image and
likeness of God. It's that principle.
It's that teaching that grounds the
principle of the profound, inherent, and
equal dignity of each and every member
of the human family.
I'll let you in on a little secret.
Alexander the Great didn't believe in
the profound, inherent, and equal
dignity of each and every member of the
human family. Why was Alexander the
Great considered the great by the people
of his own time? Because they didn't
have that Hebrew revelation.
He was great because he could conquer,
dominate, exploit. That's what greatness
was for those pagan peoples. Why do we
not consider Alexander the Great?
Because we've heard a different message
grounded in those scriptures delivered
to us by Jesus,
right? that every human being, the weak
and the vulnerable and the poor, not
just the rich and the strong
and those who can take care of
themselves are bearers of profound,
inherent and equal dignity. It's a
radical idea. If you compare it to the
to the to the pagan world, it is a
radical idea.
&gt;&gt; But that's what our civilization is
fundamentally built on. If you're
against slavery,
most of history, most people were not
against slavery. Slavery was ubiquitous.
If you're against it, it's because you
are the heir to a tradition that
proclaims the imo day, manade in the
image and likeness of God. Even if you
yourself don't believe it, even if you
yourself don't believe in God, if you do
believe that slavery shouldn't exist
because people are created equal, that
they're are equal in worth and dignity,
you're living off the capital.
What do you have to say to Alexander the
Great? You know, so
how long can we live on that capital if
we don't replenish it spiritually?
No, there are an awful lot of people who
they're against slavery. They're for
social justice. They're for this
oppressed people, demonstrating against
those who are oppressing those people
and so forth and so on. Well, why do
they think exploitation is bad?
Oppression is bad. Why don't they think
Alexander the Great's great. The way
you're great is if you can dominate and
exploit. It's because they're heirs to
this principle as members of this
civilization. But they don't stop to
think of it. I don't know where they
think they got it, but that's where it
came from. Number two, Genesis 2,
marriage and the family. The man shall
leave his mother in home and cleave unto
his wife, and the two will be one flesh.
The basic institution of civil society
that the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints has done so much to
uphold and defend. The proclamation on
the family is one of the most beautiful
teachings of any religion. All right,
that's central. You let that go, you got
a short time period left as a
civilization on this earth. So yes,
you're right to be focused right at the
beginning. Those first chapters of
Genesis, those early chapters of
Genesis, everything else we've got is
built on them. That's valuable is built
on them.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, indeed.
You know, I would say that uh the genius
of our precious Jewish brothers and
sisters
in the Hebrew
scripture
was
justice is what love looks like in
public.
Tenderness is what love feels like in
private. So it's not just about justice.
Do justly, love mercy, walk humbly with
thy God. Let justice roll down like
waters and righteousness like a mighty
stream. Yes, but any justice that's only
justice soon degenerates into something
less than justice,
you need love.
Shakespeare, merchant of Venice talked
about mercy and that great reflection on
mercy deeper than justice. That's where
the soul formation takes place.
These days, justice talk too often
becomes just a lifestyle,
which is a brand rather than a way of
life, which is a cause you're willing to
live and die for.
And so when I think of how we wrestle
with Hebrew scripture even before we get
to Jesus of Nazareth and then on to the
second testament that I see in my hotel
rooms often times.
Oh, I take time to read some in and out
of it. I some good stuff here.
But it is that love train tied to
justice but not reducible to justice.
And the love train is a soul to soul,
person to person, human to human
relationship
of tenderness and sweetness and kindness
and grins and smiles and hugs and family
connections and community relations.
what the Germans used to call the mind
shaft and that face-toface soul to soul
not that gale shaft and mediated with
the market because we live in a society
in which everything's for sale
everybody's for sale it's just
commodification on steroids
mediated with new technology
and where is the love the mercy the
tenderness the kindness the sweetness
now See, as someone who comes out of
black tradition that when we talk about
soul and people say, "Well, you know,
Artha Franklin sings so soulful." In
fact, Mormons have a soulful singer
named Glattus Night. Is that right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yes.
She used to be a Baptist like me and I
guess saw a better way.
Well, I don't know about that, but she's
a she's part of a great tradition at the
moment. But she's soulful just like the
tabernacle choir because soul is the
sharing of a soothing sweetness against
the backdrop of grim catastrophe.
And it keeps you persevering. It keeps
you persisting against the grain,
stepping out on nothing and landing on
something. a faith that seemingly makes
no rational sense but makes all the
sense to you given the miracles that
have taken place in your life given your
relation to a Jesus and a God. Yes, that
to me is one of the great contributions
of both Hebrew scripture as well as the
the subsequent Christian developments
and there's elements of it in Islam in
terms of various prophetic formulations
and so on. Of course, Buddhism has
magnificent talks about love. Mahatma
Gandhi's embodiment of a love that's
undeniable in the Hindu tradition. But
as a Christian, I come in with my own
set of lens.
And I'm focused on that cross
and the blood at the bottom of that
cross.
Love drops.
And those who chose that way over
against a world of overwhelming hatred
and greed. And I hope some of the
hermeneutical activity and
interpretations taking place in the
classes and I know it goes far beyond
what I'm talking about here at the
university is able to convey some of
that to our young people because young
people are hungry and thirsty
for bonafide
real forms of integrity, honesty,
decency, love, mercy, justice
that gives them a joy, not a cheap
pleasure cuz so much of their culture,
they can find every kind of conceivable
pleasure in the world and still have
their souls joyless
and vacuous and shallow and hollow. And
without that kind of love and joy being
the fruit of the love, it it makes it
very difficult for the younger
generation and as they experience more
loneliness and isolation and depression.
I mean, when we first started teaching
at Princeton, what about 4% of our
students were wrestling with chronic
depression?
&gt;&gt; That's right. Now, what it's uh
something like what 34% 35%.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's almost 40% now, you know. And
you say to yourself, my god, as an older
brother,
I I I' I've got to learn from them
because that's something new. I didn't
have that when I was so young. I know
what mom and dad and Shiloh Baptist
Church and Reverend Cook was all about.
I had legacies of Martin Luther King Jr.
and Fanny Lu Heyr. They provided waves
and pathways and persons I wanted to
imitate and emulate and then try to
creatively appropriate. Young folk these
days got these little cheap superficial
celebrities.
Where are the great exemplars of high
moral integrity? Your hope is mom. Your
hope is dad. Your hope is grandma. Your
hope is granddad professor. sports very
important coaches,
musicians,
artists. So that it's a grim moment, but
uh we never allow grimness to have the
last word.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well,
we have exceeded our time.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Where did that go?
&gt;&gt; Where did it go? But it's just been such
a delight. I want everyone in the
audience to know about this book, Truth
Matters, which is an extended dialogue
between Robbie and Cornell that
uh we've only scratched the surface of
the kinds of things that come out in
this magnificent volume here. And we
hope you get a sense of appreciation for
how two
politically and ideologically different
individuals
can have such a rich and powerful
relationship. And I hope you appreciate
that this is a strange moment in our
history when this seems exceptional.
uh it shouldn't be exceptional,
but thank you for modeling this. One
last question and then we're gonna uh
have brother Pedock come up and close us
in prayer. But in your engagement one
with another over the years, can you
tell us
something where you've changed your mind
because of this relationship?
where some thought, some idea, some
approach was modified because you've
come into creative tension with one
another and done a little philosophical
jazz.
&gt;&gt; Should I just say a quick word about
that?
&gt;&gt; Before I met brother Robbie, I thought
that Viko was the greatest Italian
philosopher of all time.
And now I'm convinced that Aquinas is
&gt;&gt; okay. Very good. Not just Italian, but
&gt;&gt; Robbie.
&gt;&gt; Well, I I have a little bit of a longer
story to tell, but let me
preface it by saying uh
Cornell and I don't try to change each
other's minds. Now, sometimes we do.
That's not the objective. You got it's
very important to understand this.
&gt;&gt; Our goal is not to change each other's
mind. Our goal is to deepen our
understanding,
right? We're not trying to win. Neither
of us is trying to win. That's why I
love them so much. It's why I love our
interactions, our teaching the classroom
together, our interacting with beautiful
people like you together. That's why I
love doing this.
So, what is the objective? If it's not
to change each other's mind, if it's not
to win an argument,
&gt;&gt; it is a collaboration. It's dialectical.
We're doing it by giving the arguments
on the competing sides. We're not in the
same place in many ways, but it's a
dialectical partnership in the pursuit
of truth. If I'm wrong, and I have to be
the first to acknowledge I am a very
fallible person. I know I'm wrong about
some things. I just don't know what they
are. If I knew what they were, I'd
change my mind. I believe what I believe
because I believe it to be true. But I
know that some of what I believe isn't
true. And guess what? Well, we can we
can just do a poll. Is there anybody out
there who out there raise your hand only
has true beliefs in your head right now
and no false beliefs?
Nobody? No. Of course, all of us know
that right now we have some false
beliefs in our head. We just don't know
which ones they are. We also know this
and this is the hard part. We know that
our fallibility extends not simply to
the minor, trivial, relatively
superficial things in life, the stuff we
don't care that much about. Our
fallibility extends to the deep
important questions too.
&gt;&gt; The questions of meaning and value, the
questions of human nature, the human
good, human dignity, human destiny. We
can be wrong and undoubtedly in some
respects are wrong about the things that
really matter to us. The things we do
wrap our emotions around our
selfdefining
beliefs, our deepest, most cherished
beliefs, the identity forming beliefs
that we hold. Now, once we really take
that on board, then we realize the only
way that I'm ever going to swap out at
least some of those false beliefs in my
head for true beliefs, never get them
all out. I know that. But the way I can
make some progress, I can get more of
the false ones out and more true ones
in, is to be open to critique, open to
challenge, open to criticism. If I'm not
if I close it off or just listen
politely to somebody while I'm thinking
about, you know, who's going to win the
World Series or something, then I'm
never going to make any progress toward
getting rid of the things I believe that
are untrue or partially untrue or
inadequate or what have you.
So, when we argue, and we can be pretty
fierce with each other, you know,
especially late at night back in the
hotel lobby. Yeah. Yeah. We're we're
drinking some beverages that Mormons.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But no matter how intensely we're going
at it,
the goal is to get at the truth. If I'm
wrong, I don't want to persuade him. I
don't want to get him wrong, too. If I'm
wrong, I want him to persuade me
&gt;&gt; so that I can swap out
&gt;&gt; that false belief for a true belief. And
see, he feels the same way, which is why
we can have the trust. I know he feels
the same way.
&gt;&gt; He's not trying to persuade me.
&gt;&gt; He wants to know if he's wrong about
something so that he can switch his view
about it. Now, in a concrete area, I
tell you an area where he's deepened my
understanding and changed my
understanding in some ways.
&gt;&gt; I'm I think a very typical traditional
conservative and I have a lot of very
typical traditional conservative
beliefs. Now, one of those beliefs I've
had since since I became a conservative
was the belief that look, race is just a
social construct. And it's a really dumb
social construct that has done an
enormous amount of damage in human
history since it was invented. We didn't
always have this concept, by the way,
&gt;&gt; and especially a lot of damage in our
own country and our own society with our
legacy of slavery, Jim Crow, and all the
all the rest.
So it seemed to me as it seems to many
pro probably most conservatives that the
problem is race consciousness.
So the solution is to just stop thinking
in racial categories. Just stop
identifying by race. It's just get rid
of the concept. It's the concept has
caused the problem. The way out of the
problem is to just stop thinking of
ourselves as white or black or what have
you.
What Cornell has shown me is that it's
just not that simple. He doesn't deny
that race is fundamentally just a social
construct. He doesn't reify it, to use
that Marxist term, doesn't reify it.
&gt;&gt; But there is a history and the history
has produced a tradition and a culture.
So now when I hear Cornell say what you
have tonight heard him say two or three
times. I come from a people and he's
obviously referring to
African-Americans. That's the people
from which he comes. He talks about the
chocolate side of town. He's talking
about the African-American people. That
people out of its experience largely
experience of oppression has formed a
culture and there are cultural norms and
understandings. There's literature,
there's art, there's fantastic music. I
love Cornell's story when he was in
Charlottesville a few years ago, you
know, standing up to the neo-Nazis who
were rallying in Charlottesville. You
remember that horrible business down
there in Charlottesville?
&gt;&gt; Uh, face to face with the with the with
the Nazi and the guy saying to the Nazi
saying to Cornell, "You're that guy on
TV who calls everybody brother. I hate
that. I can't stand that. Why you call
everybody brother?" And Cornell says to
him, "Well, brother,
it's because no one's going to tell me
who I can and can't love.
You are my brother. You're a gangster,
but you're my brother and I love you and
I want you to be better.
And I'm a fellow gangster." Or, how do
you put it, Cornell? I was a gangster
before I met Jesus. And now I'm a
redeemed sinner with gangster
proclivities.
And here's the part I love. Here's the
part I love. What do the Nazis have
playing? The music they have playing in
their back. They're listening to music
while they're there rallying. Whe they
Mottown, Stevie Wonder. I'm not kidding.
You can't make this stuff up.
&gt;&gt; That's true.
&gt;&gt; So that's part of that culture
&gt;&gt; they're talking about. Now,
&gt;&gt; does that mean I change my views on
whether we should treat people in a
raceneutral way and hiring
advancement,
admissions, and so forth? Don't give
preferences back. No, I haven't changed
my views about those things. I have the
standard conservative views about those
things. But I do now understand that
it's not just a matter it it's just an
oversimplification to imagine that you
solve the problems that race has created
by just dismissing racial constructs.
Now none of that means I'll just
conclude none of that means that James
Baldwin or
Duke Ellington belong to Cornell and not
to me.
&gt;&gt; That's right.
&gt;&gt; Or that Shakespeare or Aristotle belongs
to me and not Cornell. That's not what
it means. But it does mean that I
understand what he says when he says I
come from a people who have had this
experience or I have come from a people
that has formed this art and this music
and this literature and this culture. So
that's a deepening of my understanding
that comes entirely out of 100%
&gt;&gt; out of our late night dialogues.
Thank you so much for being with us
friends. Let's thank Robbie George and
Cornell West.
&gt;&gt; Oh, thank you all. God bless you. Thank
you.