MISSION CONTROL: Houston, you're a go for landing.
Over.
ASTRONAUT: Roger, [inaudible].
Go for landing.
3,000 feet.
NARRATOR: July 20, 1969.
Astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin
became the first men to land on the moon.
ASTRONAUT: That's one small step for man, one giant leap
for mankind.
NARRATOR: Just like aliens visiting from another world.
It had been the stuff of science fiction.
Now everything that could be imagined seemed possible.
If mankind could travel the skies and go to other planets,
why couldn't beings from other planets visit the earth?
Amidst a wave of modern UFO sightings,
a new theory emerged that aliens visited Earth in antiquity
and were regarded as gods.
But if that were true, wouldn't there be proof?
Perhaps there was.
All we needed to do was open our eyes and our imaginations.
The proof, perhaps, was all around us.
In May of 2008, a startling proclamation
was issued by the Vatican.
For the first time in its 2,000 year history,
the Catholic church acknowledged the possibility
that intelligent life could exist on other planets,
and that a belief in extraterrestrials
did not contradict a belief in God.
LUIS NAVIA: Which means, of course,
that we are now entering an age in which the universe is
beginning to be conceived in different ways
from what it was before.
And if it is a reality for us, why could
it not have been a reality for other beings in the universe
who could have visited our Earth and perhaps guided culture
in ancient times?
NARRATOR: But just what sparked this sudden turnaround
in religious thought?
Could the church have been influenced
by recent scientific discoveries?
BARRY DOWNING: You could make the argument
that we are, in fact, just replacing angels of 2,000 years
ago with high tech angels now and that we have
this inner need to feel we're not alone in the universe,
that we're scientific people and we would be embarrassed to call
them angels because we've stopped believing in that kind
of superstitious stuff.
But we still believe in aliens from other planets.
NARRATOR: In 2002, the Mars Odyssey spacecraft
detected enormous reservoirs of ice
beneath the Martian surface.
The presence of ice and the possibility of water
suggested that life could be sustained or even generated
on another planet.
After decades of orbiting space shuttles and robotic rovers,
the idea of sending man back into space to Mars and beyond
ignited the imagination and brought back the notion
that mankind and alien beings had crossed paths before.
In 1968, just one year before Neil Armstrong's epic
spaceflight, a book was published that forever changed
the way many in the scientific, religious,
and creative communities would view their home planet.
Written by Swiss author Erich Von Daniken,
"Chariots of the Gods" attempted to prove that alien explorers
had visited the Earth thousands of years ago.
When I was a young man, I was educated as a strict Catholic
in a boarding school.
And there we had to make translations
of part of the Bible--
Greek to Latin, Latin to German.
For example, the first book of Moses--
before the Lord descends of the Holy mount,
Moses was ordered to construct a gate around the mountain.
Otherwise the Israelites would be damaged.
I was shocked.
I said, this is impossible.
My God, he would never use first a gate to protect himself
or to protect Israel.
What are they talking about?
And now the work started.
I started to read thousands of pages
of the beginning of religions of every mythology.
It's always the same story, of course with different names,
with different heroes.
Somebody descends from the sky to the humans.
Our forefathers could not understand it.
They believed that these are some gods.
I was shocked.
I asked the question, were primitive human influenced
by extraterrestrials, not gods?
And if it all was like I suggested, where is the proof?
So you start trying to find at least indications.
That's what I have done now for at least 45 years.
You have pictorial evidence, you have artifacts and archaeology,
and you have what's come out of the old literature--
hundreds of indications which you cannot deny anymore.
MICHAEL CREMO: What it means is that we need new explanations
for human origins, that perhaps we're not alone in the universe
and that human-like beings came to this planet
from some other planet elsewhere in the cosmos.
I think that's a very good idea, myself.
And it really excited people.
It was a new way of looking at the past,
looking at ancient civilizations.
And it put this very modern space age spin
to the whole thing.
NARRATOR: "Chariots of the Gods" caused a sensation--
fueled in no small part by the popular response
to books like Frank Herbert's "Dune,"
television shows like "Star Trek," and feature films
like "2001--
A Space Odyssey."
ERICH VON DANIKEN: The time was ripe because everybody was
talking of possible space travel,
of possibility of extraterrestrials.
So it was all wonderful coming together.
But it was not planned.
I was accused that I have chosen the timing,
so it was all a calculation.
It was not a calculation.
It was not a timing because I was writing on this story
since I was a student.
NARRATOR: Since the date of its first publication,
Von Daniken's book has seen more than 40 printings
and can be read in more than 30 languages.
But "Chariots of the Gods" was a best seller that might never
have been published.
I sent this manuscript to 20 German publishers.
No one was interested.
The manuscript 20 times came back.
It's not professional.
We are not interested.
And so on.
After a Swiss newspaper printed excerpts of it
on a weekly basis, more than 10,000 copies of the book
were sold before ever hitting the market.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: So it was a running bestseller,
starting in Switzerland first, then going over to Germany,
and then the rest of the world.
They had to print and print and print and print.
It was absolutely incredible.
NARRATOR: In 1970, a feature length documentary
was released to theaters, followed by dozens
of bestselling books and growing legions of fans and supporters.
"Chariots of the Gods" was tremendously influential.
It somehow spoke to people who want to believe.
GEORGE NOORY: When I was a boy, "Chariot of the Gods"
was one of the books I first read.
I mean, I ripped it apart.
I digest it.
I couldn't get enough of it.
I just fell in love with that book,
because it really opened up all kinds of new questions.
And Von Daniken was able to point out many anomalies
in history that the mainstream archaeologists can't answer
very well.
He had what was a revolutionary new idea, that of gods
from outer space coming to the planet,
helping create civilization.
When I first read "Chariots of the Gods,"
I couldn't put that book down, because it answered
a whole bunch of questions that I had.
And it was a great combination of archaeology and adventure.
And it's just a wonderful way to see the world
and pursue these ancient mysteries.
And it truly was, I think, the catalyst for what people like
I do today, and that is to talk about the mysteries
and the unusual and the paranormal.
He paved the way for a lot of us to talk
about these strange stories.
And that continues to grow.
And it's going to get bigger and bigger and bigger.
People want answers to questions that they
can't answer themselves.
NARRATOR: But in spite of the book's enormous popularity,
or perhaps because of it, Von Daniken's theories
were scorned by scientists and jeered at by theologians.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: Of course, it created a storm of controversy.
I was completely attacked, especially
by the scientific newspeople.
They said, come on.
He's just telling story.
He's a liar or he's a fraud or whatever.
There is not a single piece of evidence that Von Daniken puts
forward that cannot be attributed to human ingenuity,
technology, and development.
ILIA DELIO: Don't try to reduce the scriptures to a science
book.
Or don't try to reduce the scriptures to an explanation
of our modern world today.
I don't expect that the scientific community now
embraces and kisses me and say, oh, wonderful.
Great, you did.
We have to live with critics.
This is normal.
"Chariots of the Gods" was full of speculation.
I had 238 question marks.
Nobody read the question mark.
They always said, Mr. Von Daniken is saying.
I did not say.
I asked the question, would that be a possibility?
In "Chariots of the Gods," I make clear differences
between speculations and facts.
NARRATOR: But as controversial as many
of Von Daniken's theories are, believers
point to tangible evidence.
How, for example, could a centuries old map
chart a landmass that has only recently been discovered?
AUTHOR: Would tend to indicate that the map was made
at a time when Antarctica was ice free, which would be
many billions of years ago.
NARRATOR: And how could a primitive civilization
know how to harness electricity or even build a computer?
DAVID CHILDRESS: This was tantamount to finding a jet
airplane in the tomb of King Tut.
NARRATOR: And just who were these mysterious designs--
only visible from high altitudes--
intended for?
The signs are made for somebody who flies.
There's no way out of this.
NARRATOR: Could Von Daniken's theory that ancient gods were
really alien visitors contain any serious scientific merit?
The answer involves a search around the world,
and even right before our eyes.
If alien beings from other planets
had visited the Earth thousands of years ago,
how would our ancient ancestors have
tried to communicate with them?
And wouldn't there be some physical evidence
of the time they spent here?
One answer may lie in the Nazca desert of Peru.
There, atop an arid plateau that stretches for nearly 50 miles,
countless geometric patterns and figures decorate the landscape.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: You fly over this desert
and you see some lines.
The lines look like airstrips.
They start abruptly.
They end abruptly.
The longest of it is 23 kilometers.
Right away, not one curve.
Just incredible.
And ending in one of these so-called airstrips.
In the mixture of large lines and small lines,
you see gigantic figures in the ground, figures of fishes,
monkeys, spiders, apes, but of such over dimensional size
that you can see them only from the air.
GEORGE NOORY: They built them.
The people built them.
Or somebody built them hundreds and hundreds of years
ago, perhaps maybe even thousands of years ago.
They don't erode, because the conditions on top of that plane
in Peru are such that there is no wind
and it just doesn't weather away.
I mean, they've got spiders and monkeys and just
different pictures that could be signs of, hello up there.
Here we are.
It's something
ERICH VON DANIKEN: When I was young,
when I was the first time in Nazca,
I realized that in the ground you'll find some lines
with a white stuff.
To me, it looked like salt. I crushed it up with my nails.
I took it into my mouth.
It doesn't smell like salt. It smelled like nothing.
I went to the hotel.
I [inaudible] it in hot and cold water.
But nothing changed.
So I asked the Dresden University,
please take some samples of this.
What is this?
They analyzed it in the big microscope.
And out comes a crystalline glass.
We don't understand this.
So I know for sure something is wrong in Nazca.
But I still don't have the answer why,
because the next step would be digging.
And we are not permitted--
Nazca is like a holy place.
Nobody may change or do anything.
NARRATOR: Various disputed explanations
suggest that the lines could have been used for irrigation
ditches, giant astronomical calendars, or pathways,
perhaps used for religious worship.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: Looking at Nazca from the air,
it looks like an airport.
And it really does, because you have all of these bands,
wide bands, that look like airstrips that are laid on top
of each other.
But you also have these gigantic, long, straight lines
that go for miles and miles over valleys, over mountains.
So once again, you've got this idea of like,
OK, people are creating this.
But what is the reason?
Is it to show these gods in aerial vehicles,
oh, land here kind of a thing?
Because we just don't have a good idea
of why people would do this.
And it really does seem that they're
trying to signal people who are in the air, in space,
or flying around our planet.
NARRATOR: During World War II, American troops
created air bases on remote Pacific Islands.
To natives who had never witnessed advanced technology,
the sight of giant metal birds touching down
looked to them as if the gods themselves had turned the earth
into a planetary pit stop.
DAVID CHILDRESS: They would see these big planes land.
And it was all technology that just--
out of the sky.
They didn't know how these things worked.
But they could see them land.
And what they liked about it was they were getting free stuff.
They were getting cargo.
Suddenly, when the war was over, all these airstrips
were abandoned and everyone left.
And the islanders scratched their heads
and they all said to themselves, wow,
wasn't it great when all these planes came out of the sky
and gave us free cans of corned beef and stuff?
We really like that cargo.
Entire religions sprung up from this where a priest actually
said, yes, you know, that was our dead ancestors sending us
cargo.
So what they did then was they began
going to the old airstrips and they
would build mock wooden airplanes to try and get
those planes to come back from the sky
and deliver the cans of corned beef to them again.
And so you can see how that analogy with modern cargo cults
plays exactly into the ancient astronaut scenario where
something like this could have easily happened
in the past and entire religions built
around ancient astronauts.
But gigantic geoglyphs aren't the only mystery surrounding
Nazca.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: I was flying over Nazca for days
hanging out the aircraft with the camera
and shooting and shooting and shooting.
I had more or less about 4,000 pictures about Nazca.
This is really fascinating.
You see this is one of the pictures which
prove that this mountain was made flat artificially,
because you compared it with the mountains around there.
There, the mountains cap comes up from both sides.
Here it was flat.
This is absolutely incredible.
This is one of the most craziest pictures I made about Nazca.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: The crazy thing is, the rubble,
the remains of that summit or that mountaintop-- gone.
It's nowhere.
It's not in the Valley down below.
It's nowhere in the region.
What happened to it?
Because all the mountains around it have their summits.
It's there.
And then you have other mountains
that are as flat as a table with bands on top
that look like runways.
NARRATOR: Another question-- why would visiting ETs be drawn
to the bone dry deserts of Peru?
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: Let's just say hypothetically
that a spaceship arrives here on planet Earth
and you wanted to quickly find out what this planet consists
of.
Nazca would be the perfect place to go and visit
for some sampling and for some experimentation
because Nazca still today is one of the most abundant areas
in the world regarding raw materials.
There you find everything.
You find gold.
You find uranium, what have you.
It's basically the cliff notes of planet Earth.
You go to Nazca and you immediately
know everything about what our planet consists
of because all the raw materials converge there at high volumes.
JAVIER GRILLO-MARXUACH: Why do we have to believe that they
simply could not be an expression
of an artistic impulse, you know?
Is it really that outlandish to believe that these natives
in Peru might have wanted to create some large scale
work of art?
And to say that such a large scale work of art
could not have been created merely for the possibility
of having created it, rather than the Nazca lines
are so inhumanly vast that they could only be admired by people
who are capable of flight.
Well, you know, you can say the same thing
about the Great Wall of China.
And yet, the Great Wall of China has a purpose that
is political, that is martial.
Somebody might have walked the Nazca lines
as a spiritual labyrinth in the shape
of a spiritual, totemic object and were,
in their own way, supposed to get a kind of epiphany
from that.
The fact that we don't understand
the purpose of a thing opens it to tremendous speculation.
GEORGE NOORY: Now, sure, could it have been people
of that time simply saying, let's make something
for the gods?
But who are the gods to these people?
Did they come down and did they live with them for a while?
And then did they make these pictures as some kind
of celebration to them?
Who knows.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: Nazca and the Nazca figures
make no sign seen from the Earth.
You have to fly over it.
The signs are made for somebody who flies.
There's no way out this.
I hope archaeology sooner or later will
come to a similar conclusion.
NARRATOR: But if visitors from other planets
were thought to be gods, wouldn't there
be written accounts of them?
Perhaps the answer can be found right in front of us
in one of the most shocking places of all.
Ironically, Erich Von Daniken's firm belief
that Earth has been visited in the past
by beings from other planets is entirely
consistent with his belief in God and the Bible.
It is merely a question of interpretation.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: Now, one has to understand,
I was a very, very deep believer in God.
By the way, I'm still a believer in God.
I never lost my God.
But for a young man, my God had to be almighty.
My God would never need a vehicle
in which to move around, a vehicle to go from point A
to point B.
NARRATOR: In what Christians refer to as the Old Testament,
there are in fact several accounts of God
and his angels visiting the Earth.
Sometimes these visitations are accompanied by tremendous noise
and clouds of billowing smoke.
In the book of Ezekiel, for example, the prophet
claims that he witnessed a visitation by heavenly beings
coming down from the skies aboard a fantastic flying
machine.
As far as Von Daniken is concerned,
it's a highly detailed description
of an alien sighting.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: This is incredible.
Ezekiel not only describes what he see,
he also describes what he hears.
He describes the whole thing as being the splendors of God.
NARRATOR: The prophet also details
several four-faced winged creatures
who appeared in the likeness of men
and who traveled upon a gleaming wheeled device.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: Inside the splendors of God,
there was something like a drone.
And now this drone was a being, sitting looking like a human
in glittering clothes.
And beneath it, he saw some vehicles.
He saw some wings.
He describes the noise of the wings.
He describes the noise of the wings
with the thundering of a waterfall.
BARRY DOWNING: Ezekiel saw his wheel within a wheel.
This sounds more high tech than supernatural.
And we can't suppose that people 3,000 years ago would
understand the difference between the supernatural and
high tech.
NARRATOR: But what if there is more to Ezekiel's
heavenly visions than the imaginative insights
of a religious man?
What if there was a scientific foundation for them?
LUIS NAVIA: Yes, I once had the opportunity
of meeting and spending time and traveling with a gentleman
by the name of Joseph Blumrich.
He was a senior chief engineer at NASA, personally
involved in the Mariner expedition to Mars.
He was also in charge of the landing gear for the Mariner
space ship.
And he told me himself that the idea of the design used
for the Mariner spaceship that landed on Mars
came to him from the reading of the biblical
takes in which there is talk about wheels within wheels.
So here you have another example of the person of curiosity
who conceives of these ideas.
NARRATOR: Another biblical figure
who continues to fascinate Von Daniken is
the character of Enoch.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: Enoch is not part of the Bible.
In the Bible, in the Old Testament,
you find maybe just one phrase about Enoch.
That's all.
But among the apocrypha texts, there are volumes and volumes,
if you know them.
You'll find the Book of Enoch.
Enoch is the first person in antiquity
who writes in the first person.
I did.
I heard.
I was there.
NARRATOR: In one of the ancient texts,
this great grandfather of Noah is said to have been taken away
by God for 300 years.
He was taken up to the sky.
Up there, he meets the Highest--
the so-called Highest.
In religion, they call it God.
He meets the Highest.
And the Highest says to his servants,
you teach this young man in our language
and then you teach him writing.
So he writes books.
Of course, he knows all these foreigners by name.
He quotes them by name.
He knows their profession.
He knows which of these extraterrestrials
was the astronomer.
So Enoch is the only and first person thousands
of years ago who gives some of the names
of the extraterrestrials and gives
some of their professions.
How is this possible?
We have an eyewitness and nobody speaks about it.
So I really was confused.
ROBERT CARGILL: That would be the argument that the followers
of Von Daniken would say.
Why is it so absurd for aliens to come when it's completely
acceptable for God to intervene in human history?
The difference is Von Daniken is arguing that aliens came
and gave technologies to people to advance those cultures.
So basically, they gave objects.
They gave new ideas and new technologies,
and that those cultures advanced because of them,
whereas at least in the Bible, it's not like God gave
humankind a magic watch or a new missile
that they could use to defeat their enemies.
God gives instruction-- at least the Bible records
that God gives instructions on how to live,
but not how to build new devices that further
or advance a specific culture.
ILIA DELIO: Can we liken Ezekiel's chariot to a UFO?
The ancients used myth and metaphor and images to describe
their experience of God.
I think what we don't want to fall
to is a type of fundamental literalism.
The stories of the Old Testament emerge out
of the people of that time, out of their own context,
to make sense of their experience of God.
We can gain insight by reading the Old Testament
and reading about Ezekiel's chariot.
But it's not to draw a strict analogy between his chariot
and a UFO.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: When all of these stories
were written down, writing was a fairly new invention.
The very first thing they wrote down
is something that actually happened to them.
It was so important, so compelling, so significant
to them that they had to put it in writing.
Why can't modern society come to grips that these stories might
be true, after all?
NARRATOR: Von Daniken's research turned up
evidence of other arguably extraterrestrial phenomena,
and not only in the Bible.
Almost every religion has similar stories about deities
with spectacular powers and abilities who come to Earth
and directly influence the lives of men.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: Suddenly one day I said to myself, now,
come on.
This is similar to stories in so many old religions.
Are they talking about extraterrestrials?
This so-called gods are here.
They give orders.
They force the humans to do certain things.
And one day they disappear.
But they always disappear with the promise
to return in a far away future.
MICHAEL CREMO: If, as I believe, people in ancient civilizations
were familiar with space travel, people in ancient civilizations
were in communication with human-like beings
from other planets, then I think we should expect
to find evidence for this in their literatures,
which we do find.
NARRATOR: Throughout the ancient Sanskrit epics of India,
there are numerous descriptions of vimanas, or mythical flying
machines.
One of these accounts even dates back over 5,000 years.
MICHAEL CREMO: In the Bhagavad Purana, which
is an ancient Sanskrit history, there
is a description of a spacecraft that was piloted
by a King named Shalya.
It's described that it was made of metal.
It was described that it sometimes appeared
to be in two places at once.
It was described as having a motion similar to that
of a butterfly.
And these descriptions are consistent with what people who
observe UFOs today report.
NARRATOR: In other Sanskrit text, such as the Mahabharata,
the Rig Veda, and the Ramayana, there
can be found descriptions of vimana measuring as wide as 100
feet and often equipped with the capabilities
of modern aircraft.
One vimana produced a shaft of light
which, when focused on a target, consumed it with its power.
It's like Buck Rogers or Flash Gordon movie from the '30s.
They read like the wildest science fiction.
People are flying around in airships called vimanas
blasting each other and having aerial fights,
destroying entire cities.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: And the crazy thing
is that all of those stories are totally accepted
in the modern society of India.
MICHAEL CREMO: I don't think we can say that these descriptions
are simply imagination, because even though they were written
thousands of years ago, they match what many people today
report in terms of observing the actions of UFOs.
Were they just mythological tales
that they're making up fantasy?
Or were these physical, real events,
and they're trying to describe them as the best
that they could?
That seems to make more sense to me.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: I can tell you this--
I would be out of a job in India,
because there if I were to talk about ancient aliens
and ancient gods, they would say, OK, so what else is new?
NARRATOR: When backing up their claims
of extraterrestrial visitation, ancient alien theorists
draw upon two kinds of examples.
There's the evidence you can read,
such as that found in ancient texts,
and then there's the evidence you can actually see.
Among the earliest types of physical specimens--
numerous cave and rock drawings and stone sculptures
found all over the globe.
Pictures are worth a thousand words, absolutely.
When you see pictures depicted, for example, on a cave in Italy
that show two astronauts with helmets on, what the heck
could it be?
What could it be?
NARRATOR: Each of these ancient illustrations or statues
depict figures dressed in strange attire for the times
and sporting unusual headgear.
But could they really be representations
of alien astronauts, visitors from other worlds, who touched
down upon the Earth thousands of years ago?
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: All over the world,
we have statues and sculptures and paintings and depictions
of these extraterrestrial beings.
Even in the United States at Sego Canyon, Utah,
we have petroglyphs of very weird looking creatures that
have antennae on their heads, helmets.
And halfway around the world--
in Kimberly, Australia, for example--
we have the exact same depictions
of these helmeted beings with a halo around their heads.
And the question I have is, what did our ancestors see
that compelled them to put this on their cave walls?
On yet another continent in Guatemala City,
we have a sculpture that looks eerily
reminiscent of a modern day astronaut.
I mean, that thing is wearing a helmet.
There is some type of a mouthpiece.
And on his chest are some type of controls or a breathing
apparatus.
How is this possible 1,500 years ago?
And in Columbia, there were thousands of tomb artifacts
that look like modern day airplanes.
It has fixed wings.
It has a fuselage.
And it has an upright tail fin, which is not
intrinsic to nature, but it is intrinsic to modern day
aerodynamics.
Did our ancestors see something similar flying in the air?
Absolutely.
Another compelling artifact that was found
was at the Istanbul museum, where
you have this headless spaceman sitting inside some type
of a space vehicle.
You can see his hands.
And you can see tubing that go to some sort of devices.
He's wearing a suit.
His legs are crammed in there.
I mean, even to the untrained eye,
this looks very aerodynamic.
And it looks something that came from outer space.
GEORGE NOORY: These people witnessed something.
They were told something.
And they tried to depict it the best
way they could with the kind of technology
they had at the time.
And that was simple tools and simple artwork.
MICHAEL CREMO: Many of these ancient civilizations
were widely separated in space and time.
They weren't in communication with each other.
But still, they have the same kinds of accounts.
I think it's because they all experienced these things.
And they all have the idea that we're
part of a cosmic hierarchy of beings.
So I think we can't explain things away so easily.
NARRATOR: But for Erich Von Daniken and other proponents
of his ancient astronaut theories,
perhaps the most significant illustration
can be found in Mexico.
The Mayan archaeological site of Palenque
had been abandoned for centuries before it was stumbled upon
by Spanish explorers.
DAVID CHILDRESS: So you get to the top of this.
And suddenly, here are the Great Pyramids of Palenque.
NARRATOR: Here, deep within a secret tomb,
under one of the age old temples,
lies the seven ton sarcophagus of Palenque's seventh century
ruler, Pacal the Great.
DAVID CHILDRESS: Lord Pacal apparently
died here at Palenque.
He was apparently this mysterious Mayan leader.
He was a giant--
7 or 8 feet tall, actually.
And then they built this pyramid around his tomb.
The Mayans literally worshiped him as some kind of a God.
NARRATOR: King Pacal's sarcophagus
is adorned with a carving that has become a famous example
of classic Mayan art.
Most believe the illustration shows Pacal descending
into the Mayan underworld.
But ancient astronaut theorists interpret the carving a vastly
different way.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: On this slab, an incredible in chiseling.
You see a man.
And he's sitting in the sort of capsule.
He has some sort of mask on his nose.
And you see his upper hand.
He's manipulating some controls.
From the lower hand, he's turning something on.
The heel of his left foot is on a kind of pedal.
And outside of the capsule, you see a linking flame.
This is incredible.
This is absolutely proof for extraterrestrials.
ASTRONAUT: 3, 2, 1, 0, liftoff.
JASON MARTELL: If we look at the similarities of what
our astronauts look like when they are in a rocket ship
or in the space shuttle and have gear attached to them,
there are similarities being shown.
So one just has to ask the question of,
is this just an artifact symbolically showing something?
Or are they trying to depict with their own limited
understanding of the time what was taking place?
DAVID CHILDRESS: Was Lord Pacal just some Mayan King
that everyone liked?
Was he some important visitor from some far off land?
Or was he even possibly some extraterrestrial
from another planet?
NARRATOR: Although most scientists and archaeologists
discredit Von Daniken's interpretation of the Palenque
carvings, visitors to the site are often treated to stories
and offered souvenirs that support his claim.
This is Erich Von Daniken's theory,
"The Chariots of the Gods."
You see, Pacal is supposed to be driving the rocket,
holding the controls, the pedals, the engine,
and the fire of the rockets.
This will be the cabin.
And this is the oxygen.
Mainstream archaeologists claim that it's really
a depiction of Lord Pacal and his journey to the underworld.
He's going under the ground, rather than out into space.
Both are interesting theories and either could be right,
in my mind.
NARRATOR: In recent years, Pacal's tomb
has been closed to tourists and casual visitors.
Although the sarcophagus is off limits,
ancient astronaut theorists can still find a wealth of evidence
in the carvings along the walls of Palenque.
This is very similar to what's on the lid of Lord Pacal,
of his tomb, the way he's got his left hand right here
in a odd position, and his wrist, also some kind
of rocket exhaust or something is coming out of him.
NARRATOR: But Lord Pacal may not have been the only alien who
once walked the Palenque ruins.
DAVID CHILDRESS: The Mayans had such a advanced calendar
and mathematical system.
Why were they so obsessed with the stars--
one of the most advanced of any ancient cultures.
And yet, the Mayans just vanished around 500 AD.
We don't know where they went.
And one explanation is that the Mayans were
some kind of extraterrestrials and they literally
left our planet.
NARRATOR: But ancient cave drawings and stone carvings
aren't the only types of illustrations that fascinate
ancient alien theorists.
In 1929, historians discovered a map
which had been painted onto a piece of gazelle hide.
They traced the document back to a 16th century Turkish Admiral
named Piri Reis But in stark contrast to other maps
dating back to that time, the map
depicts landmasses that were still as yet unexplored.
MICHAEL CREMO: It shows the coast of Antarctica
as it exists under the current ice cover.
Now, that's really pretty amazing, because it would tend
to indicate that the map was made at a time when Antarctica
was ice-free, which would be many millions of years ago.
NARRATOR: The map also accurately charts the coasts
of Europe and North Africa.
But it's the illustration of northern Antarctica
that truly astonishes ancient astronaut theorists,
because this region wouldn't even be discovered
for another 300 years.
JASON MARTELL: We have to remember that Antarctica
is covered by at least a mile thick ice.
We didn't have ground penetrating radar until 1958.
So for a map to exist in 1531 accurately
showing the topography is pretty interesting.
NARRATOR: When cartographers superimposed the Piri Reis
map over a modern map of the world,
they were amazed to discover that the ancient chart was
fantastically accurate in the most minute of details.
But how could the creators of a centuries old map
have known of mountains or rivers that had yet
to be discovered?
In 1531, I really don't know of anyone
who was flying above the surface of the Earth high enough
to map topography.
And how would they see underneath the ice?
DAVID CHILDRESS: Their maps were so accurate.
I mean, we know that they didn't go to Antarctica
and explore it.
But yet, they were able to draw these maps of it.
NARRATOR: But if ancient aliens possessed the technology
to travel the universe, would the only evidence
of their journey be in the form of a few carvings
or a mysterious map?
Wouldn't there also be signs of a highly advanced technology,
signs that might be too large to overlook?
GEORGE NOORY: You mean to tell me that people of that time
period did this by hand?
I don't think so.
NARRATOR: When it comes to searching for evidence
of ancient aliens, Eric Von Daniken literally leaves
no stones unturned.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: I have collected for more than 40
years information.
And there are two sorts of evidences
to support my hypothesis.
The one source is literature.
This might be archaeological or mythological literature.
And the other sorts are practical objects--
for example, the pyramids are linked
to the gods, the gods who once descended from the sky
to us earthlings.
NARRATOR: Without a little interplanetary help,
how else could early Egyptians have learned
to stack the nearly 2 and 1/2 million limestone
and granite blocks that create the Great Pyramid?
How could prehistoric man move the immense boulders
at Stonehenge?
And how could ancient builders at Kuzco
pit stones so closely together that even a razor blade can't
fit between them?
DAVID CHILDRESS: As you travel around the world trying
to piece together this puzzle of the ancient world,
there's not that much to really get a good grasp on.
But what there is is giant blocks
of stone, huge, articulated granite or basalt blocks,
in many cases.
Sometimes they weigh 1,000 tons.
These things are the size of railway cars.
And you find them in Peru and Bolivia and Mexico
and ancient Egypt.
You have to ask yourself why and how could ancient people have
dragged these railway car sized blocks of stone, stacked them
up together into these giant buildings?
NARRATOR: Perhaps the most familiar and most mysterious
megalithic structure in all the world
is the Great Pyramid of Giza--
the oldest and largest of Egypt's three Great Pyramids.
This miracle of engineering is believed
to have been constructed during a 20 year period ending
around 2560 BC.
But to ancient alien theorists, those numbers
just don't add up.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: The Great Pyramid was not
built in only 22 years, because logistically speaking,
you would have to cut, transport, and put into place
one stone every nine seconds.
And there are modern engineers who have come forward and said,
we couldn't do this in 22 years, either.
GEORGE NOORY: There are all kinds of theories
on how the Great Pyramid of Giza was built--
so many theories, you just sit back and shake your head.
And that includes ET visitations,
levitating the blocks with some kind of sound system,
anti-gravity, thousands of workers pulling long ropes
on a ramp that had to be almost two miles long
to get it up to where it is.
All I know is that they are so finely aligned,
and that the architecture is so precise,
that even modern people today with great technology
would have a difficult time being that good.
How, for example, in the inside of the pyramids, in the tombs,
could they build granite and marble areas that were just so
perfect and so clean?
You mean to tell me that people of that time period
did this by hand?
I don't think so.
NARRATOR: The enormous size and weight of the stones multiplied
by the sheer number of them makes one thing certain--
the construction of the Great Pyramid
remains one of the greatest marvels and mysteries
of architectural engineering.
JASON MARTELL: I don't want to discount human ingenuity,
because I do believe that we do have the ability
to do these things over a longer period of time.
But the knowledge to build some of these monuments--
there had to have been some type of intervention
or some type of knowledge given to ancient man
to carry out those instructions.
They couldn't have just come up with it on their own.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: In Egypt, there
are old traditions saying the Great Pyramid
was constructed by a pharaoh with the name of [inaudible]..
And then they say [inaudible] is the same, which the Hebrew
community calls Enoch.
Enoch is a prophet in the Old Testament.
There are books of Enoch called the apocryphal texts.
You make a connection with Enoch to these extraterrestrials.
He clearly says that he met these extraterrestrials.
Now, we have writings in the Book of Enoch.
And he gave the order to construct a building which
cannot be destroyed by the thousands of years
of the future.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: And the ancient Egyptian texts
speak that the pyramids were built by human beings
with the assistance of the guardians of the sky,
meaning the gods.
And so we have proposed that the pyramids were
built by human hands, but with the assistance
of extraterrestrial technology.
NARRATOR: As one of the seven wonders of the world,
the Great Pyramid remains not only an archaeological mystery,
but a geographical marvel.
In 1877, author and theologian Joseph Seiss
demonstrated that the Great Pyramid resides
at the intersection of the longest line of latitude
and the longest line of longitude--
the exact center of all the landmass in the world.
Also, each of its four sides aligns almost precisely
with the four points of the compass,
though such an instrument wasn't even designed until thousands
of years later.
But is it just mere coincidence that pyramid construction very
similar to that practiced in ancient Egypt
was also evolving halfway around the world?
DAVID CHILDRESS: There are pyramids on remote Pacific
Islands and in India and in Mexico.
So this is something that's all over the world.
archaeologists haven't really been
able to explain why dissimilar cultures separated
by huge oceans are building the same structures--
and in many ways, the same way.
NARRATOR: Here in Central Mexico stands an ancient city
that dates back more than 2,000 years.
Its name-- Teotihuacan--
literally means "city of the gods."
And located at its center is the Pyramid of the Sun.
Incredibly, this pyramid's perimeter
is virtually the same as that of the Great Pyramid of Giza.
A structural coincidence?
Or could it be that both were inspired by the same designers?
GEORGE NOORY: Couple of theories for that.
One, maybe they were all taught the same thing
by an extraterrestrial race.
Two, there were ancient travelers
from within this planet who went from one area
to another over the thousands of past years.
And then as some skeptics will say,
hey, that's the greatest archaeological way to make it.
So they just knew it.
I don't think that's the case.
DAVID CHILDRESS: At Teotihuacan, here you
have a giant pyramid of the sun and a giant pyramid
of the moon.
According to the legends, these things
were built by gods who were giants at the end of one
of the destructions of the world.
Civilizations such as the Aztecs and the Mayans
and the Hopi Indians of Northern Arizona,
they believe that the world has been destroyed four times
in the past--
one time by ice, once by fire, once by water.
Each time, mankind rebuilds again.
And Teotihuacan supposedly was built just at the beginning
of one of these four worlds.
GEORGE NOORY: You may ask the question, why build
these huge, huge structures?
For what purpose?
Well, in Egypt, for example, either the pharaohs
had incredible egos and they wanted to outdo themselves,
so they built these huge museums for themselves,
or it's also possible that these ancients wanted to leave
behind something for us.
GIORGIO TSOUKALOS: It is written in ancient Egyptian texts
the purpose why.
The pyramid was built was to store knowledge--
300 books which allegedly contained the knowledge
of the universe, dictated by the guardians of the sky.
NARRATOR: Of course, the pyramids
aren't the only ancient monuments
that continue to baffle scientists and archaeologists.
There are literally hundreds of them.
And they can be found in every corner of our world.
[music playing]
NARRATOR: In a remote area of the Pacific
Ocean lies one of the most isolated
yet inhabited locations in the world, Easter Island.
Here, over 800 stone guardians called moai stand watch
over the island's coastline.
But are they primitive native carvings or eerie portraits
of alien visitors from thousands of years ago?
Whatever they were for, they're
made to last for thousands of years.
They're built out of blocks of stone
that weigh many, many tons.
Not only are people building structures
out of these huge megalithic blocks of stone,
but this was going on around the world.
And yet, supposedly, it's just primitive people doing this
for no really good reason, it would seem.
MICHAEL DENNIN: I think one of the things that comes
into our considerations of what ancient cultures could have
accomplished is whether they were able to write it
down or not.
We're very tied to, if we have evidence that they wrote down
how they did it, then we believe we know how they did it.
So Egypt, we have a lot more writings and drawings that
show them building the pyramids, give us
an idea of the technology.
If you go somewhere like Easter Island,
we don't have any real written evidence of what they did,
and sometimes that leads us to question their innovativeness.
NARRATOR: 3,000 miles away in the Republic of Bolivia,
stonework exists which is amazingly
similar to the statues of Easter Island.
Tiwanaku is, in fact, so ancient that it defies
modern dating techniques.
It is estimated to be over 17,000 years old, perhaps
the oldest city in the world.
And somehow, the sculptures at Tiwanaku
were constructed in the same style
and with the same enigmatic expressions
as their distant cousins on Easter Island.
A lot of the stuff at Tiwanaku you can see in earlier
civilizations, all the way back, you know, before into the--
the centuries BC in Peru, you see
some of these same patterns.
Some of the same iconography, the imagery.
And you can see the ancestry of this.
NARRATOR: But while tourists flock to the ruins of Tiwanaku,
perhaps the most mystifying of all ancient sites
lies just a few hundred yards away.
Of relatively little interest to most visitors,
Puma Punku is a field of stone ruins
that both thrills and stimulates the imaginations
of ancient alien theorists.
In my opinion, the most significant piece
of evidence that we have in this entire ancient astronaut puzzle
is Puma Punku in the highland of Bolivia.
While the pyramids of Giza are incredible feat of achievement,
compared to Puma Punku, the pyramids are child play.
Logic does not exist at Puma Punku,
because there we have megalithic structures which just lie
about this entire site as if ripped apart
by some sort of a great force.
[shaking]
NARRATOR: The blocks of Puma Punku
were so finely cut that they once perfectly
interlocked like the pieces of an elaborate puzzle.
But with the nearest quarry over 10 miles away,
how did these colossal stones, some weighing hundreds of tons,
even get here?
We are talking about the place 4,000 meters over sea level.
That means there are no trees up there which
you could use for rollers.
Nothing grows except a few grasses and bushes.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: I have stood
in front of many monuments.
However, Puma Punku takes the crown,
because what we find there is so inexplicable, so
inachievable that the question remains, how was it done,
and for what purposes?
Mainstream archaeologists say that Puma Punku was built
by the Aymara Indians, and we would all
have to agree that in order to build something like Puma
Punku, you need writing, you need planning,
and you need some sort of an idea where which piece goes
and how it ultimately all fits together.
But there is one thing that all the mainstream archaeologists
agree upon, that the Aymara didn't have any writing.
So how was it possible that they built all of this
without plans?
DAVID CHILDRESS: What's really amazing,
and why the ancient astronaut theorists are so drawn to Puma
Punku and Tiwanaku is that the quality of the stonework
and the immense size of these blocks
is so incredible and perfect that there's actually evidence
of machining, and that they were using machine tools to cut
these blocks.
One of these platforms is 800 tons,
and they are so smoothly polished.
You have some stone, megalithic stones,
with grooves which are just a few [inaudible] inside,
which definitely cannot be made with stone age chisels.
It doesn't work with stone age chisels,
so there is another technology behind it.
NARRATOR: The lines cut into these rocks are exactly
straight and precisely the same depth
from one end to the other.
It's as if only master builders were allowed to work
there, because everything is so precise,
everything is so perfect, you wonder how any of this
was even possible.
One of the most intriguing things
there is, that the stones that were used there
aren't sandstone.
They're granite and diorite.
The only stone that's harder than diorite is diamond.
So the only way that this could have been achieved
is if the tools were tipped with diamonds.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: American professors who were up there
with their computer and other measurements,
they were really shocked.
In their literature they say, it is impossible to reconstruct
Puma Punku.
It's absolutely impossible.
NARRATOR: But is it really difficult to believe
that ancient peoples could have so precisely carved
these stones or could build such an incredibly
intricate structure from them?
If it was ancient astronauts teaching them these building
techniques, why don't we see just perfect,
almost skyscraper-like vertical edifices?
Everything was all pyramid-like?
Stonecutting techniques have been invented and reinvented
and independently invented all over the world.
If you think of yourself as a god king
and you want to have a structure built
that's going to last thousands of years,
it's much better to build it out of perfectly fitting stones
without mortar that degrades and decays
and has to be maintained.
So we see mortarless structures, megalithic structures
all over the world.
You have an anomaly here where on one hand,
these people are supposed to be very primitive.
They're just one step out of the Stone Age.
Yet, what they're doing are things that we couldn't even
do today, apparently, or would have extreme difficulty.
And that is building with these giant blocks of stone,
perfectly fitting them together with other blocks,
interlocking them.
The ancient people of our time on this planet
truly saw strange things.
They witnessed bizarre events.
But those stories other than in depictions and some artwork
and things like that, they're gone for some reason.
They're just gone.
But left behind are incredible things
that we have that make you wonder, how in the heck
were these things built?
Those are great mysteries.
And I think one of the things that keeps people just
continuing to push for the answers are
the fact that these things are so out there that they can't
figure it out.
NARRATOR: But uncovering the mystery
of just how these incredible structures were built
would only solve one piece of the puzzle.
Finding out why they were built and how they were used
poses equally compelling questions, questions
that may not be answerable here on Earth.
[music playing]
Did aliens really inspire our ancestors
to build ancient temples and pyramids?
And if they came here, did they leave behind any advanced
knowledge of physics, astronomy, or mathematics?
If so, is there any evidence that remains to this day?
One example might be this one.
Often described as the world's first mechanical computer,
it dates back over 2,000 years.
The Antikythera device was found in 1900
by sponge divers diving off a small island in the Aegean
called Antikythera.
There was a shipwreck there, and in it
was a coral-encrusted box.
And it was made of metal alloys.
And it then went to the Athens museum
where a good 50 years later, they
were able to X-ray this box and they
were able to discern cogged wheels that were interconnected
and give us a very good depiction of what
this thing was.
And it is a computer.
It's a really sophisticated machine.
JASON MARTELL: It's a very interesting piece
of technology, because it served two purposes.
One was that it was an astronomical device where you
could, by using it, chart your position to the stars
and navigate your way through the seas.
It was also an astrological device
so that someone could tell you, ah,
if you were born on this date and your planet sign is this,
then certain things were going to happen to you when
the planets are in this alignment.
So it was a very interesting piece of technology
that literally had more complicated gears
and inner workings than a modern day Swiss watch.
And it's found to be dated, I think, like, 200 BC.
So it's really an anomaly as to who could have created that
and what it was being used for.
When archaeologists first started
to examine this thing in the 1950s,
they said that they never could conceive of the ancient Greeks
having such complicated machinery.
And in fact, they said, this was tantamount to finding a jet
airplane in the tomb of King Tut.
NARRATOR: Even older than the Antikythera mechanism
are these carvings on a wall at the Dendera Temple
Complex in Egypt.
To some, the strange designs look eerily similar to objects
very much in use today.
In Egypt, there is this underground crypt at Dendera
that was always secret, and only the high priests
had access to that crypt.
And it's very hot in there, very narrow, low ceiling.
And on the walls, you have these reliefs of what
looks like ancient light bulbs.
Because we have to question one thing.
How did the ancient Egyptians light the inside
of their tombs?
NARRATOR: According to most mainstream archaeologists,
torches were used by the ancient Egyptians
to light the pitch black chambers of tombs and temples,
yet nowhere on the ceilings is there even the slightest
evidence of soot or smoke residue.
But if torches weren't used, how else could
these ancient rooms and hallways have been illuminated?
Another theory that was proposed
is that the light was directed from outside by copper mirrors.
And then there was light.
Hey, that is a neat trick.
And they've actually tried to recreate that theory,
but unfortunately they failed, because only
after a few corners, the sunlight dissipated
because the copper mirrors were too weak.
Also, there isn't enough oxygen inside those tombs with which
to support or feed a flame of a torch.
I was once inside the King's Chamber inside the Pyramid
of Giza, and somebody turned off the lights,
and immediately we were in pitch darkness.
And I said, no problem.
I'll just take out my lighter from my satchel,
and I turn on the lighter, and it didn't work.
So how were the insides of their temples lit?
I mean, the only remaining solution
is by some sort of an artificial light source,
and that is, for example, a light bulb.
So at an underground crypt at Dendera,
we find reliefs of such light bulbs.
DAVID CHILDRESS: Egyptologists' explanation of this--
and they have to have some explanation.
There's got to be one.
And it has to be pretty mundane.
It can't be that it's an electrical device.
Their explanation is that it is a lotus flower,
and what appears to be a bulb around
is the aroma of the lotus flower.
And so it's just a very odd depiction of a flower.
But another explanation, of course,
would be they actually had electrical lights.
NARRATOR: But if the ancient Egyptians had used some kind
of electric light to illuminate their passageways, why
does the visual evidence exist only in the temple at Dendera?
In Egypt, you had different areas of specialty,
and Dendera was the area where the knowledge
of the light-giving source was kept.
And this secret knowledge was kept by the high priests,
and they were the only ones who were privy
to this type of information, because Dendera was
the special place where this specific knowledge was guarded
and kept.
The scientific community is not saying,
oh, there aren't extraterrestrials
or they never did it.
They are judging whether or not this
is a valid scientific theory.
And what do I mean by that?
For something to be a scientific theory,
it really needs to be something you can test
with an obvious experiment.
NARRATOR: But how could the ancient Egyptians
have used anything resembling a modern day light bulb
without access to electricity?
After all, electricity wouldn't be discovered for thousands
of years.
That is, of course, with the exception of what scientists
call the Baghdad battery.
JASON MARTELL: The Baghdad battery
was discovered in ancient Iraq.
Scholars today say there's no way that ancient man was using
electricity or light bulbs.
So they look at this Baghdad battery,
and there's about a dozen of them
that have been found in Iraq.
And the only mainstream theory is that they were using it
for electroplating jewelry.
NARRATOR: Two major proponents of ancient alien theory,
Jason Martell and Giorgio Tsoukalos,
demonstrate just how the Baghdad battery could generate
electricity using a modern mockup of the device.
Well, basically, this is made out of a clay pot,
clay just found naturally in that region in southern Iraq.
And then they would use a small copper lining and something
along the lines of an asphalt stopper wrapped around an iron
rod.
And these all applied together in the combination
of some weak acidic acid--
vinegar, grape juice, orange juice, in this case wine--
would be able to generate a charge by combining
these elements with the iron rod and the copper.
And the combination of that creates an abundance
of electricity.
So what we're going to do is basically just
fill the clay pot with some orange juice here.
I'll try not to spill it too much.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: OK.
JASON MARTELL: And then we'll go ahead and put the copper rod
back in there, copper and iron rod.
We'll give it a moment to kind of fill that copper area there.
And then by turning on the voltmeter
and applying this to each side, we
should be able to generate a charge.
And there it goes, into the positive.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: Mm-hmm.
JASON MARTELL: And if we give it some time
to get the electrolytes really buzzing in there,
you'll see that this volt will actually continue to rise.
NARRATOR: But while some see the Baghdad battery as evidence
that man was sparked on by extraterrestrial wisdom,
others look at it and simply say, so what?
You could take some ancient technology like the Baghdad
battery, which probably was used for something like metal
plating in which you just mix chemicals
and it has certain chemical reactions to it
that they're using for this reason,
and we can take it, put a voltmeter on it,
and go, oh, look.
We're able to get a reading out of it.
Well, so what?
That's just a chemical reaction.
If they were using it, say, this battery
to operate other machines, where are the other machines?
If they were sending the electricity down wires, where
are all the wires that would have been all over the culture.
In other words, it's not likely a one-off invention like that
is going to survive without all the other inventions that would
have been there at the same time.
It is a battery.
Everybody agrees with that.
But nobody knows why they made it and how they made it.
What mind would think of that?
You know, electrical current that--
several thousand years ago?
It's very strange, but it's clearly a battery.
DAVID CHILDRESS: The whole idea that ancient civilizations
actually had knowledge of electricity
and used electricity is an accepted archaeological fact
today.
Just like in our own civilization
where about 200 years ago, Benjamin Franklin
and other scientists began experimenting
with simple electrical devices, we now
have evidence that over 3,000 years ago,
people were also experimenting with electrical devices.
Where might it have led them?
What other electrical devices would they
have been able to create?
I believe they probably created all kinds
of electrical devices.
NARRATOR: Tombs, temples, ancient light bulbs,
even electricity.
Here on Earth exists evidence of architectural and technological
wonders, centuries before we ever believed them possible.
But if evidence of ancient astronauts
exists here on Earth, what about elsewhere?
Might we find what we are looking
for by looking in the sky?
[music playing]
Here at the ancient city of Teotihuacan in Mexico,
evidence suggests that ancient cultures possessed
an incredibly accurate knowledge of our neighboring planets.
Some scholars have even interpreted the number
and orientation of its pyramids to perfectly reflect a model
of our own solar system.
Along the Avenue de Los Muertos,
the Avenue of the Dead, the pyramids
there align in perfect distance of each
of the orbits of our planets in our solar system.
NARRATOR: Perhaps significant is the fact that the large Pyramid
of the Sun is positioned at the center of the other structures,
reflecting the fact that the sun is
at the center of our solar system
and that the planets revolve around it.
It was a known fact back then already
that the sun was at the center of our solar system, which
Western science didn't find out until much, much later.
NARRATOR: But just how could Teotihuacan's designers
have known so early on that the planets in our solar system
revolved around the sun?
Didn't that take many more centuries
of scientific progress and investigation to figure out?
Interestingly enough, debunkers
will say, oh, this is just coincidence that these pyramids
are aligned with the planets of our solar system.
But if we go on the other side of the planet to Stonehenge,
we have another ancient site, which is way older, by the way,
than Teotihuacan where if you look at Stonehenge
from a bird's eye view, you see that these are all
concentric circles.
And each of these circles corresponds exactly
with the orbit of all of our planets in our solar system.
So we have two places on Earth where we have the same thing.
In recent years, Stonehenge has also
been interpreted by some archaeologists
to be a kind of astronomical calendar, one
which could be used to calculate events such as solar eclipses.
But if that were true, whoever lined these massive stones
on the barren English landscape would
have to have had precise astronomical knowledge
of the path of the sun.
Built between the seventh and ninth centuries,
the stone temples of Tikal tower more than 200 feet
above the Guatemalan rainforest.
Tikal is home to one of the largest excavation sites
in the world, one where thousands of structures
still remain buried beneath the jungle.
According to most scientists, Tikal's pyramids
played an essential part in helping the Mayans devise
their calendar.
By aligning the sight lines between the highest points
of the structures, ancient astronomers
could pinpoint the most important dates of the year,
such as an upcoming equinox or solstice.
But what also excites ancient astronaut theorists
is how perfectly the layout of Tikal's pyramids
correlate to the star map of the Pleiades Orion
region of the sky.
An overhead view of the structures almost
exactly mirrors the alignment of the constellation.
This same outline has been spotted
in an area far from Tikal.
Much, much farther.
Recently discovered on Mars is a cluster
of landforms that offers a near perfect replication
of the pyramid pattern of Tikal.
Three distinct locations, one unique pattern.
Coincidence or design?
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: At Tikal, the legends and the mythologies
that we have all speak of a time when the gods intermingled
and interconnected with our ancestors.
So Tikal also was built as a message for future generations
to see that a long, long time ago, we were visited
by extraterrestrials.
Someone who had seen this had to have actually relayed
the information to them, because they couldn't have just
guessed.
So it really starts to raise the question of saying
this ancient astronaut theory really needs to have
more light shed on the topic.
It's certainly possible that the ancient people not only
measured all of these astronomy events,
but were able to come up with a mathematical theory
to put them together and then to predict new things.
We shouldn't think that the ancient people were dummies.
Early man, people in ancient times,
didn't have dashboard-mounted GPS units.
They had the path of the sun through the sky, the path
of the moon through the sky.
They could see the stars at night.
And these were permanent fixtures
that they could navigate from.
So it's not surprising at all that almost every culture
recorded astronomical phenomenon.
SARA SEAGER: We never look up at the sky
and enjoy the beauty of it.
Ancient people would not have been able to avoid
looking at the sky.
With no electricity, the skies would be so dark
and the stars would be so bright.
Not only that, but they relied on the sky for directions,
for seasons in which to plant, and for a variety of things.
Today, with our GPS units and navigation systems
and computers, we don't need to look at the sky.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: Now, I want to be very clear about one
thing, that our ancestors were as smart as we are today.
However, I don't believe that ancient astronauts visited
the earth in the remote past.
I am convinced of it because of all the countless indications
and pieces of evidence that we can find from all
around the world, in different ancient cultures,
in different mythologies and legends.
I know it happened, because if you look at all the pieces,
it's the only conclusion that you can draw.
NARRATOR: But just why were ancient people so
focused on the sky and the stars in the first place?
Were they waiting for something to happen, or perhaps
for something or someone to return?
[music playing]
Four decades may have passed, but the ideas put forth
by Erich Von Daniken are still captivating his followers
and frustrating his skeptics to this day.
Like an Old Testament prophet or an ancient shaman,
the author is still out there, spreading his firmly held
message, that we are not alone.
But while the proof of Von Daniken's theories
may be debatable, their influence on movies, TV series,
and even radio programs is undeniable.
JAVIER GRILLO-MARXUACH: It's a tremendous lightning rod
for fiction and for fictional storytelling.
Now, the classic "Battlestar Galactica" series started
with a narration that said, "There
are those who believe that life here began out there
with tribes of humans far across the universe that may have been
the forefathers of the Egyptians and the Toltecs
and the Mayans."
You know, that's straight out of Von Daniken and that kind
of belief, you know?
It puts us in contact with an idea
of a mythological intelligence, and that is one of the things
that we as human beings crave desperately,
is to know that we are not alone in the world,
and that somebody else out there is either looking after us
or coming to fight for us, and that will unite us
against a common enemy.
WOMAN: I was reading a lot of books from Erich Von Daniken,
and I can imagine that's true, what he wrote in his books.
And so I can imagine this, that we had help from aliens.
But I don't know.
I'm not sure.
[laughs]
WOMAN: We only know so much in this world, and what we do know
is so limited.
And every day, we're finding more.
It requires us to ask more questions and bigger questions
and think bigger.
It's possible that something from another planet came,
some other life form, intelligent life form
came and did this.
MAN: I mean, who knows?
It could be, because the origins of many things
are lost in antiquity.
All we have are remnants and shreds of evidence
to suggest what might have happened.
WOMAN: If someone told me that it was proven that aliens had
a part in this, I wouldn't be that surprised.
Why not?
TODD DISOTELL: To be honest, ancient astronaut theory
has never cropped up in a discussion with my colleagues.
I don't care how many pints into it we've been.
We have never discussed ancient astronaut theory
in any credible way whatsoever.
DAVID CHILDRESS: One of the good things about ancient astronaut
theory is that it makes us think.
It brings out the, what about this?
What about that?
We need explanations for all these things.
And I think that one of the main reasons why mainstream
archaeologists get a real knee-jerk reaction
to the ancient astronaut theory is
that it's very disturbing to them,
because they don't have all the answers.
GEORGE NOORY: Now, some of them may believe that life could
exist in the universe, but their bottom line
is, show me the proof.
Show it to me for real.
I want to see the spaceship.
I want to see something concrete.
Not just a few pictures that everybody
can interpret as being this or that.
NARRATOR: Far-fetched, ridiculous, insane.
Ancient aliens visiting Earth centuries ago,
building monuments, influencing scripture.
But what if it all turned out to be true?
What would happen if just one piece of evidence
turned up one stone, one key that proved that Von Daniken
had been right all along?
And if he is right, what does that suggest about our future?
If alien visitors had come here before, would they come again?
MICHAEL DENNIN: Even I think the idea of aliens
and them visiting us is very exciting and interesting,
and it would be really cool if that happened.
So it gets people excited about the question.
Maybe they start thinking about it.
And like many things, they might ultimately
come to thinking about the physics or the archaeology
and get involved in the scientific process.
So that can be a positive side effect of these theories
and their popularization.
GIORGIO A. TSOUKALOS: If it turns out
that the ancient astronaut theory is wrong,
I will be the first one to say, OK, no problem.
But so far, certain pieces of evidence
have not been debunked.
SARA SEAGER: If the ancient alien astronaut theory
is somehow proven to be true, this
would be a huge boon to my work and to the search
for other planets like Earth with life on them,
because if alien astronauts have visited Earth
in the distant past, it means they're pretty nearby.
And it means that we don't have to look very far to find
planets like Earth with signs of life on them.
But evidence has to be treated with a great deal of caution,
because it has different meanings.
I'm not sure what the reaction of the population would be.
BARRY H. DOWNING: It will strengthen the general concept
that our history of religions in the world
needs to be looked at again with more respect and also
with more wonder.
Meaning, what are we supposed to make of this now?
And what are we supposed to be doing with this now?
ILIA DELIO: If science detects life on Mars,
if science detects a UFO, then we
need to take what science is saying to us
and begin to rethink about ourselves on Earth in light
of the possibility of new life.
Does that change our understanding of God?
It should, if anything, broaden it.
If we do find alien life, we should rejoice.
[laughs]
GEORGE NOORY: And honestly, the way things
are going on this planet right now,
I would welcome a visitation every once
in a while, a little help.
ERICH VON DANIKEN: There is no doubt that my hypothesis will
be accepted by the mainstream.
It's maybe a question of just five or 10 years.
Sooner or later, we will have contact with someone out there,
and then the thinking changes completely.
And one day, they will return.
And if you don't listen to Erich Von Daniken,
you will have the shock of the gods.