I had an experience earlier this summer,
which I probably shouldn't tell, but I
will. That is an example of how it gets
weird. We we uh a friend of mine moved
to London and left me his library for
unspecified amounts of time to keep. A
very bizarre library, mostly Platonic
stuff, a lot of magic, a lot of uh that
sort of thing. And so we built a book
loft for it. And our house is wedge-
shaped. And so this book loft is way up
at the top of the house. And uh I was
alone in the house. And I took uh seven
dried grams. And I was sitting there
and uh it was just beginning to come on.
I was in the show what you know thing
phase and it was beginning to show what
it knew. And there was this disrupted
area of space in front of me where it
was like rotating and I was looking into
it and talking it up and I was actually
speak at first I was just speaking in my
mind then I would began speaking aloud
and I was saying you are beautiful
thing. you are beautiful. And suddenly
there things changed and it became very
cold
and uh meaning the temperature fell
suddenly and uh the dog next door who
never howls howled
and uh the cat which was down below me.
I was up in this loft looking down at
our bed. The cat was on the bed. cat
flared out and made this really weird
noise and I just, you know, I stopped
what I was doing and projected my mind
into this situation. And at that moment
I heard this sound which was like
and then something settled onto the roof
sufficient to make the 6x4
in beam
creek in just went
[Laughter]
and I was floored
and I just I just sat for a minute and I
was not frightened. In fact, my emotion
was um hard to get back to, but I wasn't
frightened.
But just at that moment, these this
thing was really coming on and really
visually peculiar. And it seemed like
the two things were independent. The
trip was getting stronger and stronger,
but a 10 ton something had landed on the
roof beam of my house. So, I just sat
with it for about 30 seconds and then
this thought or voice came and it was
this thing has come because of something
I'm doing and that means that I can get
rid of it. So I just turned like this up
toward the roof and projected this
thought very strongly which was begone.
I am in conversation with an elder
and uh this thing went
and there was a long pause 10 seconds or
so and then whatever it was it lifted
off the roof and went away. Cat and I
were in the Amazon in 76 taking Iawasa.
We got in with this certain group of
people in Peru that took it every week.
And you know, cultures have different
ways of handling hassle. And in some
cultures it's confrontational, in other
cultures not. The way these Peruvian
country folk operated was if somebody
was screwing up, nobody would ever say
so. They would just talk about these
people behind their back until the
morphogenetic field of gossip was so
strong that you would basically awaken
to the problem. So there was a complex
social situation going on in this iawasa
circle which was there was a master
shaman who we were apprentice to who was
beloved by his neighborhood but he had a
a a nephew a so who was a jerk. I mean
this guy was uh as Don Fidel said
ambitious. He dealt a little weed. He
did a little pimping. He was just sort
of an edger type of guy. And every
Saturday night we would all get together
and take Iawaska about 30 of us, older
shamans, our guy, people from the
neighborhood and this so Don Jose.
So, uh,
I don't know what the real history of it
was cuz I had just arrived on the scene,
but these old guys would sing these
ikaros, these magical songs on Iawaska
that appear as colored tapestries in
front of your eyes. And you know, they
were they had soul. They were into it.
They were and this guy would sing
against them. I mean, it's the rudest
thing you can possibly imagine. I mean,
imagine if if
you know, Lou Reed were trying to give a
performance and the guy in the third row
just launched into Old Man River and
kept at it. You know, I mean, in this
town, I'm sure large guys would appear
and say, "Sir,
in Peru, it didn't work like that. They
just kept singing. He kept singing." And
it was clear that this is how it was
going to be handled. that we had just
divided into two separate entities here.
Well, um
my uh wife was sitting next to me and he
was sitting across the room from us, the
Sabrino, and I had been watching him for
a long time and I was loaded to the
gills and I could see he would get up on
his honches and he he looked like a
monkey. He he his face it was uncanny. I
mean, he looked like a monkey and he
also looked kind of like a jackal, a dog
with long teeth. Kept going through
these changes and and Cat leaned over to
me and said something like, "This guy is
an asshole." And I just said, you know,
let it slide. What do we know? Think of
it as anthropology.
But she she wasn't having it. So after a
while um he kept doing this and at one
point and everybody in the room every
person in the room was bummed out and
they were looking at their laps. All eye
contact was broken. It's actually when I
was a kid I invented a word. The word is
far and it means the embarrassment you
feel when someone else [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] up, you
know, and you happen to just be there,
but somehow the aura of it is so strong.
So the entire room is just a wash in
Farardau and the old guys are singing
and the guy is singing. So then at the
end of a particularly intense clash of
these two styles, uh, my wife just
looked across the room at this guy and
like put the whammy on him and I saw
these red arrows leave her eyes and like
like dotted lines go across it
and they move fairly slowly, you know,
more slowly than you could throw a ball
or something. Well, when this line of
red arrows got to this guy, he was
knocked off his feet. He he fell
backwards with his legs in the air and
there was a big noise and all the
singing stopped and everybody in the
room looked up and these three old
shaman who were sitting behind Don Fidel
who I to that point had not heard speak
any language but Ketwa one turned to the
other and he says in Spanish, "Oh, the
gringa sends the zaba."
I never had exactly that. But I remember
I had a very anomalous DMT trip once. I
It's was sort of like that. It was
Here's what it was. It was really a
strange one. I can't remember where I
was, but anyway, I smoked the DMT and I
expected to see the crosanthemum and
everything as I described. And instead
when I opened my eyes or when I not when
I opened my eyes but when I broke
through into the space I seemed to see
red flocked wallpaper in a fli
on a wall of some sort. It looked like
red flocked wallpaper. And as I looked
at this, I dropped my head forward and
there was a
a water fountain spiggot of the kind
that you depress and it shoots a stream
of water coming out of a marble basin
and it was just perfectly realistic. And
then above it and then I saw above it
was this flocked red wallpaper. And as I
was trying to get my bearings in this
situation, I turned like 90 degrees and
there was a curtain
of red velvet and I walked through the
curtain
and there was a DMT trip up on a huge
cinemascope screen and I just sat down
in the aisle seat and then the trip
happened. But but there had been this
peculiar hesitation
where I was apparently in some art deco
movie palace somewhere on the foyer
landing at the water fountain and then
and I never quite understood
what that was about or why it happened,
but it had the same quality of the
parting curtain revealing the trip
somehow already in progress.
One of the things that goes on in DMT
that's sort of odd is you perceive your
body geometry differently. You seem to
have um an infantile
body. You can tell that your head is
massive and your body is small and your
arms and legs are short. And at times
we've played around with the idea that
once you smoke DMT all subsequent trips
are like journeys back to this first
trip. It's as though you can you open a
nexus in time in your personality and
then every subsequent trip you just
return to this to this open place.
There's a very funny feeling about it
that is
something about the past, something
about time. It's hard to put your finger
on. I explored the
red sandstone bluffs yesterday and
violated my own rule and actually did
take a little psilocybin just a tiny bit
just to help me uh sort of understand
the landscape. Uh, and since today we're
going to talk about ecology,
it was sort of, I figured, uh, part of
the business end of things to do that.
The reason I went to the effort to get
the aerial photograph of Rustler's
Valley up so you could see it was simply
because on my very light mushroom trip
yesterday, I went down the face of the
bluff and then up onto the bluff and
then I just sat there and I had no real
expectation. And I mean I was roughly
interested in the botany and but uh and
then I just sat there and smoked a
bomber and sort of considered the
situation and several thoughts came to
me of a somewhat surprising to me and uh
it was about the land
and uh I've been puzzled ever since I've
gotten here because this whole journey
has had a kind of funny
personal element in it in that this
place
is more like where I grew up than any
place I've ever been. And I keep telling
myself it's not so
that I'm not paying enough attention and
that there is nothing more irritating
than the tourist who carries with him
always the assumption of his home. But
on the other hand, my relationship to
the place where I grew up was not
casual. I was a rock hunter, a fossil
hunter. I spent a lot of time alone in
the sandstone country looking at it from
a distance like this, you know, and
picking at it and climbing around. And u
I can't shake the impression that I'm
within 50 miles of where I was born. And
if any of you ever have the opportunity,
go to western Colorado to places like
Montro, Delta, uh, Delta County, Pitkin
County. It's this to a tea. It's the
land that is the same. Of course, the
plants are totally different. And I
concentrated yesterday on a lot on
looking at the identifiably exotic South
African flora, which I'm sure you all
take for granted. But things like the
the cabbage tree and the palospelos and
the kerodopsis, the little kerodopsis
plants up on the rocks and all of that.
Very interesting. But then I had a sort
of a hallucination about the place or an
understanding and that's what I why I
brought the map in. And this is an
aerial photograph of the general area
and this uh this is the valley.
The house and all the complex and the
buildings and everything is here. And
the big stone bluff behind us is this
thing. And I don't maybe you were aware,
but maybe you weren't all aware of how
thin it is, how it's just a knife of
stone. It's not a mountain range that
begins behind us. It's a knife of stone
that is quite as clear on the other side
as it is on this side because we hiked
up and looked over and there's more
cultivation and so forth and so on.
So I was thinking about how this is
roughly a round valley, an enclosed
valley and valleys like that are uh
always uh gather energy just it's like a
trivial observation they gather energy.
Uh the catmandeue valley is such a
valley a round valley. the uh valley of
the Sibui in Colombia that Schulty's
called the site of the most highly
evolved narcotic consciousness on earth.
He was speaking of the Bugmansia shaman
is a valley very similar to this. The
Kovaleo Valley in Northern California.
Anyway, uh not to put too fine a point
on it, but my impression of this thing
yesterday very strongly was that it's a
live
and it's uh it's a beast. It's
specifically and very obviously a dragon
and it c it guards this valley and
there's a very uh strong sense of its
personality and intelligence and I
wonder if uh the local people haven't
always perceived it that way. Certainly
in Australia it would have that kind of
a character. So you know that was just a
couple of grams of mushrooms, no purpose
and walking around and suddenly there
was this whole new dimension to things
and this gives it very clearly. This is
another whole new dimension to things to
look down on things. This is the
shaman's eye view of Rustler's Valley
and the whole thing is clearly under the
protection of this thing. And I'm sure
in the late afternoon this must
photograph very clearly from orbit
because it would throw a sharp a long
extended shadow. So anyway, that's about
as woo woo as I'll get.
It was a personal observation. I felt
this thing very strongly.
Beginner's luck.
So
where we were and let us continue
now this question about fear which is a
real question because when everything
begins to slide
if you're not if it's it's it's more
than most people who haven't done it
expect they have heard it they've read
the books they they but they think it's
a metaphor they don't understand it's
really going to happen and it's really
going to happened to you and there's a
tendency to clutch or to try and resist
it. The thing to do in those situations
I think and it's counterintuitive to how
western people think but the thing to do
is to sing
to sit up not to assume the fetal
position. See you what you might tend to
do is assume the fetal position and tell
yourself my god this is the most
appalling thing that's ever happened to
me. If I can just live through it, it'll
be all right. I've taken this drug. If I
can just wait through. How long did they
say it will be? Seven hours. I see it.
It started 2 minutes ago. Uh, if I can
just No, the thing to do is to sit up
and to sing.
And why? Well, being practical people to
oxygenate your brain to move this the
entire this thing that's happened to
you. Though it may have one claw in
heaven, its roots are in your
neuroysiology and in the chemistry of
the drug. You want to move your
physiology around. So oxygenating your
brain can't fail to do this. So you
sing. And this almost always is
accompanied by a sense of power,
control, equilibrium, and so forth and
so on. Not always. I mean, let's face
it, you're a product of a nutty society,
and there are unexamined
crevices and uncleaned out drain traps
in all of us. And uh and you're going to
encounter that stuff. The good news is
the earlier psychedelic trips tend to
deal with that. If you will quickly
discover taking psychedelics that either
you can work through your personal
issues and become a psychedelic explorer
or this is just stronger medicine than
you are up for and you would be far
better to go back to psychoanalysis or
whatever works for you. uh some people
just can't take it. Uh why is that?
Well, because what it does is it
dissolves boundaries and most of us are
overbounded defined. But some of us are
having an uphill battle getting some
boundaries in place and realizing we are
not the telephone or the tree or the
person we live with. Uh, and so for
those people who are having trouble
establishing and maintaining boundaries,
this is the last thing on earth they
should get involved.
Cannabis.
Cannibis.
Yeah. Whe when you're
in the state that you're experiencing
the total loss of ego or boundary,
is it possible that your physical self
could just literally stop because I have
where people often yes wondered often
people wonder you you get into a place
where it's so unfamiliar
that that the question comes up. Have I
done it this time? You know, am I dying
or am I in danger? The the answer is
the odds are incredibly against you
being seriously in danger. People don't
die from psychedelics unless they have
uh heart conditions or some incredibly
rare medical condition. The problem is
that the ego
feels threatened by the boundary
dissolution and its ace is your
self-identification with it and it can
actually say to you are dying
and here's the evidence and you have to
say no it's unlikely
uh and sing your way through it but this
is really tough I mean This is you know
the Buddhists talk about slaying the
ego. This is slaying the ego for real.
You must slay it otherwise it will
spread panic into your whole
psychological system will will give way
to panic and hysteria. So unless there
is some real reason to think you're
dying and you should have done your
homework, you should know what to
expect. For example, if you take LSD and
begin
intense bouts of vomiting, this is not a
proper reaction to LSD. Something is
wrong either with the LSD or with your
ar relationship to it. You should know
what a t because a typical trip will put
you through changes but is not
dangerous. But if you suddenly begin
exhibiting uh some symptom uh heart
fibrillation or or something like that
then you want to have uh this is why
then the there's always the issue of the
buddy system. Should there be somebody
else there and what about all that? My
position is if you're anxious then you
should have a sitter. If you're going to
do it alone, you should certainly tell
someone so that they will check on you
after a while. Uh I don't like doing it
in groups or with sitters because
inevitably I get spun into them.
uh
what I want to do is go as deep as
possible and be and even if I'm alone
with one other person culture is the
third guest at the table you know if you
start I mean I've often found myself in
the middle of psychedelic trips thinking
I'm sure glad there's nobody else here
to see this because I'm sure it would
alarm an observer because I have my leg
thrown back up over my neck and I'm
screaming in erdo or something but it's
okay after a few minutes it's okay but
if there were an observer they would
feel the need to do something you know
and often like I've seen people you
smoking DMT and people moan and they say
no no no
and they moan and well so then you know
you get them back together and
constituted and you say how was it and
they say it was fantastic.
So you realize, you know, how they
present is not reliable. I had a really
weird experience years ago. Uh I took
LSD one evening with a bunch of people
and it was fairly casual and social and
smoked a bunch of weed and this went on
for a couple of hours and it didn't
really ever seem to come on or it just
seemed to be very light. And then I
climbed on my uh motorcycle and went
home and decided I would go to bed. And
I decided that I would smoke one last
joint before going to bed. And I had one
of those standup electrical resistance
heaters that you get in
uh at the Salvation Army, you know, if
you're a poor student. And I said, so I
turned it on as I started to smoke this
joint. And it it was badly wired and it
made this sound like
and as I began to listen to this sound,
I like went to lizard land and I entered
into this completely coherent thing
which lasted for hours about this world
inhabited by these intelligent reptilian
beings. beings and we went through their
art, their history, their theories of
jewelry making, their philosophy, their
polity, their science, their religion,
their fashion, their and it was like
endless endless stuff about this very
specific uh reptilian world. Well, then
later I tried again. And I took LSD with
my arm around my heater and had by then
been preaching it in the streets that
this was the and I could never really
find my way uh back, you know, which is
a typical phenomenon of high higher
dimensional phase space. Ralph taught
me, you know, doing the reverse of what
you did doesn't steer you back to where
you started. You have to find your way
forward uh through the matrix. Um other
things, comments, this is your last
crack at me. You have to get your
money's worth. I did have one DMT trip
way back, like maybe the second or third
or fourth way back where it was
completely different. It's the only one
I've ever had like that. And it was
completely different. And the way I put
it to myself was the big people were
home.
And uh it was an entirely different
feeling. And many people actually, I've
never quite had this myself, but many
people report DMT trips where they break
in on an entity who is not pleased at
all and demands to know how the hell you
got there. And uh it's this you know who
are you
and uh you know then various sorts of
dialogues go on and one person described
being then just hurled through all of
time like exploded back from this thing
and going through all the recapitulation
of ontoy and uh it's weird stuff
DMP trips I mean mine are always as I
described But some people report
um and these may be synergies with
anti-depressants or something like that,
but apparently very stable and strange
worlds. I mean worlds with alien peoples
and animals and cities and um you know
very science fictiony stuff. That's why
uh this Bell's theorem, I don't think we
used that word, but this non-locality
that we talked about may have something
to do with the phenomenon of the
imagination.
Like it's occurred to me over the years
that what we call imagination
might simply be hyperdimensional
perception. And you're actually seeing
uh worlds and places that truly exist
somewhere scattered through the galaxies
like grains of sand, but no place you
will ever contact or visit in the flesh.
but that the data is somehow
present. There seems to be some kind of
tuning thing that needs to go on,
you know, possibly with technology.
My pleasure to introduce tonight's
lecturer, Terrence McKenna.
With the release of his captivating new
book, True Hallucinations,
Terrence McKenna has given many of us
renewed hope that the philosophers stone
as fungus is finally within modernity's
reach. During this sleepless period, I
sat one night uh on this laundry rock
below the police house where Dennis was
incarcerated. And he was more or less
incarcerated because he refused to keep
his clothes on. And anything put in a
room with him, he would hurl out the
window. He even hurled the window frame
out the window. So he was thorough.
I said nothing to anyone, but I formed
the resolve not to spend that sleepless
night as I had spent the others
wandering the fields like the fox spirit
or meditating at the chorro. Rather, I
would sit here where the lake emptied
and the agara resumed its languid
course. Here at the boat landing, 70 ft
down a steep mud bank from the
riverhouse, I would sit through the
night and watch. And so all night long I
sat reviewing the things that had
passed, seeming to divide my
consciousness and send it both backward
through my family tree and forward into
the future. I seemed to see all the
years ahead. I saw some technique
emerging from this contact
which I now think is the technique for
growing stferic cubensus. Our careers
pursued across space and time and
finally vindication as the world
realized the truth of the
transdimensional nature of the staria
visions and the true nearness of the
worlds that they had thrown open. For it
had become my belief that the contact
with an intelligent and utterly alien
species was beginning for humanity. It
seemed that out of the long night of
cosmic time, the novelty of novelties,
the moment of contact between minds on
utterly different plains was beginning.
We were among the first to achieve
contact with this other species. It was
the real thing. We had come to the
equatorial jungle to explore the
dimensions glimpsed in tryptoine
ecstasy. And there, in the darkness of
the heart of the Amazon, we had been
found and touched by this bizarre and
ancient life form that was now awakening
to the global potential of a symbiotic
relationship with technical humanity.
All night long, strange vistas and
insights poured through me. I saw
gigantic machineries and worlds of
vegetable and mechanical forms on scales
inconceivably vast. Time agotized and
glittering seemed to pour by me like
living super fluids inhabiting dream
regions of terrible pressure and super
cold. And I saw the plan, the mighty
plan at last. It was an ecstasy, an
ecstasis that lasted hours and placed
the seal of completion on all of my
previous life. At the end, I felt
reborn, but as what I knew not in the
gray of a false dawn, the wave of
internal imagery faded away. I rose from
where I had been sitting for hours and
stretched. The sky was clear, but it was
still very early, and stars were still
shining dimly in the west. In the
southeast, the direction from which
toward which
my attention had been focused, the sky
was clear except for a line of fog or
ground mist lying parallel to the
horizon only a few feet above the
treetops on the other side of the river,
perhaps a half a mile away. As I
stretched and stood up on that on the
flat stone where I had been sitting, I
noticed that the line of fog seemed to
have grown darker and now seemed to be
churning or rolling in place. I watched
very carefully as the rolling line of
darkening mist split into two parts, and
each of these smaller clouds also
divided apart. It took only a minute or
so for these changes to be executed, and
I was now looking at four lensshaped
clouds of the same size lying in a row
and slightly above the horizon, only a
half mile or so away. A wave of
excitement swept through me,
followed by a wave of definite fear. I
was glued to the spot, unable to move as
if in a dream as I watched the clouds
recoales in the same way they had
divided apart, taking another few
minutes. The symmetry of this dividing
and rejoining, and the fact that the
smaller clouds were all the same size,
lent the performance an eerie air, as if
nature herself were suddenly the tool of
some unseen organizing agency. As the
clouds recoales, they seemed to grow
even darker and more opaque. As they all
became one, the clouds seemed to swirl
inward like a tornado or a water spout.
And it flashed into my mind that perhaps
it was a water spout, something I still
have never seen. But even as the thought
formed, I heard a high-pitched uulating
whine come drifting over the jungle
treetops, obviously from the the
direction of the thing I was watching. I
turned and gave one glance at the
riverhouse 70 ft behind me and up the
steep hill, ga gauging whether I had
time to run and awaken someone to get
confirmation of what was happening. To
arouse someone, I would have had to go
hand overand up the slope and
consequently take my eyes off the thing
I was watching. In the space of an
instant, I decided that I could not
cease observing. I tried to shout, but
no sound came from my fear constricted
throat. The siren sound was gaining
pitch, and in fact, everything seemed to
be speeding up. The moving cloud was
definitely growing larger, rapidly,
moving straight toward the place where I
was. I felt my legs turned to water and
sat down, shaking terribly. For the
first time, I truly believed in all that
had happened to us, and I knew that the
flying concretence was now about to take
me. Its details seemed to solidify as it
approached. Then it passed directly
overhead in an altitude of about 200 f
feet, banked steeply upward and was lost
from sight over the edge of the slope
behind me. In the last moment before it
was lost, I completely threw open my
senses to it and saw it very clearly.
It was a saucer-shaped machine rotating
slowly with unobtrusive soft blue and
orange lights. As it passed over me, I
could see symmetrical indentations on
the underside. It was making the wee we
he sound of science fiction flying
saucers. My emotions were all in a
jumble. At first, I was terrified. But
the moment I knew that whatever was in
the sky was not going to take me, I felt
disappointment.
I was amazed and I was trying to
remember what I had seen as clearly as
possible. Was it real in the naive sense
in which that question is asked of UFOs
and tables and chairs? No one else saw
this thing as far as I know. I alone was
its observer. I believe that had there
been other observers, they would have
seen essentially what I have reported.
But as for real, who can say? I saw this
thing go from being a bit of cloud to
being a rivet studded aircraft of some
kind. Was it more true to itself as
cloud or aircraft? Was it a
hallucination?
Against my testimony can be put my
admitted lack of sleep and our
involvement with psychedelic plants. Yet
curiously, this last point can be
interpreted in my favor. I am familiar
through direct experience with most
classes of hallucinogens.
What I saw that morning did not fall
into any of the categories of
hallucinated imagery I am familiar with.
Yet also against my testimony is the
inevitable inongruous detail that seems
to render the whole incident absurd.
It is that as the saucer passed
overhead, I saw it clearly enough to
judge that it was identical with the UFO
with three half spheres on its underside
that appears in an infamous photo by
George Adamsky, widely assumed to be a
hoax. I had not closely followed the
matter, but I accepted the expert
opinion that what Adam Damsky had
photographed was a rigged up end cap of
a Hoover vacuum cleaner.
But I saw this same object in the sky
above Lerera.
Was it a fact picked up as a boyhood UFO
enthusiast? Something as easily picked
out of my mind as other memories seem to
have been. My stereotyped but already
debunked notion of a UFO suddenly
appears in the sky by appearing in a
form that casts doubt on itself. It
achieves a more complete cognitive
dissonance than if its seeming alieness
were con completely convincing.
So
he at times appeared to work miracles.
At one point, I I was trying to test him
and his abilities, and I recalled that
there was a a box that my grandfather
had given me that you opened with a
little silver key that had been lost for
years and years. And he I said, "Well,
if you can do anything, why don't you
produce the key that uh to that box?"
which neither of us had seen even the
box for a dozen years. By this time, he
was naked and locked in a room at the
mission.
And uh and he went and he would make
these bizarre gestures, these strange ar
I don't know what was going on. and he
uh he went into a period of
concentration, gave a wild squawk and
slammed into my hand and gave me the
key.
Gave me the key. He was naked. He had
been locked in this room for 14 days at
that time. And I was like, I didn't know
what was going on.
But what was happening to me was I was
like utterly unconcerned for his mental
health or any practical concern which
was causing a lot of problems for the
other people on the expedition. In
classical psychology this is called a de
a fileadu
a delusion of two. It's a simultaneous
schizophrenic episode. It usually
involves a mother and a daughter. I've
never heard of a brother brother file
adu but it was accompanied by all these
exterior manifestations
freak rainbows
and uh in my case an encounter with a
UFO and this UFO encounter had a very
curious quality to it. Not that they
don't always, I suppose. But this was
even more curious than the pedestrian
UFO encounter. What happened was uh
it was on the for it was on the 13th day
of the reversal
and uh
that I had had this intimation. There
was something going on about the
southwest. I wasn't clear quite what it
was. And the the two women on the
expedition were that afternoon washing
our clothes down by the chorro by the
lake. And I looked across the lake and I
saw in the sky not a rainbow but just a
spot in the sky that was a
spectrogrammatic defraction, you know, a
little patch of rainbow. And I asked the
women if they saw it and they said they
didn't. And then it intensified
and by this time I was plenty in the dog
house as well. I mean this put a great
deal of strain on our small party as you
can imagine. And this specttogramatic
iridal intensified and then I said to
them now do you see it? And they looked
and they said oh yeah it's you know big
deal not much but I knew I knew. And
knowing means the voice was speaking to
me. All kinds of weird things went on. I
mean, uh, I discovered that I that the
closer I was to water, the easier it was
for me to rhyme
and which I've never and then years
later I encountered a Celtic saying,
poetry is made at the edge of running
water. And uh and the thing would give
me these apherisms like one time it said
the clones load is a stoned mode and you
know and I was not sleeping. I was now
11 days without sleep. So, uh, that
night I decided to sit by the choro and
just cuz I stayed up all night and I
would walk in the fields and the thing
would draw the would connect up the
constellations for me and show me where
they were in the sky. There was also
embedded in all this thing the
intimation of this thing called the
teacher which was a giant insectlike
thing that was always like right over
here. There was the sense of something
watching us from the sky. Something
moving us very very gently but
persistently toward this very weird
breakthrough.
[Music]
The question relates to um an incident
told about in both my book with Dennis
uh Invisible Landscape and in True
Hallucination very creatively agitated
under the influence of mushrooms.
announced that he could
do something which is very hard to
describe what it was. It was sort of
like turn himself inside out, trigger
the end of the world, uh open a doorway
into hyperspace,
something like that. Anyway, some highly
touted dramatic thing. He organized an
experiment to test the theory and the
result of the experiment was not nothing
which was what I was betting on, not
what he said would happen, which what he
was betting on, but a very peculiar
uh incident then was generated where he
seemed to uh lose his mind to put it
simply for about 3 weeks. but in a very
specialized and orderly way.
And I seemed to uh
also undergo a a parallel but different
kind of transformation.
And the theory that was being
manipulated was a theory that involved
using vocally produced tones to
acoustically cancel metabolizing
psychedelic molecules in the body so
that they would bond uh as dimers into
DNA. In other words, so that they would
intercolate into DNA. The hypothesis
which lie behind all this was that DNA
must be the storage the physical storage
site for memories. This is not a popular
idea. This is a smeared idea but um
memory is a great problem for modern
science. uh you know we've decoded DNA,
we've got the top quark, we've measured
the core temperature of Balju, we have
no idea how memory works. It's
absolutely confounding
uh because a a po a a woman a man of 90
years old can remember
the way their greatg grandmother's
skirts smelled when they used to crawl
up into her lap when they were four
years old. It was 86 years ago. During
that time, every molecule in the body
has been cycled out every 5 to seven
years. So, it's 10 bodies away is the
body that crawled up into that woman's
lap and could smell the starch in her
skirts. And yet, the memory is
completely clear. Where are the
memories? And as you know uh
uh experiments have been done with
ablating large parts of the brain or
studying people who are the unfortunate
victims of very traumatic head injuries.
And there are cases in the me medical
literature of people who have fully 80%
of their physical brain destroyed and no
memory impairment whatsoever.
So where are the memories? Well, uh
there are a number of theories but there
is nothing more than theory at this
point. Dennis said
let's assume nature is conservative for
a moment. We know that nature stores
protein codes in DNA and we know that
DNA has large silent portions and in
fact some of you may have seen the data
which came out just recently that those
large silent portions of the DNA uh
exhibits the same uh mathematical
properties as language. Did you all read
this? Oh, this is hot news folks. As you
know, DNA codes for protein.
That code is only about 6% of the DNA
chain. The rest of the DNA, the other
94% is called silent DNA or by some
people junk DNA because it doesn't code
for proteins. So, what does it do? Well,
recently they've been sequencing this
junk DNA and then studying it with
algorithms used by the CIA to detect
code in noise. And they discover that
these silent portions of the DNA fit all
the necessary criterion of language.
They have syntactical structure.
This seems to support Dennis's
contention which was and it's very would
be very controversial you see because
it's a Lamarian mechanism. It's saying
that experience can modify nuclear DNA
which is denied by anti-lamarian
evolution. That's not the way it's
supposed to work according to Darwin and
the neodyarwinians.
Uh nevertheless
uh if we don't believe that the only
part of the body which is not traded out
many times over the course of a long
lifetime the only part of the body which
you are born with and die with is neural
DNA. Neural DNA what you're born with
you keep. Therefore, it's reasonable
following good scientific method to
hypothesize that the neural DNA must be
where the memories are. Well, then
Dennis's idea was that ordinary
experience
has to do with serotonin
uh dropping into a relationship of
bonding with DNA and vi and giving off a
signal like a radio transmitter of the
structural hyperfine ESR of the DNA and
that that then constitutes the
electrobiochemist ical foundation of the
experience of thought. And so what he
was saying was then what these
psychedelics are is they're like
different kinds of of transmitters,
stronger or transmitting in different
wavelengths or transmitting with a
higher bandwidth. And it is known in
fact that these psychedelic molecules do
compete with serotonin. They are
serotonin competitors. So visualize the
DNA in the course of metabolism
unfolding and folding itself to expose
various runs of nucleotides to ribosomal
coding into RNA. And in this in this
molecular environment, these drug
molecules are whirling around and by
Brownian motion or by enzyatic delivery,
it does the details don't matter. The
these molecules intercolate meaning they
slip neatly between the nucleotides.
Many drugs do this. This is known. Uh
but most drugs or compounds when they
intercolate into DNA, they they distort
the twisting of it and it it's
dysfunctional. It messes up. The thing
can't transcript anymore. These drug
molecules, if you look at them, they're
usually a pentexal five-sided central
group with a two uh benzene rings or a
benzene ring and a partial benzene ring
hanging off of this thing. And they're
pl flat. They're planer. It means if you
could blow up a psilocybin molecule to
the size of a cutting board, it would be
about as thin as a cutting board. and as
wide and as long those flat molecules
fit right in between the nucleotides.
Yes. And when this happens, uh, the
electron spin resonance signal is
amplified
just as though a more efficient, uh,
transceiver had been dropped into place.
And you can measure the hyperfine ESR
signature of DNA in a in an in vitro
laboratory situation. This is not
mysterious. So the idea then is that we
have a family of molecules
endogenous neurotransmitters like
serotonin acetylcholine so forth and so
on and exogenous neurotransmitters like
psilocybin DM uh DNA I'm sorry
psilocybin
masculine and then exogenous endogenous
like DMT found inside and outside the
body and it may be that what the
evolution of consciousness is is the
slow trading in of low gain molecular
transceivers like serotonin for much
more broadband high gain uh molecular
transceivers like DMT. So Dennis's idea
was to take all this theory that I've
just laid out and then use acoustically
produced vocal sound
to cancel
uh the charge of these molecules. And as
you probably know or maybe you don't
know when the when the uh when a
molecule becomes superconducting
it will bond into anything. it becomes a
hyperbonding
uh molecule. It will bond anywhere. So
theoretically if you could cause uh
psychedelic molecules during their act
of being intercolated into your genetic
material to become superconducting even
for a moment. they would lock in
permanently and you would begin uh to
have uh a very deep a much deeper
experience of consciousness. It would be
much broader, much deeper. He claimed he
could do this, but he also went further
and claimed and this is where I am not
good at explaining it because I didn't
understand it then and I don't
understand it now. But he claimed that
the in the act of becoming
superconducting and intercolating this
thing would cause the molecule to
undergo something which he named. He
called it dextrotary
uh hyperdextro rotation which means
simply that it would turn inside out and
he said then that you would produce
something and you know I'm embarrassed
at the strangeness of the concept but
that you could in some sense give birth
to your own soul
that something could be generated out of
your body which you would have a high
degree personal identification with
because it would in fact be the central
essence of yourself. It would be he made
analogies to the philosopher stone to
the flying saucer to the birth of an
idea. It's the idea that you could
create what he called transllinguistic
matter. That means a form of an
ontological form of being which looks
like matter but which behaves like mind.
Uh and and that somehow this would
trigger uh the collapse of his of the
illusion of history and everything would
be swept uh into the presence of
almighty God upon her throne or
something like that. Anyway, that was
the notion and in proceeding to carry
out this experiment which I just thought
was madness and would result in nothing
and then we could go back to botanizing.
Uh instead it it in a sense it seemed to
work. The condensation of the
philosopher's stone and the collapse of
the historical state vector uh is
slightly delayed. But the rest of it
seems right on track in that when he
began when he threw the switch as he
said the harming switch he went bonkers
basically for about 21 days in a very
complicated way which he had
anticipated. He said, "There is a small
chance that I will be turned inside out.
Not my body, but my mind." And it seemed
as though that was precisely what had
happened. He could he could recite the
alphabet backwards.
He spoke in a language which if you got
him to spell it, you could turn it
around and you could see these were full
sentences
uh but spoken backwards. In other words,
he truly seemed to be running backwards
while we were all the rest of us were
running forward. Well, after about 21
days, that faded and he got his act
together and went back to get multiple
PhDs in molecular biology,
pharmarmaccognacy, and what have you.
coincident with the throwing of the
switch. I who had been the skeptic
noticed that it was it was as though a
switch had been thrown in me and I began
to understand.
It was not like any drug I'd ever taken.
It was not like psilocybin nor I was
there were no hallucinations. But what
began to happen was I simply began to
understand
faster and faster and faster and faster.
So fast that I was just walking around
on these jungle trails holding my head
going, "Uh-huh.
I see. Yes. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh.
Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh." And it
was opening up ahead of me. And uh I
eventually this understanding settled
down into the theory of the time wave
which I will not slay you with because
this is a course in psychobbotany not of
course in megalomania revealed. Uh but
but what I finally came to rest with was
a complete model of space and time
as which is what you would end up with
if if he had succeeded. He said it would
condense into three-dimensional space
and end history. And everyone would
leave their factories and offices and
discard their clothes and with tears of
joy streaming down their faces begin to
form the cosmic round dance that
precedes the departure for Alpha in
Sagittarius.
Well, that remains a future promise to
be redeemed.
But what happened to me was I obtained
this strange idea out of the Ching uh
that offered me a complete model of
space and time and the future and the
past and from has continued to be the
touchstone of my intellectual life. So I
think that you know we can argue for
hours although it's probably not worth
doing about whether anything at all
happened at Lurera. I was there. I
should mention I didn't sleep for 11
days and it was the most amazing 11 days
I've ever had. I I was absolutely
ecstatic. I barely ate. And uh I I was
full of compassion and understanding for
everyone and their limitations in this
terrible dilemma because we were, you
know, a thousand miles up the Rio baboon
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] with no airplanes and no radios.
And here my brother proceeds to go nuts.
And I'm saying it's okay, but the world
may end in a few days. And on and on.
Um,
it took me about five years to get
myself publicly presentable.
In that time, my I was a burden to my
friends and a joy to my enemies because
I just appeared I appeared to be a
social menace. You know, I could back
people into a demise and hold them there
for 16 hours at a stretch with a wrap.
So alarming and appalling that people
would just back to the wall to wait to
see if I was going to explode. Uh it was
simply it it takes a long time. You have
to leaven it with humor and
self-criticism and convince people that
you don't take yourself seriously and
all these things to make it palatable.
uh
yeah that is true he was mentioned and I
think if you know if you want to read an
eye-opening book if you haven't read it
read Thomas Chun's book the structure of
scientific revolution because what
you'll learn there to your amazement is
that these great intellectual
breakthroughs like Newton and Einstein
and and plank and so forth they don't
come out of careful examination of the
evidence and conservative admiration of
theories and all. No, they don't come
like that. They come like revelations,
you know, completely and then you argue
backward to convince your colleagues.
You go out and you get the evidence and
you argue backward and you convince
everybody and then everybody says,
"Well, it was obvious all the time and
anyway, they knew it 50 years earlier
and on and on and on." But that that's
what you have to do. So I uh have stuck
with this uh my devotion to psychedelics
because it gave me really my greatest
wish, which was I want to have a a
complete understanding of how things
work. That doesn't mean there is no more
surprises, but it means you you at least
have a a structure that you can pour it
into. And I think this is what shamans
do. They create a personal ideology
sufficient to their needs. And my needs
are complex because I live in a society
where I'm going to be talking to quantum
physicists, mathematicians, historians
of science, epistemologists, so forth
and so on. So I I had it had to perform
at top speed. If you're in the
rainforest situation in a cultural in a
monoculture, then it it is perhaps not
so challenging. But the point of all
this is catalysis of ideas. You know,
culture can evolve no faster than its
language. It can evolve no faster than
the models that it can set up for itself
to achieve and that requires language.
So I take the psychedelics to be
catalysts of language. They probably
caused it to come into existence in the
first place and then they continue to
push it forward into new domains. and th
this great period of creativity that
we're living through now in the sciences
in the arts in the implementation of
exotic technologies I think this is the
real legacy of the 60s the people who
run these fancy computer companies and
the worldwide web and the net and Stern
and all that they're all freaks they're
all people who came up through the 60s
and have somehow fitted themselves in uh
to straight society. But the great bulk
of creative work is in the society in
those areas is being done by people who
took psychedelics. And in fact, arguably
the the scientist of today, the the
technological implementers of today are
in fact shaman. And we are creating a
kind of culturally validated shamanic
superspace except we call it cyberspace.
But all we're doing with the creation of
cyberspace is hardwiring in a male way
what has always been there in a female
way. I mean the the web of invisible
hidden associations that make up the
cosmos instead of the chaos. Well, uh,
over time and using tricks, you can drag
a certain amount of data out of it. Um,
and what I'll do is, um, I'll describe a
DMT trip and it's u it's a composite of
maybe 40 of these trips and uh, then you
can see what you make of it. So, this is
I'll just describe it. I'll be the the
graduate student. You be the guy with
the clipboard.
You're saying to me, "So, what
happened?" Okay, here's what happened.
You I took one takes most people can get
off in about three to four hits. Now,
there's a trick to it. Hash smokers are
greatly favored in this endeavor because
you really need leather lungs for this.
Uh the great problem is that people will
cough or not be able to hold it in. You
take two hits in a situation where your
clothes have been loosened and you can
just flop backward uh when you need to.
You take two hits. Now many people miss
the point because after two hits you
feel completely peculiar. You feel as
though your body is undergoing some
strange kind of anesthesia.
All the air has been pumped out of the
room. This is the visual acuity thing I
talked about last night. The colors jump
up. The edges sharpen. It's And at that
point people say, "Whoa, wow. It's
really coming on strong." And then what
you have to do is you have to take one
more enormous hit. And this separates
the intrepid from the casual. Believe
me, because most pe and and the
facilitator doesn't want to lean on the
person. You say, you know, damn it, take
the third hit. And saying, no, I feel
completely weird. Say, I know you feel
weird, but take the third hit. Well, if
you can coke somebody into that, then
what happens is you close your eyes and
you see the ordinary
warm brown
back, you know, closed eyelid scenario
and then these colors begin racing
together and it forms this mandolic
floral slowly rotating thing which I
call the chrysanthemum. This is a a
place in the trip that you want to see
as you go by it. The chrosanthemum forms
and you watch it for like
15 seconds. If it doesn't give way, then
you didn't do enough. You have to do
more. One more hit usually will do it.
Well, then what happens is it like
physically propels you through this
crosanthemum like thing and you there's
a sound like a saran wrap bread wrapper
being crumpled up and thrown away. You
know that crackle. A friend of mine says
this is your radio intellect leaving
through the anterior fontel at the top
of your head. I don't know what it is
but it's something is being
coming up your brain. Yeah. Right.
That's what it is. Uh and then there's
this very
uh very defined sense of bursting
through something a membrane. And on the
other side, and this is now, remember my
experience on the other side as as you
break through, there's a cheer. There's
a a a a whole bunch of entities waiting
on the other side and they you know that
Pink Floyd song, the gnomes have learned
a new way to say hooray.
Well, it's that place. It's those gnomes
and you burst into this space and um and
they're saying
how wonderful that you're here. you come
so rarely. We're so delighted to see
you. And the
one of the things about the MT that's
really puzzling is in a sense it doesn't
affect your mind.
In other words, you don't change.
For instance, if you take ketamine, the
first thing you notice, the very first
thing you notice before the trip hits is
you notice that you no longer are
anxious about having taken ketamine. You
just sort of anxiety leaves you. That
means it's affecting your mind. It's
doing something to the judgmental
machinery. DMT doesn't lay a hand on the
judgmental machinery. You you break
through into that space exactly who you
were before breaking through. And the
usual reaction of most people is
something like,
you know, and you think, "God,
heartbeat
normal. Pulse normal. Everything's
normal." Yeah, everything's normal. Oh
god. Because these things are there and
they're hammering at you and they come
forward. They're like jeweled self
dribbling basketballs
and there are there are many of them and
they come pounding toward you and they
will stop in front of you and vibrate
but then they do a very disconcerting
thing which is they jump into your body.
They jump into your body and then they
jump back out again. And the whole thing
is going on in this very high-speed
mode where you're being presented with
thousands of details per second and you
can't get a hold on. You say, you know,
my god, what's happening? And these
things are saying, don't abandon
yourself to amazement, which is exactly
what you want to do. You just want to go
nuts with how crazy this is. They say,
"Don't do that. Don't do that. Pay
attention. Pay attention to what we're
doing." Well, what are they doing? Well,
what they're doing is they're making
objects with their voices. They're
singing
structures into existence.
These things are. And what they will do
is they'll come toward you and then and
you have to understand they don't have
arms. So we're kind of downloading this
into a lower dimension to even describe
it. But what they do is they offer
things to you. Say look at this. Look at
this. And as your attention goes toward
these objects, you realize that what
you're being shown is impossible.
It's impossible. It's not simply
intricate, beautiful, and hard to
manufacture. It's impossible to make
these things. The nearest analogy would
be to the fabriier eggs or something
like that. But these things are like the
toys that are scattered around the
nursery inside a UFO or something.
Celestial toys. And they are the toys
themselves appear to be somehow alive.
the toys themselves can uh sing other
objects into existence. So what's
happening is there's just this
proliferation of elf gifts and the elf
gifts are moving around singing and the
whole thing is directed toward they're
saying do what we are doing and they're
very insistent they say do it do it do
it and you feel like a bubble or and now
this is subjective I mean only you know
5% report this but it happens To me, you
feel like some kind of bubble inside
your body that's beginning to move up
toward your mouth. And when it comes
out, it isn't sound, it's vision, you
begin, you you discover that you can
pump stuff out of your mouth by singing.
And they're urging you to do this. They
say, "That's it. That's it. Keep doing
it." And the whole thing is like, you
know, we're now at minute 4.5 with this
stuff. And uh you speak in a kind of
glossalia. There's a spontaneous
outpouring of syntax unaccompanied by
what is normally called meaning. It's
sort of, you know,
And this is accompanied by a a modality,
something seen and they're saying, "Yes,
do it. Do it. Do it." And then after a
minute or so of this, the whole thing
begins to collapse in on itself. And
they literally begin to physically move
away from you. And usually their final
shot is they actually wave goodbye and
they say deja vu deja vu which makes no
sense at all if you analyze it. So then
you come down and you're now at minute 6
to 7 and you come down and it's like
being more loaded than you've ever been.
It's like about a 700 mic acid trip, but
you embrace it as totally down. You say,
"I'm totally down." I mean, you look you
look like a termite from our tourists
and the room is decorated in Amish
quilts, but I'm completely back.
And uh then over a minute or a minute
and a half or so, the room just comes
right back together. And and four
minutes after that. Some people can give
no account of it whatsoever. They just
say, you know, I I don't know. It was
the weirdest thing that ever happened to
me and I I can't remember it. Now,
reason I don't particularly like
tripping with people is because I just
worry. I'm a worrier.
And if I'm stoned and somebody else is
stoned, then I worry and I listen to
their breathing and I wonder and I
wonder how they're doing and I wonder if
I should ask how they're doing and I I
just lose all spontaneity and I become
completely the victim of my imagined
concern for this other person. Well,
then if there's if and then the other
thing that happens is people are the
weirdest objects in the universe. And if
you're stoned and you come upon another
person stoned, I mean, they can just
unleash something you could never have
imagined or conceived of. Uh, nicely
green and sculpted. And we were sitting
there under a tree and I swear, you
know, 500 yards away, there were these
two Indian guys walking across my field
of vision. And I was sitting there and I
was loaded and I was watching the
traceries. And then I looked out across
my field of vision and I saw these two
these two Indian guys stop dead in the
center of my field of vision. And then
they said something to each other and
then they turned 90 degrees. So they
were now facing me and they began
walking toward me. And I was horrified
and I looked down. I said I can't I was
so horrified that I said I can't believe
this is happening. I refuse to believe
this is happening. I will just look at
the ground in front of me like this. So,
I started looking at the ground in front
of me and I looked and looked and looked
and looked until two pairs of brown feet
appeared in my field of vision. And then
I looked up at these guys and they they
had caught the vibe and they wanted to
know what was going on. And uh several
experiences like this caused me to
believe that, you know, you should
really bury it deep before you take it
into public. The other thing I've
noticed is, you know, if you're stoned
in a confined space, there's a certain
amount of control of synchronicity. I
mean, there's rustling in the corners
and batting at the windows and so forth,
but this you can handle. But if you take
it out into public, God, it's just
absolutely uncontrollable. I mean, you
could be struck by a meteorite. You
could be abducted by extraterrestrials.
A safe could fall on you. Anything could
happen because the statistical
disruption of ordinary probability is so
great. What was touched on last night
and which is sort of one of the
centerpiece themes of this point of view
is uh
the felt presence of uh some kind of
alien intelligence
that is
somehow
co-angent to the human experience.
for different people in different ways
with varying degrees of intensity in
different times and places.
And though
you know at the bedrock of my take on
things is the notion that there is
really finally a mystery wrapped in an
enigma that there is no resolution.
Nevertheless, as you close distance with
this mystery, there are um
a series of analogical metaphors
that don't really suggest themselves,
but that are communicated to you uh by
the other. And one of these analogical
metaphors is the presence of this alien
intellect,
this uh organized other that is
folklorically
present in tradition
as fairies, gnomes, elves, gins, afrits,
sprites, tree spirits, uh that sort of
thing. and anecdotally
present in uh rural cultures throughout
the world as the the poltergeist and the
milk souring fairy and it the thing
seems to reside in a curious area that
is not epistemically clearly defined for
the culture. In other words, the
question of is it real or not is thought
to be sort of tasteless. I mean, you you
would intuitively sense if you were
drinking in an Irish pub, I think, and
people began to spin leprechaun stories
that the question is it real is a real
bringdown.
You know, it it isn't really like that
because the question is it real is
ultimately can be shown to be infantile
in any situation. I mean, is the Bank of
America real?
uh what are you know immediately you
realize that there are just assumptions
skating over the mystery
but uh this this felt presence of the
other uh I choose to talk about so much
because it was for me such an
astonishing personal surprise
my
I was raised Roman Roman Catholic and uh
indulged in the kind of theological
fiddle battle that that involves and
then grew out of that into atheism into
agnosticism and by the time I got to
college I was reading Jean Paul Sartra
and Huser and uh these people and pretty
much the main had followed uh my
intellectual ontoy had followed
historical philogyny and I had arrived
rived in the 20th century. Uh and then
uh having abs thought I had absorbed the
lessons of LSD which seemed to me to be
uh to reinforce
and confirm the theories of Freud
concerning the dynamics of the psyche
that it was about repressed memory,
repressed desire, uh sexual neurosis,
parental uh you know foulups in the
projection of the parental energy.
patterns and this kind of thing. And
then someone came to me one rainy
February evening in 1967
and uh
a really a mad person, a kind of a
social menace, an intellectual criminal.
This guy had said to me only months
before, "We must live as if the
apocalypse has already happened."
and and here he was on my doorstep and
and and he he wore these little black
suits that he buttoned up to the throat.
Anyway, uh he came in and he said
something that you might be interested
in and brought out a sample of
dimethylryptamine
that he had somehow come into contact
with. And and I said, "Well, what is
it?" And he said, "Well, it's this short
acting. It's a flash," he said. And I
said,
"You know, how long does it last?"
That was my first mistake. They said,
"Oh, it doesn't last long." So, I said,
"Okay, we'll do it." And we did it. And
uh I discovered I had I guess it's
called a peak experience or a core
revelation or being born again or having
your third eye opened or something
which was it was a revelation
of an alien dimension
of a brightly lit inhabited
non three-dimensional
self-conting,
sustained,
organic, linguistically intending
modality
that couldn't be stopped or held back or
denied. I mean, I sank to the floor. I
couldn't move. and uh and uh this
dystolic
hallucination of tumbling forward into
these fractal geometric spaces made of
light and then I found myself in the uh
sort of oric equivalent of the pope's
private chapel and uh and there were
insect elf machines uh profering strange
uh little tablets with strange writing
on them and I was a gasast, completely
appalled because it the transition had
been a matter of seconds
and my entire
expectation of the nature of the world
was just being shredded in front of me.
I've never actually gotten over it.
And um
and uh
you know, it all went on. I mean, they
were speaking in some kind of there were
these these these self-transforming
machine elf creatures were speaking in
some kind of colored language which
condensed into these rotating machines
that were like fabriier eggs but crafted
out of luminescent superconducting
ceramics and liquid crystal gels. And
all this stuff was just so weird and so
alien and so unglishable
that I felt like it was some a complete
shock. I mean the literal turning inside
out of the intellectual universe. And I
had come to this
fair I thought fairly intellectually
prepared
uh you know I mean a kid but
nevertheless double Scorpio art history
major heronomous Bosch fan Moby Dick
William Burroughs you know
and and it was uh as I came down and
this this went on for like two or three
minutes this situation of discontinent
orthogonal dimensions to reality just
engulfing me. And then as I came out of
it and the room sort of reassembled
itself, I said, "I can't believe it.
It's impossible.
It's impossible."
That I mean that to call that a drug is
ridiculous.
I mean it just means that you just don't
know. You just don't have a word for it.
And so you putter around and you come
upon this very sloppy concept of
something goes into your body and
there's a chain. It's not like that.
It's like being struck by noic
lightning.
And the other thing about it which
astonished me was there is no clue in
this world. You know, in the carpets of
Central Asia, in the myths of the Maya,
in the visions of an Archmbolo or a
Fangelico or a Bosch, there is not a
hint, not a clue, not an atom of the
presence of this thing. And when you
look at the religious herophanes of the
human species, uh it doesn't have the
same vibe. It doesn't have the same
charge. Religion is all about dissolving
into unitary states of uh of love and uh
transllinguistic oceanic unity and this
sort of thing. This was not like that.
This was more multiplistic
than the universe that we share with
each other. It was almost like uh the
victory of neoplatonic metaphysics.
Everything had become made out of a a a
fourthdimensional tesseractural
mosaic of energy.
So I I was uh just quite knocked off my
feet and set myself the goal of
understanding this. There was really no
choice, you see, and I don't know how it
hits other people. I mean there is there
are many things that can be said about
introducing a chemical into your body.
Uh they've shown uh that certain people
are 50,000 times more sensitive to the
odor of certain compounds than other
people. And part of the unique genetic
heritage of each of us are our
complement of synaptic receptors for
psychoactive alkyoids.
So that you know there may be something
to the notion that the Kelts tend to be
poets. The you know certain people
certain peoples tend to be expressive in
certain artistic modes or or certain
senses seem to be accentuated for
certain human subgroups. But uh whatever
the explanation for how it hit me, I
felt that it was like a call. There was
no turning back from trying to
understand that because there is no
place for it in our world. And yet it is
overwhelmingly
existentially
real,
you see, and easily accessed. I'm not
pedling that you have to go to some
place in India with poor sanitation and
put yourself at somebody's feet for a
dozen years or something like that. the
the enunciation of the presence of this
dimension should inspire some kind of
coming to terms with it. I mean, it's
preposterous that we can entertain in
our popular journalism the uh the
titilation of the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence and prop
up all these reductionist guys and trot
them out to give the statistics on the
distribution of G-type stars and all
this sort of thing because the fact is
what blinds us to the presence of Alien
intelligence is uh linguistic and
cultural bias operating on ourselves.
The world which we perceive is a tiny
fraction of the world which we can
perceive which is a tiny fraction of the
perceivable world.
You see so uh we operate on a very
narrow slice based on cultural
conventions. So the important thing if
if synergizing progress is the notion to
be maximized and I think it's the mo the
notion to be maximized is to try and
locate the blind spot in the culture the
place where uh the culture isn't looking
because it dare not because if it were
to look there its previous values would
dissolve.
You see,
and I think that that place is the
psychedelic experience
as it emerges out of nature
in a in human societies interact with
the psychedelic experience in nature,
they inevit they they inevitably secrete
the institution of shamanism like a
pearl around the this umbilicus or this
nexus point or this lossi of
interdimensional
uh data flow which is really what it is.
It's that when that under certain
conditions
which have to do with these molecules
that have evolved in these species which
have this weirdly quasi symbiotic
relationship to our species you punch
through the veil. You know Melville said
if you would strike strike through the
mask and that's what's done. You strike
through the mask of a of the coordinates
of apparent reality and then
this thing is there which to me is a
miracle. It transcended any miracle I
could ever ask for because it not only
had the quality of a miracle as I
imagined it, it had the quality of a
miracle as I could not have imagined it.
It was entirely charged
with uh with the energy of the other.
It it had the ambiguity of a pun, a kind
of zany, impossible,
improbable,
hysterical
uh revelation
of the joke, the the uh
self-contradiction,
the provisional nature of it all, that
it really is a Marx Brothers movie in
some sense.
So I uh pursued it first to uh
Nepal
and involvement with pre-buddist
shamanism in Tibet because I I first the
thing that puzzled me most I guess
because I was an art historian was this
absence of the theme in the artistic
productions of humankind. mind and I
felt that maybe there was a trace of it
in the artistic conceptions of the old
pantheon of Tibetan shamanism and that
central Asian Tibetan shamanism had
actually created astronauts of inner
space that had gotten good recon on this
same area.
uh you know the dharmapalas the
guardians of uh of the dharma are not
Buddhist deities per se. They are
autotheistous
Tibetan folk demons
that protect the dharma by virtue of the
fact of having been overcome in magical
battles by great Buddhist saints who
came to Tibet. In fact, there are or
were before the Chinese uh uh occupation
monasteries in Tibet where the vow of
feelalty to the dharma on the part of
the dharmapala had to be renewed by the
monks every 24 hours or the uh thing
would run a muk and be on its own and
bust up the countryside. I'm just
telling you what they told me.
So it seemed to me that this raw sense
of the shamanically accessed demonic
realm uh was there and I also saw a
traces in henisticnosticism
and alchemy but such thin traces.
So I went to Nepal, immersed myself in
that and decided ultimately that uh
it was inaccessible.
I wasn't sure whether it was there or
not.
And then I placed myself in the context
of nature by moving my sphere of
operations to eastern Indonesia to the
climaxed continental rainforests of the
ancient continent of Sunderland.
You see, Indonesia was a continent until
as recently as 120,000 years ago. And
then with the melting of the glaciers
and the subsidance of this continent, it
became a vast group of islands. And I
think that that it was my good fortune
or the fortune of my fate because it was
prudent for me at that time in the
late60s to remain outside the United
States. And so I sort of had to become
the hero I had pretended to my friends
that I was, which I wasn't. I had an
around the world air ticket and was
entirely a preppy posour. But suddenly
suddenly return was not a possibility.
And so I became and my apologies to
Buddhists in the audience a professional
butterfly collector. And I pursued this
blood sport for many months in these
remote montaine jungles of eastern
Indonesia. And that was
where the the missing link in the quest
for the resolution of the meaning of DMT
and spirit fell into place because I saw
what most of us only see on National
Geographic specials, which is the real
fact of the rainforest, the real fact of
organic nature and how nature is
communication.
Uh, not only are the species that
comprise the biota linked by pherommones
and acoustical signals and color signals
and all of these uh various methods by
which communication is seeping around.
In fact, nature ultimately resolves
itself into a self-reflecting
syntactical meta system.
And you can pursue this right down to
the DNA.
DNA working as it does with nucleotide
sequences that code code right that
means arbitrarily assigned code for
certain amino acids. It means that
organic objects are essentially
utterances in three-dimensional space of
some kind of universally distributed
linguistic intent. This is what it means
when it says in the beginning was the
word. Nature is that word. this
infinitely
selfadambrating
fractal syntactical hallucination that
has an infinite number of facets for
potential uh regarding and self-
reggarding and then you know might
invoke here Girdle's incompleteness
theorem which as I'm sure many of you
know was uh Kurt Girdle's brilliant
contribution to theoretical mathematics
where he showed that the possible set of
of true formal statements generated by
any formal system was exceeded or
exceeded the possible set of true formal
statements which the rules of that
system allowed. He showed this for
simple arithmetic. Showed that. And what
this means, friends, is that what was
called truth up until the beginning of
the 20th century is absolutely
impossible.
That's what Girdle's incompleteness
theorem secures. It shows that there is
no there is no ultimate closure in an
effort to describe.
And so in a way my take on nature and
culture and man is that
human language
is a meta linguistic system generated
out of the necessary formal
incompleteness of nature.
You see, it's that nature is a
self-describing genetic language and yet
out of it arises something which is not
formally
uh predicted by its uh constraints and
rules. There's a symmetry break there
and a a so-called emergent property
comes into view. And this emergent
property is our unique ability to
provisionally
uh code sound to meaning so that we then
can freely command and reconstruct the
world. We imagine that we do this for
our own purposes of communication.
The analysis that I'm suggesting would
would seem to indicate that actually we
do it because we are f complicated
enzyme systems that are moving
linguistic charge around inside some
kind of meta system. very important for
the emergence of new order out of
nature.
You see, and I talked about this a
little last night,
the fact that it is uh
contrived
provisional is very interesting. It
doesn't arise out of the gene structure.
Rather, it is agreed upon by individuals
who are living at the time that the the
linguistic structure whatever it is
emerges into consciousness. Well, since
individuals are replaced, the thing is
much more in flux than the genome.
You see the genetic component of an
organism is a physical structure
stabilized by atomic bonds possibly
stabilized by a phenomenon like room
temperature superconductivity
in the the way nature works is to
conserve the genes and so molecular
machinery has been created to do that
but there is no mechanism in nature
with the same kind of binding force that
conserves meaning.
Meaning
is some kind of freely commandable
open-ended
self- evvolving
system. The rules are that there are no
rules. consequently addresses itself to
a much larger potential modality of
expression than the genes. The genes
basically repeat themselves over and
over almost like homeriic poetry where
the idea is that it be memorized and
repeated. And that's what sexuality is
about is memorizing and repeating gene
structures, handing on parts of the
story. But the epigenetic uh the the
creation of linguistic systems where
meaning can be freely commanded allows
very rapid evolution of cultural norms.
And uh what I suggested last night and
want to say more about tonight is that
this process is mediated by plants. It
is synergized in human beings by plants
of all sorts. I mean we are obsessed
with drugs and shortterm
uh spectacular effects. But think about
the effect on a culture of the presence
or absence of say sugar or the presence
or absence of coffee.
What human culture can essentially be
seen to be is a series of
plantestablished
developmental creodess for a higher
mammal. The fact that we are omnivorous
lays us open for the formation of these
weird relationships to things in our
food chain. Everybody is taught in
school that the Renaissance, the close
of the Middle Ages, the rise of urban
culture, all had to do with the search
for spices,
right? Bringing spices back to Europe.
Why was it so important? You know, that
a a drive to simply broaden the pallet
of Europe is given uh credit for uh the
redefining of post-medieval
civilization.
Very strange.
Hoffman and Ruck and Wson showed that
the Illusinian mysteries
which were the philosophical and
experiential lynchpin of the ancient
world's cosmology the Henistic cosmology
was a cult of erotized beer.
there every September at Elusis this
mystery was carried out and everyone who
was anyone participated in it and uh you
only got to do it once in your life so
you had only one take.
The point is clear as you look at human
culture in all times and places. The way
in which our cultural institutions have
been molded by uh these so-called
tertiary compounds in plants is very
suggestive. It seems to me that uh the
felt presence of the other, the alien
intelligence, the being from outer space
is actually co-present with us on this
earth.