On The Nature Of The Fundamental Theorem Of 
Creation 


A Logical Enquiry Into The Cross, Christ And Coexistence 
Latest Draft Apr 19th, 2026 Revision B archive.org/details/logicalcross (@logicalcross) 


Supplementary: 258-71 Harmonic Integral Representations 284-292 Harmonic Integrals for the 


for the Riemann zeta function Riemann zeta function ... 
using a Yukawa density. 
272-73 Evolution of the quantum dark energy Also the connections to 
scalar field for a 3D star, in pictures Noether’s Theorem, and 
some more experimental 
274-77 Laplace inversion techniques for a validation. 


certain class of density functions 
293-737 On the equivalency of 


278-83 Evolution of the quantum dark energy the physical laws and 
scalar field, using a Yukawa density. analytic continuation. 
Also some thoughts on covariance. The Riemann Hypothesis, 


undecidability, & misc topics 


‘Science, without religion, is lame ... religion, without science, is blind ...’ 
--- Albert Einstein 


A Table of Contents can be found on pages 735-736, which 
will be updated as new pages are added to the essay 


Some commentary on solving the field equations of general 
relativity for a perfect star in the presence of a dark energy 


singularity has been added 


« Some new material was added to the essay in this release 


May all Souls in all realms read these notes before coming here Father God. I have nothing more 
to give than what you have given to me, and thank you for this knowledge. Give to them now in 
turn. 


Then, like a trumpet blast with a shower of spiraling lights, the Great Light spoke, saying, 
"Remember this and never forget; you save, redeem and heal yourself. 


You always have. You always will. You were created with the power to do so from before the 
beginning of the world." 


Noether's Theorem states that to every continuous symmetry in a physical situation ... there 
corresponds a conservation law (and conversely). This deep connection requires that the action 
principle be assumed. 


In this essay, the synonymous terms 'Cross and Crucifixion’ should be seen as an event equivalent 
to the action. The term 'Father-Son duality’ is a personalized reference to symmetries within the 
Godhead. The term 'Christ' refers to the person Jesus Christ who was crucified, and the term 'Holy 
Ghost’ refers to the laws of Creation. As the essay progresses, we shed more light on these terms 
and definitions, and often refer to the Godhead as B-space or the B-world, throughout. 


... and God created the heavens and the earth ... 


Bo 


the alternating noises of dispute await their turn ... but you need not attend them ... 
there is nothing worse than the zeal of a convert 
think radially 


ok 
By the Father and Son, and all they have done, 
To give full life, to everyone ... 
ok 


choose your own path, go at your own pace ... intent is the Light’s measure ... 


‘I knew with total certainty that everything was evolving exactly the way it 
should, and that the ultimate destiny for every living being is to return to 
the Source, the Light, pure Love* [Juliet Nightingale's NDE] 


The Circles (we justify our perversions in the strangest of ways) 


Here are 7 circles of life I think may apply. Certainly they're worth thinking about. Conquer them, 
if you think you can, and learn to grow into your own spiritual virtuosity. 


O hurt --> anger --> fear --> hate (darkness) 

O necessity --> need --> want --> greed (desire) 

O defiance --> resistance --> indifference --> acceptance (denial) 

O thought --> action --> deed --> consequence (design) 

O self-aggrandizement --> self-gratification --> self-righteousness --> 
self-importance (delusion) 

O knowledge --> understanding --> wisdom --> enlightenment (discernment) 

O joy --> peace --> courage --> love (delight) 


The circle of circles: 
O darkness --> desire --> denial --> design --> delusion --> discernment --> delight 


Note there is both an inward and outward radial component you can associate with each circle. The 
inward component would be the intrinsic effect felt by the person walking a particular circle and 
the outward component the extrinsic effect felt by others -- perhaps many others -- who were 
influenced by way of the ripples. Walking these circles is not a solitary experience, as our 
thoughts, actions, emotions, and so forth, affect not only us but many others at the same time. 


(others) 


Laws Of Creation (there are many ... you have to earn what you receive ... a law itself) 


This section is intended to be a very quick overview of some of the spiritual laws of creation. It 
was written at a time when I knew little about them and is only intended to be a rough sketch. We 
learn far more about these laws and how they came to be as the essay progresses. 


There are at least three fundamental spiritual laws of creation, these being free choice, forgiveness 
and karma. The axiom of free choice, in spite of all its usefulness, leads to many contradictions, 
both in mathematics and in any realm where it is applied outside the bounds of at-one-ment. One 
could go so far as to say that the axiom of free choice, therefore, only becomes complete and 
consistent once the state of at-one-ment has been reached and maintained. 


The second law, used properly, can save a soul many incarnations, but beyond that I don't know all 
the ramifications. According to Angie Fenimore's NDE, Christ's work on the Cross forgives us of 
much. While I find this comforting, it is always important to remember that ‘intent’ is ultimately 
the Light's measure -- a notion of high importance within the world of spirituality. 


As to the third law, much has been written about it, so I'm not going to chime in here. Suffice it to 
say that God is probably bound by the spiritual laws of creation which, among other things, demand 
that harmful debts be settled. In fact, Fenimore was told that for every harmful act, an act of 
suffering is required, which is a law, she says. 


There is most likely a fourth spiritual law of creation which is the conservation of truth. We'll 
discuss that later, but for now, it is important to recognize that creation is one giant, self-correcting 
feedback loop with many spiritual laws. Our goal, as souls, is to live in harmony and balance with 
these laws by developing a reverence -- a very deep reverence -- for their power and their source. 


The Second Coming and What It Really Means (it is within) 


According to the Light you save, redeem and heal yourself. If so, there is no such thing as someone 
doing it for you. In order to accomplish this, you must learn to conquer the circles and walk away 
from 'all things base'. The focus has to be on the higher-self, to the exclusion of all other things. It 
may or may not happen in a single incarnation; odds are it will take many, but when that point 
arrives, you are done. 


wae 


See with the spiritual eye and not the physical, for the physical binds to physical, but the spiritual 
does the opposite. There is no point to the physical experience other than training the soul, though 
few understand this. 


eke 


Odds are, when it is all said and done, that all roads lead to Christ. There is too much NDE data to 
suggest otherwise. It is also probably true that Christ, meaning the ever-growing soul most favored 
by God, has attained complete at-one-ment with God. When this happened I do not know, but there 
is a chance this perfect union reached its fulfillment on the physical plane during the last 
incarnation. As such, there may be no distinction between Christ and God--an extremely hard thing 
to believe and accept, but the chances are fair to high that each is an image of the other. It is also 
possible that no other soul has ever attained this type of union in any realm and may never do so. 
Certainly the NDE data supports this conclusion, but see below for more, especially in relation to 
Noether's work. 


If these findings are true then all religions, faiths, creeds, sects, and systems of belief are to be 
discounted--a notion that ties in with the work of Godel and Incompleteness. At best they become 
approximate truths but are inadequate nonetheless. The goal becomes one of trying to attain at- 


one-ment with God, realizing that it may never be possible. The pattern, to the degree it's worth 
emulating, would be Christ, the ever-growing soul most favored by God. I do not feel, in my 23rd 
attempt, it is worth going any further. 


all roads 


ake 


{11 23 11--> 1 + 10] triplet to [23,36,45] with trace 23; union with God, return to God, mastery on 
the physical plane, enlightenment; gap 12 which is perfection; 11th level; 23rd incarnation; 
Fibonacci; EDS (he) and SPD (she) ; Feb Sth/2011 see a license plate while driving 1123 KW (K is 
the 11th letter, W the 23rd) ... what are the odds ... April 15th/2011 see another license plate while 
driving with decal expiry May 19th ... what are the odds ... June 3rd/2011 see a cross in the sky 
made of double contrails ... June 7th/2011 someone from behind me puts their hand on my right 
shoulder whilst looking for bread at Superstore, but nobody is there when I turn around ... definitely 
felt it ... 


On Aug 2nd/2011 I noticed a cross at Gyro Park, made of dry wood, standing upright and firmly 
embedded in the ground. It was by a tree I was sitting near , though at first I didn't see it. I had 
been thinking of the Cross rather intensely in the last few days, particularly after discovering that 
Christ does indeed have membership in the Godhead. 


A year ago it was the wreath in Sutherland Park made of twisted strands of bark and wrapped in 
leaves. The wreath caused me to think more deeply about the sufferings of Christ back then, and 
no doubt sparked my interest in writing this essay. Maybe next time it will be the nails ... 


ake 


Finally, the NDEs of George Ritchie and Angie Fenimore strongly suggest a literal interpretation of 
this second coming is also possible. See as well Howard Pittman. And Cayce mentioned 1998 as 
the year of the 'birth' of Christ. 


This is important to note because in Pittman's NDE, for example, Pittman says explicitly that God 
is building an ‘army of soldiers’ through whom He will work miracles of a kind never seen before. 
God is apparently taking this approach in preparation for the 'return' of Christ, I am presuming, in 
much the same way that John the Baptist was a precursor to Jesus the first time around. 


As of today, such a 'voice in the wilderness’ performing miracles of a kind and of a caliber that 
supersedes anything we've ever seen before, including the work of Moses, has not come along in 
my view. 


Perhaps Moses was the precursor to Joshua, just as John the Baptist was to Jesus, just as 'someone' 
will be to Jesus again. What or who that 'someone' really is, I have no idea, but I think it's fair to 


say this 'someone' will be a ‘desert man’ of a type and shadow, who quite possibly doesn't even 
know the essence of his spirit or his destiny. 


When you think about it, neither Moses nor John the Baptist understood their specialness until the 
appointed time, but both were 'men of the desert’, to be sure. In fact, only Cyrus really knew, 
which perhaps makes him a more special figure in history than anyone else. 


ake 


The Crucifixion (an expression of at-one-ment; hematidrosis; symmetric justification) 


This has puzzled me for some time now, but on or around Sep 1/10 I had a strange thought 
concerning this notion. It should probably be seen more in a spiritual context than physical and 
most likely is symbolic of the death and resurrection of creation at large, spread throughout the 
entire virtual grid. A pervasive sign, for those who can see, that such a resurrection or 
reharmonization is inevitable. In other words, a return to unity, everywhere, as we learn to self- 
correct from our experiences, primarily in the physical plane. 


It was the task of the Christ soul to show us, in the extreme, how we might gain mastery over the 
physical plane and recover at-one-ment, which I'll refer to as the pattern. The Cross, the nails, the 
crown of thorns, and so on, are simply remnants from this pattern, left behind for us to ponder. 


By us, I mean any soul within the virtual space of creation. It (the pattern) is not specific at all to 
those on this planet--not by any means--and to a greater or lesser degree, all souls may have 
knowledge of this pattern, wherever they are. 


If 1am correct about this interpretation, one can see just how valuable the Christ soul is to God, for 
it has been charged with not only laying down the pattern, but also ensuring that each and every 
one of us learns to embrace it in our own unique way. I can't imagine a more important role in 
creation and personally, wouldn't want the job myself. 


And finally, if Israel of old was ever intended to become a beacon of light for this world or any 
other realm, that particular design was and is woefully incomplete. You could say the Christ soul 
became the completion of that pattern, which is the expression of at-one-ment as opposed to the 
ancient notion of atonement. 


reharmonizing creation 


August 10th/2010 'when the student is ready the teacher will come’ 


An unusual dream in which an eagle divided me from a pastor I once revered. I was young in the 
dream, maybe in my twenties or early thirties, and handsome. The pastor was older and fat, but 
tried to disguise his age with a long, curly black wig. I can remember trying to talk to him through 
his joviality, but the eagle somehow divided us. We no longer seemed to understand one another, 
the pastor and I. 


ake 


The eagle represents spiritual protection, carries prayers, and brings strength, courage, wisdom, 
illumination of spirit, healing, creation, and a knowledge of magic. The eagle has an ability to see 
hidden spiritual truths, rising above the material to see the spiritual. The eagle has an ability to see 
the overall pattern, and the connection to spirit guides and teachers. The eagle represents great 
power and balance, dignity with grace, a connection with higher truths, intuition and a creative 
spirit grace achieved through knowledge and hard work. 


ake 


What Is At-one-ment Anyway, August 23rd/2010 


Imagine two objects, A and B. Suppose each has its own individuality which we'll call the origin. 
If A contains B and B contains A, generating at-one-ment, then this can only happen if both A and 
B are infinite, otherwise, the origins would have to shift causing one to lose one's sense of 
individuality. Thus, at-one-ment only makes sense and can only really exist, while still preserving 
both origins, if A and B are infinite. If now A is God and B is any soul, this union or at-one-ment 
can only happen if B expands into A, since A is already infinite. Note that this blending into 
infinity causes one to lose one's sense of individuality because the origins of A and B would appear 
to converge as the expansion took place . At-one-ment, then, removes the feeling of being a single, 
distinct entity. 


ACB andBCA <~~~~~ > at-one-ment 


No doubt this was the original state we as souls found ourselves in. As our thought patterns 
emerged that union was most likely broken and we became finite in the sense of being more aware 
of ourselves and those we clustered with. New realms probably emerged, according to these 
thought patterns, with each containing a subset of like-minded souls. This break in the symmetry 
or at-one-ment is what God is trying to repair, a daunting if not impossible task in my view. 


As to the Christ soul, it now becomes an interesting question. Once the break occurred, was the 
union between this soul and God preserved or did it, the Christ soul, separate as well. It is my 
personal view that the union was always preserved in the higher realms, which might mean any 
incarnations on the part of this soul were solely for our benefit. Certainly the work of Noether 
supports this conclusion. 


It is also highly probable that this was the only soul to retain its union with God, post-break. If so 
one could postulate that no other soul has managed to regain that union and may never. It is an 
open question for which I do not have a definitive answer, but theoretically, even an infinite 


number of incarnations may not be sufficient to achieve the at-one-ment that was lost. How it is 
regained I do not know, assuming the question makes any sense. 


But there is a corollary to all of this and it goes as follows: if the Christ soul was the only soul to 
retain its union with God, post-break, that was by design in all likelihood. And this can only mean 
that God knew the break was inevitable, but allowed it along with an embedded pattern we might 
emulate in order to regain or strive to regain what we ‘lost’ originally. How we choose to 
incorporate that pattern into our existence as souls is somewhat arbitrary, realizing that our intent is 
far more important to God than our failures. But the lifeline is there for those who need it, and it 
should be used because the mandate of the Christ soul is to help us along in our spiritual growth. 


If I am on the right track here, the Light, which is God, was correct when it said we must learn to 
save, redeem and heal ourselves. It's fine to offer the pattern, but in the end, the pattern is not a 
saviour, redeemer or healer. We are, each and every one of us. These are my findings as of August 
23rd/2010. 


Porn and Sex 


I wanted to say a few things about this wretched addiction. Over 50% of all evangelical preachers 
admit to using porn, which means ~ 80% use it on a regular or semi-regular basis. Talk about 'don't 
do as I do ... do as I say.' We should do our best to stay away from it, but having said that, I have 
not read a single NDE account where the Light mentioned the experiencer's use of porn, if 
applicable. The Light, in general, doesn't seem too interested in our sexual preferences, orientation 
or habits, choosing instead to focus on motive and intent, cause and effect. My little goal in life is 
to make God's job here a little simpler by becoming a soul he doesn't have to worry about too 
much. I think if I can do that I'll be satisfied when it's time to go, which hopefully won't be very 
much longer. 


To me, anyway, the world is an overcrowded insane asylum for the spiritually bankrupt and I feel 
very uncomfortable being here. At the same time I realize how critically important the physical 
plane is for growth and understanding, but nonetheless would prefer to let the dead have sex with 
the dead. It isn't for me anymore. 


ake 


According to the literature, there are over 500 forms of paraphillia. Even if we reduce it to the 80 
most common, which you can read about on Wiki, and assume a normally distributed population 
regarding each of these forms in particular, there is roughly a 93% chance that any person in the 
population will be plagued by at least one type of paraphillia or another. In other words, restricted 
to sexually distorted behavior alone, most of the planet is dysfunctional even though any member 
seems normal. 


wae 


Open Questions 


Has the Christ soul always been in perfect union with the Light in the higher realms ? My hunch is 


yes’. 

Has the Christ soul always been in perfect union with the Light on the physical plane with each 
incarnation ? I don't know but my hunch is 'yes' in the last incarnation we know as Jesus [cf Susan 
Blackmore's OBE]. 


Has any other soul always been in perfect union with the Light in the higher realms ? My hunch is 


‘no’. 
Has any other soul always been in perfect union with the Light on the physical plane with each 
incarnation ? Most likely 'no' regardless of how many incarnations that soul has had. 


Conclusions 


The goal is at-one-ment with God, irrespective of realm, region, remnant or reality. The pattern is 
the Christ soul to the degree it's worth emulating. You go at your own pace and you choose your 
own path. Intent is the Light's measure. 


A Prayer To God (which I hope he reads and runs with) 


Please Dear Father God, begin to tear down the structures on this earth that are harming us the 
most. There are many souls, from Sodom and Gomorrah of old, who are here today and would 
seek to damage again and again all that you are trying to repair. You know who they are, what they 
do and the designs of their hearts. If you will not intervene and put these souls in their rightful 
place things will only get worse, for they continue to spread their errors, their confusion and their 
culture, taking many with them. They should be made to forfeit their own lives in all fairness. 


At the same time you must enlighten each and every one of us who desires the truth despite our 
many failures. That enlightenment goes well beyond the teachings of any religion but is available 
to all who seek it. As our spiritual understanding grows the world will change, but it needs to be 
instilled in those who are able to receive. These are the ones that love truth, which is to say, you 
Father God. 


So you need to do both--tear down and build up--and that is what I would want the most from you. 


The Focus Of My Prayers 


Since God probably isn't interested in 'begging prayers' I thought I'd focus mine in five different 
areas, and try to make them as fluent as possible -- adoration, contrition, gratitude, understanding, 
separation. We'll see where it takes me, if anywhere. 


10 


A Note On The Hierarchy and Physics Of Realms (just my ideas) 


No doubt, each usable or emerging planetary system has an associated set of higher and lower 
realms. Beings working in the light-filled realms would be functioning in some beneficial capacity 
tied to the planetary system, and beings in the lower realms would be there because of 
entanglement issues. The realms are most likely infinite in nature, and every usable planetary 
system in every galaxy in every universe would have such a set of local realms. 


Galaxies and universes may also be associated with light-filled realms, in the same way as 
planetary systems, but may or may not have lower realms. The complete distribution of light and 
dark-filled realms throughout the virtual grid of creation is unclear to me. 


The management of this hierarchy would be top-down I should think, from the universal to the 
galactic to the planetary realms. One can see just how insignificant we really are as a lonely planet 
on the outer edges of an ordinary galaxy, amongst an almost infinite number of galaxies in our 
universe, which is one of an almost infinite number of universes. 


In between physical universes is what I call the pre-big bang consciousness of God, for lack of a 
better term. It may be part of the physical plane, but most certainly could not be detected by any 
human or man-made device. Whatever this energy field is, it is something we as humans do not 
know, but it is the medium through which information and force flow from one universe to another. 
As such, when designing a theory of the cosmos, say Relativity Theory or whatever, one cannot 
look only at this universe, but must look at all universes together, as each has an influence on all 
the others. 


No doubt universes orbit universes, just as stars orbit stars, and something like gravitational pull 
would exist at the inter-universal level, just as it does at the inter-galactic level. So when talking 
about the bending of a universe, one cannot look at only the material inside a universe but must 
also look at external influences carried through the pre-big bang energy field. Whatever curvature 
tensor or momentum tensor is used to explain something like Relativity, it has to be designed to 
accommodate all objects in the physical plane and the forces that exist inside and outside any 
particular universe. This would mean understanding the pre-big bang energy field, among other 
things. 


No doubt the pre-big bang energy field does not contain the dimensions of time and space as we 
know them, which means a whole new physics would have to accommodate the flow of 
information and force between universes. Once that information or force reaches the boundary of 
any universe in particular, and penetrates it, the physics we have today could probably be used to 
describe things. As such, physics as we now know it is but a tiny subset of a larger physics hidden 
in dimensions which could be described as more spiritual than physical. It is on the boundary of 
any universe that the Larger Physics quite possibly morphs into the Smaller Physics, with the 
former based on an almost infinite number of spiritual laws and the latter based on a smaller set of 
disorganized laws that we have before us at present. 


It is unlikely we will ever unite the Larger Physics with the Smaller Physics as this is akin to 
uniting the Spiritual with the Physical, and we as humans in particular, are a long, long way off 
from ever becoming spiritual beings first and physical beings second. Until we change, stamp out 


11 


the corrupt ego that dwells within each of us and find at-one-ment with the Father God, we are 
doomed to live out our days in a state of utter spiritual ignorance. How sad. 


A Note On The Human Shell and How It Came To Be (necessary foolishness for the foolish, 
necessarily) 


I don't regard the shell we currently live in here on earth to be very important, as any vehicle would 
suffice if we could learn sufficiently well through it. Having said that, the most likely explanation 
is the one offered by Cayce, which goes something like this: 


Sometime in the distant past, maybe 2 million years ago or less, a first wave of souls decided to 
descend into whatever shells were available on the earth at the time and deemed usable. These 
would have been ape-like creatures of the Homo erectus type, in all probability. But the shells 
really were not sufficient for learning in, and upon leaving them, these souls were not able to find 
their way back to their origins and instead, became entangled in lower realms, where perhaps some 
or maybe many still linger to this day. 


A second wave of more enlightened souls would have come along sometime later, not so much to 
descend into similar shells, but rather, to guide the course of future evolution by modifying DNA in 
these shells, so as to produce a suitable vehicle we now know as the Homo sapien or modern 
human being. The reason for doing this was to assist the first wave of souls (now in an entangled 
state) in freeing themselves from entanglement by allowing them to descend into the new and 
improved shells, with the hope that lessons learned would return them back to the Light upon death. 


These newer shells were also designed so that many other souls who have never had the 
opportunity to descend could now do so, thus giving them lessons they really couldn't obtain in any 
other way. The earth, therefore, becomes a school for souls, designed to instruct and correct, so 
that ultimately, after a sufficient number of incarnations, the need to return to this planet goes 
away. It is my view that such a process will continue for millions of years into the future, if not 
billions. 


I also believe an evolutionary intervention could have taken place in any other usable planetary 
system in any galaxy in any universe for similar reasons, but have no way of really knowing. 


A Note On Noether's Theorem and The Father-Son Duality (around Sept/2010) 


In what follows, the words image, symmetry, parity, connection and duality will be used 
interchangeably. Here we go: 


“for every symmetry there is a conservation law and for every conservation law there is a 
symmetry~ according to the work of mathematician Emmy Noether, regarded as one of the most 
influential thinkers in the last century. 


I listened to a one-hour youtube talk on Emmy Noether and her work in algebra which ties together 
symmetries and conservation laws. The theorems are used to this day by physicists in many 
disciplines. 


12 


At about the same time as I listened to this talk I remember finding a wreath in Sutherland Park, my 
favorite summer place to go. I also remember watching Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ, so 
maybe the stage was being set for what follows ... 


I postulated a while back that Christ and God may be duals, meaning symmetric. That is, looking 
at one is like looking at the other. Is it possible that the conservation law which follows is really 
the law of conservation of truth? If this is so then either could speak on behalf of the other, for they 
are symmetric duals. There is a reference to this idea in Angie Fenimore's NDE which might be a 
hint, so let's keep going. 


One could also ask the reverse: what symmetry results when speaking of the law of conservation 
of truth? A symmetry of some kind must exist, but what is it? I'm thinking it is some mirror image 
or dual of God, and the only image that makes sense to me at this point is the Christ soul, based on 
NDE research. 


Noether's Theorem 
° 
| 
| 


° 
duality <--> action <--> truth 


The law of conservation of truth is most likely an axiomatic spiritual law upon which all of creation 
rests, just like the axioms of free choice, forgiveness and karma. It would be the fourth law I've 
become aware of. What is amazing about this law is that it necessarily implies the existence of a 
symmetry in the Godhead, which might be a duality, triality, or something even beyond this. Ata 
minimum it suggests a duality, which is likely the Father-Son connection through at-one-ment that 
I've been looking for. If the symmetry is greater than this, it could ultimately extend to all souls, 
which may be the symmetric state of creation that existed before the almost spontaneous break 
which led us to where we are now. 


In other words, we were all in union with God, wholly and completely, before we decided not to be, 
but the law of conservation of truth could not have been violated, which means that even 'post- 
break’, a symmetry had to exist and that symmetry most likely was the Father-Son connection 
through at-one-ment. 


wae 


If I am correct, the Christ soul never lost its at-one-ment connection to God in any realm, which 
would answer some outstanding questions I have had for a very, very long time. In fact, the Father- 
Son connection through at-one-ment is what upholds the law of conservation of truth, and this is 
perhaps the most profound thought I have ever had in my 55 years of living on this earth in what is 
probably my 23rd incarnation. May all souls in all realms reading this fully appreciate what is 
being said here. 


ake 


13 


In short, the Father-Son connection, through at-one-ment, is both a necessary and sufficient 
condition for the law of conservation of truth, which can neither be created or destroyed. Truth, 
then, in God is both complete and consistent, and you could, therefore, say truth is the embodiment 
of the spiritual laws of creation. 


ake 


In the vision or dream I had where two perfectly symmetric, extremely powerful, beautiful male 
beings appeared, I got the feeling that we were tied together through the numbers on the 3 solid- 
core orbs. Perhaps at a deeper level this 3-fold symmetry, as exemplified in a set of triplets, is also 
present in the Godhead [Father, Son, Spirit]. Something to think about. 


ake 


Think of a chessboard with red and black squares. Let the red squares emit a truth, defined by the 
arrangement of those squares on the board. Now paint the red squares black and the black squares 
red, and let the red squares emit the truth again. Since the board is as it was initially, the same truth 
is emitted from what were originally the black squares. Thus, because of this symmetry the black 
and red squares have emitted exactly the same truth, so we would say truth is conserved under this 
symmetry. 


aK 
oether's Theorem Revisited (truth ... the embodiment of the spiritual laws of creation) 


Iam going to dig more deeply into this theorem, for it states that ‘differentiable symmetries via the 
action of a system lead to conservation laws'. If here the system really is the [primordial] Godhead, 
and the conservation law is the Law of Conservation of Truth, then some action exists within the 
primordial Godhead for which there is a differentiable symmetry that upholds this universal 
conservation law. 


Furthermore, if each law contained within Truth is conserved, then a corresponding symmetry tied 
to some action within the Godhead upholds that law. There may be many 'discrete symmetries’ that 
exist as a result, but in the aggregate they would lead back to the more universal notion mentioned 
above. 


What does this mean ? It probably means that God is the union of a set of (perhaps infinite) laws 
generated through corresponding symmetries and that this union of symmetries itself is a symmetry 
that implies the Law of Conservation of Truth. The set of symmetries and their union could well be 
one and the same thing. 


What the underlying action of this system we will call the Godhead really is, I don't know just yet, 
but such a notion probably exists and may be 'characterizable’ through some of the math used to 
prove Noether's Theorem. I am going to have a go at this one, depending on how much brainpower 
I've got left. 


As an example, consider the law of ‘harm and suffering’ noted by Fenimore. Every act of harm 
must be met with an act of suffering, according to AF. If this law is conserved, a corresponding 
symmetry in the Godhead exists which upholds it. That symmetry is most likely the Father-Son 


14 


duality through the at-one-ment connection, via the action of Christ's sufferings, which culminated 
in his work on the Cross. Since there is no time in the B-world, these sufferings always were, and 
are both necessary and sufficient for the removal of any and all harmful acts throughout the virtual 
space of creation, in my view. In essence, this is the law of ‘harm and suffering’ as dictated to 
Fenimore, from the perspective of the Godhead. 


It should also be said that for every spiritual law which is conserved, the (symmetry, action, 
conservation law) triplet might have been formed in the B-world ‘long before’ the physical plane 
‘existed’, and perhaps long before souls were brought into being. In the case of the ‘harm and 
suffering’ law above, we note the action, in part, is manifested in the physical plane. This might 
best be explained by noting that harm has also manifested itself in the physical plane, or it may be 
God showing us a glimpse of his profoundly forgiving nature. Whether action always manifests 
itself physically for every conservation law, I do not know, but like its two counterparts, symmetry 
and invariance, action always was. 


Finally, I am of the belief that (symmetry, action, conservation law) are all equivalencies, taken two 
at a time. Thus, in the example above, the action of Christ's sufferings, which culminated in his 
work on the Cross, is equivalent to the Father-Son duality through the at-one-ment connection, and 
both are equivalent to the law of conservation of ‘harm and suffering’. Seen in this light, Christ not 
only becomes a symmetry in the Godhead, but also a suffering Christ whose work on the Cross is 
both a necessary and sufficient condition for the removal of any and all acts of harm. 


In a nutshell, this 3-fold equivalence, which always was, is God's gift to mankind, for which I am 
deeply grateful. And it is the only such 3-fold equivalence I am aware of that has manifested itself 
physically, thus providing any observer on earth some deeper insight into the nature of the 
Godhead. Indeed, it may be the way back home. 


Jesus said "I am the life, the way, and the truth ... (symmetry, action, conservation law). It seems 
the Bible was correct after all, as these words are materially no different than the 3-fold 
equivalencies discussed here. 


duality <--> action <--> law of h&és <--> truth 


A Virtual Creation With and Without The Law Of Harm and Suffering 


Imagine a virtual creation where this law did not exist. There could be no harm, for there would be 
no way to 'cover' the harm through suffering. Thus, any soul would, in all likelihood, be confined 
to the Godhead in a state of at-one-ment, even if it were an embryonic utopia for that soul. In short, 
there might be little to do. 


With the law, it is a given that harm will exist, though now, necessarily, it will be covered by 
suffering to keep the books balanced, as they say. But also, any soul is now allowed to make as 


15: 


many mistakes as it needs to in an effort to grow, self-correct and learn throughout its seemingly 
endless cosmic journey. 


There is no longer at-one-ment with the Godhead--by design--but in return, the soul is presented 
with a virtual creation in which there are an infinity of choices as it inches ever closer to perfection 
by self-correcting at each step along the way. 


As such, at-one-ment, like infinity itself, may be illusory. The aim of the soul is not to be in a state 
of at-one-ment with the Godhead, but rather, to strive to attain this virtually unattainable state. 
Creation and its laws would have it no other way--particularly the law of harm and suffering. 


So was there ever a 'fall from grace’? I say there was not. We may have all lived in an ‘embryonic 
utopia’ initially, just as an unborn child makes the womb its home for a while, but eventually it 
would have been time to move on and begin the grand journey. 


The words the Light spoke to Mellen Thomas Benedict could never be more true -- you do indeed 
save, redeem and heal yourself. We always have ... we always will. 


The Equivalency Of The Spiritual Laws Of Creation (ignorance is no excuse for the law) 


We are arriving at a point where we can start to think more sensibly about these laws and whether 
or not they are, in fact, equivalent. By equivalent, I mean they imply each other, taken two at a 
time. 


Let's start with the law of free choice, and assume throughout, that all spiritual laws of creation 
discussed here are conserved. In an open creation, meaning non-embryonic-utopian, the law of free 
choice will inevitably lead to acts of harm, implying the existence or necessity of the law of harm 
and suffering in order to 'cover' these acts. 


Conversely, in an open creation, the law of harm and suffering can only exist if acts of harm exist 
that must be covered. But acts of harm can only exist if they are voluntary or involuntary and not 
all such acts will be involuntary, particularly in the physical plane. Thus, the law of harm and 
suffering implies the existence or necessity of the law of free choice. 


So this argument seems to be telling us that the law of harm and suffering and the law of free 
choice are indeed equivalent, even though they seem unique. It is also telling us that in a closed 
creation, meaning embryonic-utopian, neither law exists, and indeed, within the Godhead alone 
[closed creation] there may be no laws at all. They would only actively exist in an open [non- 
embryonic-utopian] creation. 


Now we know that the Father-Son duality through at-one-ment (symmetry) and Christ's sufferings 
(action) are equivalent to each other, and both are equivalent to the law of harm and suffering 
(conservation law). Replacing the law of harm and suffering with the law of free choice leads us to 
the conclusion that the same symmetry and action which upholds the former also upholds the latter. 


16 


One might expand on this train of thought and conclude that any two spiritual laws of creation are 
indeed equivalent, and that the same action and symmetry which upholds one also upholds the 
other. 


ake 


In other words, there is only one symmetry responsible for each and every spiritual law of creation, 
and there is only one action responsible for each and every spiritual law of creation. The symmetry 
is the Father-Son duality through the at-one-ment connection, and the 'action' is Christ's sufferings 
which culminated in his work on the Cross. Somehow, the completion of the physical component 
of this action upholds [is equivalent to] both the symmetry in the Godhead and all spiritual laws of 
creation simultaneously, for it (the action) binds these two pieces together. 


It's almost as though Christ's work on the Cross unified, completed, activated, solidified and made 
equivalent all spiritual laws in creation simultaneously, and justified [upheld] his symmetry in the 
Godhead at the same time. Truly a remarkable offer and accomplishment for mankind to puzzle 
over, for as they say ignorance is no excuse for the law. 


ake 


Tf truth (necessarily) is now defined as the union of the spiritual laws of creation, truth becomes the 
union of a set of laws where each law is equivalent to any other, and thus the same symmetry and 
action which upholds any one of these laws also upholds truth. This was our starting point when 
we first discussed Noether without regard to action and also laid down a heuristic definition for 
truth. 


We have, therefore, come full circle and located the ‘action’ which binds the symmetry in the 
Godhead [Father-Son duality] to this more general law; namely, the law of conservation of truth. 
Whether there are other equivalent actions and symmetries is something we're going to look at a 
little later. 


duality <~~> action <~~> law of truth 


Cross 


The Embryonic Utopia, Action Revisited and All That Jazz 


The embryonic utopia, which you could also refer to as the womb of God, is perhaps the birthing 
place for all souls. Whether birthing is a continuous process I do not know, but it is probably safe 
to say that those souls who linger in this 'womb' are typically more reluctant to move forward with 
their cosmic journey once they leave it. 


That is because the Godhead [embryonic utopia] is really a state of perfect equilibrium in which no 
laws exist that are active. The spiritual laws of creation really only exist in an active sense of the 
word outside this womb, in what we call the non-embryonic-utopia, or open creation. 


17 


Many of these reluctant types might never have incarnated even once on the physical plane, and it 
wouldn't surprise me that those who do are more prone to suicide, depression and other related 
phenomena. 


On the other hand, braver souls that long ago left the womb and have since incarnated many times, 
would have gained the courage necessary to deal with challenges in any physical realm, and could 
well function as mentors for the 'younger' ones. So goes the cycle of helping and being helped 
within this loving, linked community we call God's children. 


It may also be true that a soul decides at some point it no longer wants to participate in creation. In 
such a case, that soul might be able to re-enter the womb under dissolution and never return to the 
open creation again. Its essence, however, would be gone if dissolution were allowed. 


Some evidence for this notion can be found in Sylvia Browne's writings, but regardless, it probably 
doesn't happen very often, if at all. 


Earth, The Planet Of Sorrows (Feb 18th/2011) 


It occurred to me recently that it is no coincidence that this planet [earth] is also known throughout 
the virtual space of creation as 'the planet of sorrows'. Why might this be ? 


Because I suspect there is no other planet like it, anywhere in any universe, and if I am right, it is 
the only planet a soul can come to where the learning experience is optimized. 


If I am correct, it is then no coincidence that the action which binds the symmetry in the Godhead 
to the Law of Conservation of Truth was also manifested here on earth. That ‘action’ [Christ's 
sufferings and the Cross] was, no doubt, established in ‘blueprint form' within the B-world [closed 
creation] long before it was mapped into the open creation--indeed, long before there may have 
even been an open creation. 


The mapping needed an endpoint in the physical plane in order to create legitimate suffering and 
illumination. It appears as though earth was the best candidate, given its instructional mandate, and 
given the fact that it is uniquely defined by its sorrows. I suspect there really was no other choice, 
which, among other things, would serve as a testament to the importance of this world and its 
continuation well into the future. 


What's In That Godhead, Anyway ? 


I was thinking about the Godhead lately, and realizing that it is a perfect equilibrium which 
contains no active laws, thought it might contain everything there is to know about the open 
creation, in blueprint form. One could even speculate, for example, that all things in the Godhead, 
in blueprint form, are mutually symmetrical or equivalent. 


An analogy might be the two-dimensional plane with a unit disc centered at the origin. Every point 
in that disc has a counterpart outside it, extending to infinity, with the center of the disc 
representing infinity in the open plane. One could think of the center of the disc as some kind of 
singularity, not unlike a black hole found at the center of a galaxy, for example. 


18 


What's interesting about this analogy is that a law surfaces, namely the law of conservation of 
information, because every point of information inside the disc has a corresponding point outside 
the disc. Nothing is lost in going from the closed creation to the open creation, and everything that 
ever was, is and will be is contained within that disc--the closed creation. 


We could call this disc the Godhead; home to the symmetry that gives rise to the Law of 
Conservation of Truth by way of an action that was mapped to the open creation and onto the 
physical plane according to the system of things. 


The mapping was necessary in order to induce suffering to bring into being, or complete, if you 
will, the law of harm and suffering. By doing this, all laws were somehow unified, completed, 
solidified and made equivalent to one another in the open creation, thus forming the basis for the 
Law of Conservation of Truth. It should also be said that such a mapping would be independent of 
time and space, dimensions we are all too familiar with here on earth. 


One might say, then, that Truth was ‘infused' into the open creation by way of this (action, 
symmetry) pair, independent of any dimensions associated with the open creation. What we 
observed 2000 years ago or so, is simply what the dimensions of time and space let us see back 
then, but in reality, the infusion always was. 


ake 


If you are really bold, and equate the open creation with Truth, itself a union of the spiritual laws, 
you could say the same mapping that infused Truth actually brought forth the open creation. Or 
said another way, the ‘action’ that binds the closed creation to the open creation is indeed the Cross, 
and all three of these--closed creation, open creation, and the Cross--are really equivalent. There 
may be no other action that does this though admittedly, a huge leap of faith is required to accept 
what we are saying here. 


The Cross, then, becomes a spiritual portal if you will, a gateway through which an observer in the 
open creation can peer into the closed creation and examine any symmetry that exists there. It is 
the gateway to the Father-Son duality, for example--something I wouldn't have guessed originally. 
Similarly, the Father-Son duality through the Cross can look back at an observer in the open 
creation and examine things accordingly. 


Perhaps the proper analogy would be the boundary of the unit disc that separates the two parts of 
the plane, much like the event horizon of a black hole. This spiritual boundary, it turns out, is both 
necessary and sufficient for the existence of each creation--the open and the closed--and is, from 
what we've said, equivalent to the Cross itself. Admittedly, though, other actions may exist. 


ake 


The parallel in mathematics would be the Jordan Curve Theorem, if you want to get technical, and 
may be worth looking into further. Maybe in the end, God really is 'mathematics personified ... 


ake 


19 


A More General Look At The Virtual Space Of Creation 


Well I wasn't going to write on this subject at all, but feel pressed to do so. I'm going to start by 
dividing up creation into the three pieces we've been talking about and offer a little detail on each. 
Since I really don't know the physics of it all, we'll have to be content with generalizations. 


First we've got the closed creation, which I'll refer to as the Godhead. This is the place where there 
are no active laws, but contains all that ever was, is and will be. One could argue it is a fusion of 
symmetries and equivalences bathing in a perfect equilibrium of nothingness -- no dimensions, no 
space, no time, no anything you might be familiar with through your senses here on earth. Among 
other things, it is home to the Father-Son duality that we've talked about in the past, but there may 
be many more symmetries or equivalencies in this creation--even infinitely many. The best 
analogy I can come up with at this point is the black hole from physics and cosmology. 


Then we've got the open creation, which exists beyond the boundary of the closed. In the open 
creation are realms, regions, remnants and realities endowed with their own unique dimensions and 
infused with the active spiritual laws of creation. Here you will find, among other things, the 
physical plane; its dimensions of space and time, however illusory, and souls functioning through 
shells on different planetary systems in different galaxies and universes. The best analogy would 
be everything outside the black hole, in both the physical and non-physical planes. 


And finally, we've got the boundary separating the closed creation from the open creation. This is a 
most peculiar region, because it binds together the open with the closed without explicitly being 
one or the other. Here you'll find the action we've talked about that sits between them, and is 
equivalent to, the Father-Son duality and Truth. That ‘action’, as we've said, is the Cross--an event 
portrayed to us in the physical plane some 2000 years ago. The best analogy concerning this 
boundary would be the event horizon of a black hole, a kind of scary, eerie concept for most 
ordinary folk. 


Now the boundary may contain or emit many ‘actions’, perhaps infinitely many, which may all be 
equivalent to one another. Any one of them could serve as a binding between the closed and open 
creations, not just the Cross that we've studied already. 


It's quite possible the physical plane intersected this boundary [event horizon] at a single point in 
space-time from our perspective, manifesting the event we call the Crucifixion and were witness to 
on this planet almost 2000 years ago. Other observers on other planetary systems might also have 
experienced a similar intersection at some point in space-time, but seen the ‘action’ differently, even 
though any two actions on the boundary would be equivalent. Whether that observer's space-time 
point was in our past or our future is irrelevant; only its existence matters. 


So in the most general sense, we've got the closed and open creations, and the boundary which 
joins them together. All three are equivalent to one another, in so much as you can't have one 
without the other two, and theoretically anyway, the boundary could contain or emit an almost 
infinite number of equivalent actions, any one of which could serve as a binding. That binding, in 
turn, would lead to some equivalent symmetry in the Godhead which could then be tied back to 
Truth. 


20 


Why is this important to us ? Because it generalizes creation to the point where souls in different 
parts of the physical or non-physical planes, for example, can peer into the Godhead by way of 
some ‘action’ [portal] located on this event horizon and identify with some [symmetrical] aspect or 
facet inside it. It just so happens that on earth, a planet uniquely defined by its sorrows, that action 
is the Cross, allowing us to ponder more deeply the Father-Son duality which itself is equivalent to 
Truth. Other observers could well see it differently. 


Thus, there may be many paths and portals to God, depending on your frame of reference within 
the open creation. In the end, however, the Light is not going to care about your specific set of 
beliefs; rather, your intent. It always has ... it always will ... and necessarily must ... 


Noether's Theorem ... The Rosetta Stone Of Creation ... Maybe (April 23rd/11) 


We're going to extend the notion above by way of an example on the physical plane in some other 
part of the space-time grid. The aim is to discover other symmetries in the Godhead and 
corresponding actions that bind the former to the law of conservation of truth, where truth is 
defined as the union of the spiritual laws of creation. I should point out initially that this note is 
somewhat hypothetical, and has no basis in fact when studying the near-death research. 
Nonetheless, it is worth considering, even if it's nothing more than a theoretical curiosity. 


So imagine, if you will, a civilization on some other planet in some other galaxy in some other 
universe. In this world, there is no concept of offspring or reproduction, nor do shells really age. 
New shells are simply brought into being by some cloning process that allows for distinguishing 
features, and thus individuality. We'll assume male and female, and fix the age of each at about 30 
years, from our perspective. 


Additionally, we'll assume this is a very advanced civilization that has learned to live in harmony 
and balance with the spiritual laws of creation. There is no evil here, no dark side ... just the 
opposite of what you see on earth, for example. 


Now let the boundary of the Godhead, where actions are stored, intersect the space-time grid at 
exactly the point where this particular world is located. The question could then be asked ‘how best 
would the Godhead show itself to this civilization ?' 


To answer that question we have to take the view that Noether's Theorem is like a Rosetta Stone of 
sorts, tying together in a universal way the notions of (symmetry, action, conservation law). We 
have already conceded that many actions and symmetries might well exist that ultimately lead to 
the law of conservation of truth, and that there is an overarching equivalency among and between 
these three notions. 


It is highly unlikely the Godhead would present itself as a 'Father and Son' symmetry since there 
are no offspring on this planet, nor would it make sense to offer up the notion of a ‘suffering Son' as 
some kind of ‘action’ binding this symmetry to truth. Indeed, that action has already been mapped 
to the physical plane elsewhere. 


Instead, it is my view that a male-female symmetry would make more sense with the law of 
unconditional love being the focus of the third component of Noether's Rosetta Stone. What 


21 


remains is some action sitting between this symmetry and this law which binds the two together--a 
very real, physical action that this particular civilization would have been witness to in a very 
otherworldly way. Such an event -- a visitation, cloud formation or configuration of the stars, for 
example, could easily do the trick, particularly if it was deemed to be both mystical and 
extraordinary. 


And thus, this world, through Noether's Rosetta Stone, sees the equivalency between male-female 
duality in the Godhead and the law of unconditional love by way of an otherworldly action that 
joins the two together. Quite the opposite of the Father-Son duality and its equivalent relationship 
to the law of harm and suffering via the action of the Cross that we see here on earth, and indeed, 
quite comforting as a matter of fact. 


Nonetheless, both triplets are equivalent to one another, and both are equally valid paths back to the 
Godhead if we are to adopt Noether's Rosetta Stone as the standard through which these 
equivalencies arise when looking at the generic notion of (symmetry, action, conservation law). 


And finally, we have to concede as well that Noether's Rosetta Stone may always be at work in 
some unique way, no matter where we are within the virtual space of creation. No two observers 
will necessarily agree on what they see or feel, but to be sure, nothing stops the Godhead from 
continuously manifesting some (symmetrical) aspect of itself through some very real action which 
might, in turn, bind this symmetry to a spiritual law of creation and ultimately the larger law of 
truth. 


One cannot, therefore, underestimate the importance of what is going on here, for it means, above 
all other things, that we must learn to tolerate and accept those who have a different perspective, 
realizing that at best our view is only part of a much larger picture--a view that is both incomplete 
and inconsistent according to Godel . 


many dualities <~~> many actions <~~> truth 
° ° ° 
| | | 
| | | 
--- Noether's Rosetta Stone --- 


Noether's Rosetta Stone Revisited, A CounterArgument 


While the concept of Noether's Rosetta Stone is interesting, it probably goes against the grain of 
how nature actually works and how the Godhead might work as well. Nature is continuously 
minimizing the energy it expends for maximum gain, and I expect the Godhead to be no different. 


Thus, there really is no need for more than a single (action, symmetry) pair within the Godhead that 
gives rise to the spiritual laws of creation, and so other equivalent actions or symmetries would 
seem redundant. One cannot, quite simply, avoid the variational principles at work here if one is to 
view the Godhead as perfectly efficient. 


22 


There is also no hard-core near-death evidence to support other (action, symmetry) pairs, and so 
one is almost forced into a corner whereby the Father-Son duality by way of the Cross leads to 
truth, where truth is defined as the union of the [equivalent] spiritual laws of creation. It is almost 
irrefutable--this conclusion--whether we follow the ancient texts, near-death research currently 
available to us, or an extension of Noether's Theorem. 


Indeed, if one were to find such an equivalent action, it would have to be akin to the horror and the 
anguish associated with the Crucifixion, for example, and retain the same level of mysticism 
associated with the Resurrection. In addition, the corresponding symmetry in the Godhead would 
have to offer up the 'godlike' evidence Christ produced by way of his miracles and his sayings, 
leading to a very specific law such as the law of harm and suffering. 


In other words, one would want evidence for such a (symmetry, action, conservation law) triplet 
which goes beyond folklore, and to be honest, I haven't seen it, anywhere. Indeed, the harder I 
look, the less likely it seems ... 


Having said that, Noether's Rosetta Stone has both theoretical and contemplative value in so much 
as it allows us to consider other (action, symmetry) pairs even if they don't really exist. In that 
sense, it helps us to develop compassion, understanding and tolerance for others who are on their 
own road to discovering truth, and in my view anyway, there can be no greater lesson to be learned 
from all of this. 


one duality <~~> one action <~~> truth 
° ° ° 
| | | 
| | | 
--- Noether's Rosetta Stone --- 


The Crucifixion Revisited (weaving together those laws through a seemingly latent action) 


On April 25th/2011 I had another strange thought concerning the Crucifixion--so strange, in fact, 
that I thought I'd write it down. 


We've learned that Noether's Theorem tells us the Father-Son duality exists by way of the Cross, 
and leads, in turn, to truth, where truth is defined as the union of the (equivalent) spiritual laws of 
creation. This is the de facto (symmetry, action, conservation law) triplet upon which creation 
hangs, literally everywhere. 


Indeed, without this ‘action’ (the Cross), you really don't have the closed and open creations 
discussed elsewhere in this essay, nor do you have the boundary separating them. In fact, all you 
may have is the undifferentiated energy of God everywhere and nothing more. Those differentiable 
symmetries (personalities) within the Godhead exist because of this (latent) action and lead to the 
(active) spiritual laws, which is to say, the open creation. 


23 


So one has to ask the question 'what really was going on, from the perspective of the Godhead, 
where there is no time and space, during the Crucifixion ?' What did Christ really mean when he 
said ‘It is finished’ whilst hanging on that Cross ? 


To answer the questions we have to remember what the higher-ordered beings told Howard Storm 
during his NDE. The Bible, while true, is commentary and should not be interpreted literally. It is 
some kind of encoding which tells us how creation was woven together absent the dimensions we 
live in--that is to say, from God's perspective. 


My guess is that during the time Christ was suffering on the Cross (about six hours), the open and 
closed creations were being formed, along with the boundary that would separate them. The open 
creation would have been completed by infusing into it the spiritual laws of creation that heretofore 
only existed in ‘blueprint form'. Once this was done, a natural boundary would separate the closed 
creation [Godhead] from the open--a boundary which, from our perspective, anyway, is none other 
than the Cross. 


No doubt the open creation, at this time, was lit up with an almost infinite number of 'big bangs' as 
universes came into being on the physical plane and started to expand into their current forms. 
Other realms on other planes might have come into being as well, and once this grand infusion of 
light, laws and energy into the open creation was complete, souls would have started to leave the 
Godhead to begin the great journey. The magnitude of such an event cannot really be measured by 
the human mind, leaving one to only imagine what must have happened in God's 'now' according to 
the Noether connection. 


Genesis speaks of 'six days of creation’ and Cayce mentions the number six as the Christ-force in 
nature, in addition to the former, and wouldn't you know it ... Christ spends six hours on the Cross. 
Almost too coincidental, in my view, that we should see this type of alignment without there being 
a deeper meaning. 


What we saw 2000 years ago is simply what the dimensions of space and time let us see, and we 
are fooled into believing there is nothing more. In reality, we were very likely witnesses to the 
unfolding and authenticity of creation itself, which concluded with the words of Christ ‘It is 
finished’. 


In this sense, Christ's time on the Cros: the physical expression of an equivalent latent action 
stored on the boundary that divides the open and closed creations. From God's perspective there is 
no material difference between the two--they are both equal and simultaneous actions that cannot 
be separated. It is only from our perspective in the physical plane that things become confusing 
because we have bought into the notion of time and space--a masterful trick if there ever was one. 


Without that suffering in the physical plane, you don't have completion of the law of harm and 
suffering, and without this law, by equivalency, you don't have any active spiritual laws of creation, 
meaning you don't have an open creation. In turn, this means you've lost both the open creation 
and the closed creation that would contain any symmetries, and by implication, the action itself. 
Effectively, all you are left with is the undifferentiated energy of God, everywhere, as we said 
before. This might well have been the state of the primordial Godhead prior to everything 
unfolding into what is now deemed life throughout the virtual cosmos. 


24 


Conversely, if there is no action, then clearly there is nothing, and in particular, there is no Cross. 
Thus, one could argue the Crucifixion really is equivalent to the latent action (boundary or 
membrane) that brought forth both the symmetries in the Godhead and the spiritual laws of 
creation, simultaneously. This is a profound notion, to say the least. 


‘In the beginning, God created heaven and earth' really means the undifferentiated energy of God 
that existed everywhere, initially, collapsed into a subspace of the virtual cosmos, bringing into 
being the open and closed creations, and the boundary that divides them. At this point 
differentiable symmetries in the Godhead would have emerged along with the (latent) action and 
(active) spiritual laws of creation--the ultimate big bang if there ever was one you might say. All 
three notions should be seen as equivalent to one another according to Noether, even though it may 
be hard for the mind to do so. We'll explore the idea a little more in the next section. 


primordial fabric <--> Noether <--> differentiable mosaic 
° 
| 
| 
° 
duality <~~> action <~~> law of truth 


ake 


Alas, a tiny fragment of God's 'now' paid us a visit some 2000 years ago, and 2000 years later there 
is no one who seems to understand what really happened or why. If Noether's Theorem does apply, 
it is probably the best explanation we are ever going to get in terms of an answer, for it seems to 
unify things in a way that no mere mortal ever could, moving beyond the familiar dimensions of 
reality we are used to and up into the rarified space where only gods dwell. 


he 
Christ never did die to 'save anyone's soul' and ‘dying for the sins of mankind’ doesn't come close to 
describing what really happened and why. Without that remarkably heroic act we call the 


Crucifixion it's very likely there wouldn't be a creation, for there would have been nothing to 
sustain it according to Noether. 


eee 


A More Detailed Look At That Thing We Call The 'Action' (May 14th/2011) 


Well, we are arriving at a point where we can think much more deeply about the different 
components associated with Noether's Theorem and how they relate to the building of creation, 
spiritually speaking. 


25 


Richard Feynman, the great quantum physicist, believed very much in using the action principle to 
resolve the mysteries of a system even though he didn't understand why it worked--only that it did. 
So we'll go with good old Rich as we try to unravel a similar mystery concerning the unfolding of 
creation, even though I'm no physicist. Effectively, we're using Noether's Theorem with a little 
more detail to try and do the unthinkable. 


The action is a sum of parts, an integration if you will, leading to a single value. From it, various 
symmetries can be deduced that lead to conservation laws. In my mind, this means the action is an 
encoding of sorts which lives in one dimension below those dimensions that contain these 
symmetries and these laws. Decoding the action leads to symmetries and laws and conversely, 
these symmetries and laws can be encoded rather compactly back into an action. 


So if we now think of a unit disc centered at the origin it only makes sense to locate this action on 
the boundary of the disc and the corresponding symmetries within it. The active conservation laws 
can be thought of as living in the region outside the disc and all three should be seen as equivalent. 
In other words, if you lose one piece, you lose the whole thing. 


We stated before it was most likely the collapse of the undifferentiated energy of God, everywhere, 
that brought into being the closed and open creations, and the boundary separating them. We now 
should feel reasonably certain the (latent) action is indeed that boundary and contains the encoded 
energy needed to derive both the differentiable symmetries within the Godhead and the (active) 
spiritual laws of creation outside it. The crucial thing to remember here is that none of this could 
have ever happened had there been no collapse to begin with--a collapse which changed both the 
energy and the geometry of the virtual cosmos. It is also crucial to understand that there is no 
material difference between these symmetries, the (latent) action itself and the (active) spiritual 
laws of creation. All three are equivalent and therefore, indistinguishable. 


So if you are wondering who God really is, God is not one thing, even though He may present 
himself to you that way. God is simultaneously the differentiable symmetries resulting from the 
collapse; the union of the spiritual laws of creation resulting from these symmetries, and the 
encoded energy which glues these two pieces together. All three are equivalent and inseparable, 
and so quite naturally this leads us to the next question 'who is Christ’ ? 


Well, in all too familiar a way, we are used to seeing Christ as a person hanging on a Cross, dying 
for the sins of mankind. This is the typical message from Christian doctrine, for example, but it 
must be seen in a very different light. 


In reality, Christ is probably one of those symmetries within the Godhead, and the same encoded 
energy which gave rise to this symmetry gave rise to all the differentiable symmetries within the 
Godhead. This encoded energy or latent action, if you will, may have been the same energy that 
made a descent into the body we refer to as Jesus Christ, who then went on to complete the law of 
harm and suffering, and by equivalency, all the spiritual laws of creation. Had this not happened, 
as we now know, there would have been no creation, essentially. 


When Christ said 'If you have seen me you have seen the Father’, he was basically saying what we 
are saying here. He may indeed be a symmetry (personality) within the Godhead but at the same 
time a full encoding of the energy which gives rise to both these symmetries and the resulting 


26 


spiritual laws of creation. Christ is probably all three, and you could, therefore, say that up to 
personality, anyway, Christ is God. 


wae 


Think of the unit disc in the plane and divide up its interior into 12 equal sectors, say, like slices of 
apie. Alternate the colors of these slices using black and white. Note that if you paint the white 
sectors black and the black sectors white you have the same geometric layout. In terms of 
(symmetry, action) you could think of the black sectors along with the boundary as being one 
component of the Godhead, and the white sectors along with the boundary as being the other. 
Black might represent one personality and white another. 


Now reflect these white and black slices along the boundary and add two additional slices between 
neighboring reflections in order to begin the process of tiling the disc's exterior. Make sure to 
change color as you do the reflections or add sectors between them. 


What you'll find is that the disc's exterior will be tiled with an infinite number of black and white 
slices in a beautifully symmetrical arrangement, and you could think of this arrangement as 
representing the spiritual laws of creation, which are not only conserved but equivalent by way of 
this symmetry. 


You can even get more creative and add additional coloring to these exterior sectors all the while 
preserving a more complex symmetry. Each colored area would represent a law, say, and any two 
colored areas extended to infinity would be symmetric. Taken as a whole, the colored areas would 
tile the disc's exterior. 


In this way, you have a geometric layout that portrays the (symmetry, action, conservation law) 
triplet associated with the Godhead in very simplistic terms. Adding more color to the interior 
sectors also produces more symmetries, but unfortunately there is no way to know just how many 
symmetries actually exist in the Godhead, nor can we be sure how many spiritual laws of creation 
there really are. I suspect there are many more laws than symmetries, but this is just a hunch on my 
part. 


Interestingly, we've used coloring throughout this example to generate symmetries and spiritual 
laws, and loosely associated color with personality. In the same way that personality can be 
associated with symmetries in the Godhead, it can also be associated with the spiritual laws of 
creation. It seems as though these laws, while being equivalent to one another, are each endowed 
with their own unique identity. 


ake 


The Principle Of Least Action and The Uniqueness Of Creation 


I've wondered for some time now just how unique this approach to creation by way of Noether 
really is. In the tiling example above, nothing stops us from dividing the interior and exterior 
arrangements with a boundary shaped in the form of an ellipse, for example. However, one should 
always remember that God is going to be perfectly efficient when it comes to encoding and 
expending the energy needed to build the symmetries and the laws and so, would choose a least 


27 


action leading to the most compact arrangement of symmetries and laws reflected in some 
corresponding geometry. 


This is where the circle comes into play, because it is probably the most efficient corresponding 
geometry for least action if we arbitrarily tile the interior and exterior with sectors. By bending the 
circle into an ellipse, the interior and exterior tiling structure would become warped leading to 
asymmetries, and I highly doubt God would do such a thing. 


You could also bend the circle into a rectangle, say, and replace sectors with squares when doing 
the tiling, but intuitively I would surmise that this would not lead to least action. Indeed, if you 
look up into the nighttime sky, or view an eclipse or examine soap bubbles, what do you see ? You 
see objects that are spherical in shape because they are built based on variational principles. God 
probably took a similar approach to building the virtual cosmos. 


Thus, least action tells us there is only one unique action from which the symmetries and laws can 
be decoded, and conversely, the symmetries and laws, when encoded, lead back to this same unique 
action. Hence, there is only one unique physical expression of this (latent) action which completes 
the spiritual laws of creation and this is most certainly the Cross. Least action is telling is there is 
no other choice. 


Similarly, least action is also telling us there is a unique arrangement of symmetries within the 
Godhead just as there is a unique (symmetrical) arrangement of the spiritual laws of creation. I 
suspect only the minimum number of symmetries and laws were built in order to make everything 
work. 


wae 


In one shot, using least action with physical expression, the undifferentiated energy of God that 
existed everywhere collapsed into a remarkably beautiful but unique geometry, according to 
Noether, generating the symmetries and laws that make up the virtual cosmos. This, in a nutshell, 
is probably how it was all put together. 


ka 


Are Souls A Necessary Part Of Creation ? 


I was driving around town the evening of June 8th/11 and pondered the idea of souls, within the 
context of this essay. My question was pretty simple -- could you have a creation without souls 
using Noether's principle as your guidepost ? 


Well, suppose no souls were ever made, leaving you with just the symmetries and the laws that 
make up the virtual cosmos by way of an action that itself is equivalent to the Cross. Since there 
are no souls there could be no Crucifixion, which means, in turn, the law of harm and suffering 
could not have been completed. Indeed, there would be no need for such a law and so, by 
equivalency, the spiritual laws of creation vanish along with the action and the symmetries. Once 
again we are back to the undifferentiated energy of God that existed everywhere before creation 
came into being. 


28 


This tells us the mosaic of creation necessarily implies the existence of souls and conversely, the 
existence of souls necessarily implies the mosaic. In other words, the mosaic of creation and the 
notion of souls are equivalent to one another -- if you lose one you lose the other. 


We can, therefore, extend our understanding of things by saying that creation or God, if you will, is 
the union of four distinct, yet equivalent, pieces. These are souls, symmetries, least action and 
spiritual laws. Losing any one piece means losing all four, or put another way, everything 
everywhere is intricately connected. 


ake 


In God's 'now', souls came into being when everything else came into being -- symmetries, least 
action and laws. They most likely resided in the Godhead until it was time to leave and explore the 
virtual cosmos which we have before us today. Souls are as fundamental to creation as are any 
symmetries within the Godhead, the encoded energy from which these symmetries arise, and the 
corresponding spiritual laws. All four pieces are equivalent to one another and creation, quite 
simply, would not exist if even one of these pieces were to disappear. 


ake 


fundamental components 


| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
duality <~~> action <~~> laws <~~> souls 
| | 
| | 
| | 


Why Does Evil Exist and The Law Of Purification Of The Void (June 27th/2011) 


The timeless question of why evil exists and why God does not destroy evil can best be answered 
now within the context of Noether. 


We know there are at least four equivalent components to creation, these being souls, symmetries, 
least action and spiritual laws. Losing one component means losing all four, and thus a reversion to 
the undifferentiated energy of God that existed everywhere before creation came into being. A 
cosmic vacuum, if you will. 


Suppose now that all souls ever created are malevolent, thus occupying the void. If God destroys 
these souls, thereby destroying the void, souls no longer exist anywhere. This implies, by 
equivalency, that creation ceases to exist and so leaves God in the position of not being able to 
eradicate this evil after all. Connectedness and equivalency prohibit such an action, unfortunately. 


29 


God has no choice but to purify the void, even if it is in small steps over eons of time, according to 
our notion of time. In other words, the existence of creation necessarily implies purification of the 
void, and conversely, purification of the void implies the existence of creation. You could, 
therefore, argue that purification of the void is a law, equivalent to all the other spiritual laws of 
creation and without it, creation ceases to exist, just like it would cease to exist if any of the 
spiritual laws were to vanish. 


ake 


God is bound by the (equivalent) spiritual laws of creation, just like any soul is. These laws were 
designed to allow us to self-correct as we move through a seemingly endless cosmic journey, even 


to the point where extricating ourselves from the void is possible. 


The law of free choice, for example, guarantees us complete freedom of thought and discovery, but 
is also met with the very powerful law of harm and suffering, designed to balance and cover our 
poor choices. The more we know about these laws, the better our chances of succeeding as souls 
no matter where we are within the virtual cosmos. 


ake 


It may be that souls are also connected to one another forming a larger whole. If indeed there is a 
dependency (equivalency) amongst souls God would be prevented from destroying even one of 
them, for to destroy one would mean destroying the whole, and this is not possible according to our 
findings above. In addition, any destruction of souls would contradict the Law of Unconditional 
Love and the Law of Principled Indifference, which we'll look at later. 


ake 


Comparison Of The Empty Fabric and The Differentiable Mosaic 


Well, it's June 30th/2011, and I hope I'm getting to the end of this rather interesting essay. In this 
section we are going to talk about the empty fabric and compare it to the differentiable mosaic we 
now see before us. 


It struck me in the last few days that the empty fabric -- also referred to as the undifferentiated 
energy of God -- is indeed a closed system that doesn't leak or suffer dissipation, and so, Noether's 
Theorem almost surely applies in terms of describing how it morphed into the remarkably beautiful 
mosaic we see today. 


The empty fabric is the state of things prior to the existence of anything, where there is no 
differentiation and no discernable structure -- all things cease to be things, implying an 


30 


undifferentiated, unified 'whole' of all that is, whatever this finally means. Such a fabric still 
contains the information necessary to build the mosaic, and indeed, that information would be 
conserved in moving to the latter, albeit rearranged, just like rearranging a bitmap, for example. 


At some point, a 'movement' or 'shift' in the empty fabric caused least action to come into being, 
giving rise to symmetries in the Godhead and hence the larger law of conservation of truth, as well 
as (perhaps through a quantum effect) souls and other fundamental components of creation. 
Almost surely this happened, because the empty fabric, seen as a closed system, would not have 
had an action of any kind without such a shift or perturbation, however subtle. 


The empty fabric and differentiable mosaic could also be seen as equivalent to one another, 
although it is highly improbable we would ever see the mosaic dissolve into emptiness. Statistical 
considerations alone would prevent an infinitely long, irregular bitmap from ever becoming 
ordered, and this is roughly what would need to happen if we were to see the differentiable mosaic 
disappear into nothingness, so to speak. 


The empty (or primordial) fabric is, however, probably the purest definition of God you are going 
to get, and from God's perspective, no doubt, this fabric and the differentiable mosaic are one an 
the same thing. As such, the notions of separateness and uniqueness in the differentiable mosaic 
are simply illusions created by our experiences in the latter, which perhaps, is a good thing, for they 
lend credence to the viability of such a mosaic, so long as you follow the laws. The price you pay 
for your sense of individuality, one might say, even though in reality all things are connected an 
unified everywhere. 


ake 


Ask yourself again, according to Noether, what it took to bring into being the law of harm an 
suffering, and thus the remarkably beautiful creation we have before us today ? It would seem we 
carried little, if any, of the burden, and indeed, could not have if we, as souls, are not a symmetry in 
the Godhead. Within the differentiable mos at least, this seems to be the case. 


We can, however, appreciate what was given to us, and indeed, the only expectation God woul 
have is that we follow the laws as best we can and hopefully, whilst here on the physical plane, put 
our spiritual interests ahead of our physical interests. For those who do, it will have made the trip 
worthwhile, to say the least. 


wae 


Searching For The Universal Least Action (July 3rd/2011) 


We noted in the last section the empty fabric is a closed system that suffers no leakage or 
dissipation. As such, it is my belief Noether's Theorem applies in characterizing this system as it 
morphs into the mosaic comprised of symmetries, least action, laws and other fundamental 
components of creation such as souls. In other words, we don't just have a universal action, but 
rather, a unique universal least action from which everything else flows. 


At the apex of this hierarchy are the symmetries within the Godhead and the larger law of 
conservation of truth, where truth is defined as the union of the (equivalent) spiritual laws of 


31 


creation. Each contains the other, so to speak, and by way of some connection to this universal 
least action all other fundamental components of creation, such as souls, emerge. 


All of these pieces -- symmetries, least action, laws and souls -- should be seen as equivalent to one 
another in so much as losing one piece means losing the whole. All things, at the apex of creation, 
are inextricably bound together and unified into a whole even though the illusion of separateness 
and individuality exists in the mosaic. 


This should not come as a surprise, especially when you think about what the empty fabric really is 
and how the differentiable mosaic came into being via Noether. Quite frankly, separateness is not 
possible forcing us instead to accept the notions of equivalency, connectedness and unification. 


We also know, from near-death research in particular, that all physical things flow from spiritual 
things, and thus we may conclude that the physical laws of creation are derivative forms of their 
spiritual counterparts. Since the spiritual laws are indeed connected to the whole, it stands to 
reason that the physical laws are also connected to the whole by way of equivalency and 
unification. 


This is an important observation, for it means the unique universal least action, were it ever to be 
found, would be sufficient to describe the physical laws of nature and indeed, that description 
would contain the equivalency and unification we have talked about. The physical laws of 
creation, no matter how you analyze creation, really are connected, equivalent and unified into a 
whole even though here on earth we cannot see it. 


wae 


In physics today, there is a great deal of activity regarding grand unified theories and the like, but it 
is my view that no such theory will ever come about until (a) we become spiritual enough to 
recognize the oneness of all things and (b) develop the necessary mathematical tools to describe 
this oneness. Even then, Godel may prohibit us from obtaining a complete and consistent picture of 
things. 


duality <~~> action <~~> law of truth 
° ° ° 
| | | 
| | | 
| ° ° 
© <~~> least action <~~> physical laws 


An Interesting Corollary (July 14th/2011) 


Because Noether can be used to characterize the 'morphing' of the empty fabric into the 
differentiable mosaic, we have to accept that some symmetry within the Godhead gave rise to all 
the (equivalent) spiritual laws of creation simultaneously, by way of an action, and not just some of 
them. Indeed, we have defined the union of these laws to be the law of conservation of truth, which 


32 


is essentially an all or nothing proposition. Either this overarching law exists in some active sense 
of the word, fully and completely, and by way of a (symmetry, action) pair, or it doesn't exist at all. 


In particular, this tells us the law of harm and suffering would have been established in its entirety 
when the differentiable mosaic was established, meaning the Crucifixion -- itself an event 
equivalent to the unique universal least action -- took place as the empty fabric unfolded into the 
remarkably beautiful mosaic we have before us today. 


Such a conclusion can only be reached if we remove the dimensions of space and time from our 
analysis and come to an understanding that from God's perspective, anyway, there is no time and 
space as we perceive these dimensions. The past, present, future and space itself are all 
compressed into what we would call 'God's now’, and it is from this perspective that we must 
examine both the empty fabric and the virtual cosmos we live in today. Any other approach will 
not work, in my view. 


ake 


Noether not only forces us into a position where all things in creation are unified, connected and 
equivalent, but also, tells us that dimensions such as time and space don't really exist after all. 


We have learned, through Noether, that a symmetric duality in the Godhead gave rise to the larger 
law of conservation of truth by way of a unique action equivalent to the Cross, and that truth is 
indeed the union of the (equivalent) spiritual laws of creation. These laws, while equivalent, may 
have stronger or weaker personalities, but it is both fair and correct to say that personalities within 
the Godhead are equally balanced because of symmetry. 


Finally, Noether also tells us there are at least four equivalent fundamental components of creation, 
these being symmetries, least action, laws and souls. If we were to lose even one component 
creation would cease to exist, according to Noether. All things, it seems, are unified into a 
connected whole through equivalency. 


ake 


Some 2000 years ago a piece of God's now ‘tore open’ the space-time continuum we seem to have 
‘fallen asleep in'. For those who have ears to hear, and eyes to see, wherever they are in the virtual 
cosmos, let them hear and see ... 


ake 


A Note On Einstein, Godel and Noether 


Throughout this essay I have used principles of Einstein Relativity Theory, Godel Incompleteness 
and Noether Invariance to justify my understanding of things. These three people were probably 
some of the brightest minds of the last century and it is doubtful we will ever see an intellectual 
confluence of this kind again for a long, long time. 


Einstein lived between 1879 and 1955, Godel between 1906 and 1978, and Noether between 1882 
and 1935. So there was a period of time when all three were alive and, no doubt, knew about each 


33 


other. To me, at least, this is not a coincidence, nor is it a coincidence that I have taken advantage 
of what they said within the context of this paper. 


If we believe in Noether's Theorem extended to spirituality, and Einstein's notion of Relativity, 
which in essence allows for the concept of God's 'now', and Godel's Incompleteness which implies 
consistency and completeness only within the Godhead, then the conclusion reached above in 'The 
Crucifixion Revisited’ is reasonable. 


T'll be pondering this for some time to come, to say the least ... 


Three Pillars 


Einstein <~~> Noether <~~> Godel 


Where Are We With Those Spiritual Laws ??? 


It's time for a recap on the spiritual laws of creation. We've learned a few more, so here's a quick 
summary: 


a) the law of free choice 

b) the law of forgiveness 

c) the law of harm and suffering 

d) the law of earning what you receive 
e) the law of conservation of information 
f) the law of conservation of truth 

g) the law of unconditional love 

h) the law of purification of the void 

i) the law of leaving the Godhead 

j)_ the law of principled indifference 


It is my view that all these laws are equivalent, not just some of them, and that Truth is indeed the 
union of the spiritual laws of creation. Indeed, Truth very likely is creation. 


A Note On The Law Of Earning What You Receive 


Well, it's July 11th/2011 and I keep saying I'm done writing, but I thought it important for those 
who read this essay to talk a bit about this law. We know from Fenimore's NDE account that such 
a law exists and that it is definitely tied to our spiritual progress. In fact, one could argue that our 
spiritual progress ought to precede any gain or acquisition we might aspire to in the physical plane, 
including, but not limited to, bodily healing. 


For whatever reason, I went back and read the account of Samson (man of the sun) on Wiki, 
probably because I had been thinking about his story in recent times. It struck me that his great 
strength was lost when his hair was cut, which led to a breaking of the Nazirite bond he had formed 


34 


with God. As the hair regrew, Samson's strength returned, most likely because he became 
reacquainted with his own sense of spirituality that was lost when he flirted with forces or powers 
that were only too willing to take it from him. 


The lesson here is quite simple. Your spirituality can be developed or destroyed by your own 
thoughts and actions, and thus it is up to each one of us to guard our progress by living in harmony 
and balance with the spiritual laws of creation. The more we know about these laws the better our 
chances. 


If we do this other things such as physical healing will flow more freely and naturally from God. In 
Samson's case, he was healed physically by God once he first healed himself spiritually. 
Unfortunately, Samson's spiritual healing was a long and drawn out process that was both painful 
and embarrassing for him, but eventually he got it right and the rest is history, as they say. 


The story of Samson may be a good example of the law of earning what you receive, for it details 
the account of a man endowed with great supernatural power and strength initially, only to lose and 
then regain it as he recovered his own sense of spirituality. It was never about Samson's hair per se, 
or any Nazirite vow, but rather, where Samson was with respect to his spiritual self. A poignant 
lesson for the rest of us who, in particular, aspire to be healed physically -- heal thyself spiritually 
first. 


A Note On Spiritual Ratios (July 11th/2011) 


For the last few days I've been thinking about reincarnation and how our reincarnations are tied to 
spiritual progress. It struck me that we must actually look at two things -- the number of 
reincarnations we've had as a soul and the level of progress achieved to date. 


T'll call this quotient of 'reincarnations to level of progress' the spiritual ratio, and make the obvious 
remark that the lower this number, the more advanced a soul really is, or has become. It does us 
virtually no good to talk about the number of reincarnations solely by itself, especially if there is no 
progress with each descent. Indeed, in some cases the experience of descending into the physical 
plane can actually be regressive, undoing any progress made in previous incarnations -- something 
to keep in mind for the overly ambitious in the higher realms may I say. 


In the world of Cayce's numbers there appear to be twelve levels of understanding, with the last (or 
twelfth) being perfection. I doubt any soul will ever reach the final level, irrespective of the 
number of incarnations, but who knows. 


In my case there is sufficient evidence to support the conclusion that I've reached the eleventh level 
in 23 descents, yielding a spiritual ratio of about 2 using the Cayce numbers. I recall as well in my 
dream (vision) the other two beings I saw had 36 and 45 emblazoned on their solid-core orbs, 
suggesting that (a) these were the number of incarnations each has had and (b) their spiritual ratios 
are probably no lower than 3 and 4, respectively, if we assume neither has ever reached the twelfth 
level. 


As perfect and beautiful as these beings were, it seems to me, ironically, that their spiritual ratios 
are actually larger than mine. Since they were identical twins and since we are tied together by the 


35, 


orbs and their corresponding numbers (23, 36, 45), it is my belief that (a) we are identical triplets 
and (b) I may actually be more spiritually advanced than both of them. 


This comes as a surprise to me, for I have thought for a long time now that I was the 'youngest' of 
the three in terms of spiritual progress. That may, in fact, not be the case after all. 


A Note On Spiritualizing The Virtual Cosmos (July 12th/2011) 


As I was sitting in the park today, it finally dawned on me that it was time to summarize all that I've 
learned through this essay and ask the fundamental question 'how does God go about transforming 
the virtual cosmos ?' 


We know Noether's principle can be used to explain how creation likely came into being, but what 
indeed is the point of this knowledge if it can't be used to enlighten others ? Knowledge, on its 
own, isn't worth much unless it leads to understanding, wisdom, and finally enlightenment -- the 
circle of discernment, if you will. 


Noether tells us the Father-Son duality gives rise to the larger law of conservation of truth by way 
of a unique action, itself equivalent to the Cross. Our poor choices, in essence, are covered by the 
Jaw of harm and suffering which was completed via the Crucifixion some 2000 years ago, and 
indeed, the differentiable mosaic exists because of this remarkable event, though few, if any, 
understand the import of what is being said here. 


For whatever reason, our planet was chosen to stage the Crucifixion according to the system and 
timing of things, meaning no other planet anywhere, at any time, can or ever will bear witness to 
what we have seen. Earth is indeed a highly special place to God, for souls who come here to learn 
have a golden opportunity to discover these mysteries if they really want to. Sadly, most never do 
no matter how many times they make the descent. 


But for those who do gain the enlightenment, they can, upon returning to the higher realms, pass on 
their knowledge to others and too, sow the seeds of understanding on other planets in other galaxies 
in other universes through incarnation. 


In M's NDE, for example, we learn of a Creator-level mandate recently issued to bring an end to the 
‘Luciferian Rebellion’. To me, this simply means a mandate has been issued to spiritualize the 
virtual cosmos in the most efficient way possible. A needed thing, in my view, since by my 
reckoning about one-third of creation has been lost to darkness already and that percentage isn't 
likely to fall unless something of a drastic nature reverses the decline. 


M's NDE speaks of Leaders of Light from everywhere throughout creation convening in the 
Library of Light to discuss the matter and find a resolution. These beings, from what I gather, are 
immensely powerful, capable entities -- almost on the order of God himself -- and so, it appears we 
are in good hands after all. 


Perhaps the best approach involves sharing the secrets Noether has given us -- secrets that can help 
unlock and decode the mysteries of the Godhead, thereby leading to a fuller understanding of the 


36 


spiritual laws of creation, and finally creation itself. In the end, isn't this what it's all about -- living 
in harmony and balance with these laws and knowing how and why they came into being ? 


Einstein, Noether, and God's Now (The Godhead) -- Digging A Little Deeper (July 15", 2011) 


It seems every time I want to put the pen down another thought pops into my head, and sure 
enough, that happened today as I was sitting in the park and enjoying my tea. 


It wasn't long ago I found a paper on the Internet written by Nina Byers from UCLA in 1998. It 
was a paper devoted to the celebration of Noether and a discussion of the deep connection between 
symmetries and conservation laws in particular. What I learned from this paper is that Noether's 
Theorem actually led to the discovery of the laws of General Relativity Theory, thereby strongly 
supporting the idea, in my view, that we can indeed use Noether to explain how creation actually 
came into being. In other words, if Noether was good enough for Einstein, perhaps she is good 
enough for creation at large. 


Adopting whatever tools the First Lady of Mathematics gave us, we have already come to the 
conclusion that from the perspective of the Godhead, anyway, there really is no time and space. 
The Godhead, you may recall, is the closed creation that contains the symmetries responsible for 
the law of conservation of truth via some action. 


Let us now turn to Einstein, who along with others, came to the realization long ago that in our 
physical plane, time and space are woven together -- there is, in fact, no way to separate these 
dimensions. We also know that light has no clock, and so, time seems to stand still for observers 
travelling at this speed. In turn, this would seem to indicate space vanishes as well for these 
observers because it is interwoven with time. 


Since Noether implies the existence of God's now [ie the Godhead], neither space nor time can 
occupy the B-world, anywhere. On the other hand, Einstein tell us this can only happen if the 
Godhead is filled with light everywhere, extending out to a perceived infinity which omits the 
familiar dimensions we live in. 


In other words, were you to cross over into the B-world by passing through the membrane (action) 
that divides the closed and open creations, any rod or clock used to measure distance or time would 
not work. Indeed, you might find your rod or clock dissolving into the very fabric of the Godhead, 
and thus becoming light itself. Taking it one step further, you might find yourself completely 
melding with the Godhead for the same reason. 


The Godhead, were you able to see it by being in it, would probably look like a colorful array of 
symmetries generated solely by the purest forms of light one can imagine. No matter where you 
were within the Godhead, these symmetries would persist, seemingly out to an infinity not 
measurable through the familiar dimensions that exist here in the physical plane. 


And because the notion of dimensionality would cease to exist, you would most likely become one 
with the Godhead, knowing all that ever was, is and will be. Some NDErs come back saying this 
has in fact happened to them. Perhaps we now know why ... 


The Godhead 
symmetries of light 
no dimensions 


all things known 


A Trip Through The Realms Outside The Godhead (July 16th/2011) 


I'm going to try and characterize the continuum of realms outside the Godhead, taking account of 
rods, clocks and light, and see if we can learn anything. At the outset I should like to say 
emphatically that Godel applies here, meaning my view of things is most likely incomplete and 
inconsistent, but nonetheless, interesting. 


We now know from Noether and Einstein that within the Godhead no time or space exists, and so 
any observer will find himself blending completely with other observers here and with the purest 
forms of light imaginable -- an experience which would seem eternal and infinite but not 
measurable using familiar norms. In the Godhead, there is no sense of individuality at all -- 
everything is meshed together into an infinite whole you might say and the concept of rods and 
clocks vanishes altogether. 


Let us now move out and beyond the membrane (action) dividing the closed and open creations, 
and into a realm ‘relatively close’ to the Godhead. In such a realm, beings would nearly have the 
same awareness they had in the Godhead, but at the same time retain a very weak impression of 
‘clock ticks' and 'spatial events’. 


They would, for the most part, feel completely blended together with each other and with the light, 
in what would seem like an infinite expanse that could not be measured with rods or clocks. 
Indeed, rods and clocks would seem strange to them, but not altogether, meaning these beings 
would feel complete at-one-ment with each another on the one hand, and a limited sense of 
individuality on the other. The light in such a realm, while very pure, would not be as pure as the 
light in the Godhead because to a very small degree it would be moving through trace elements of 
time and space. In that sense, time and space, however you wish to define them, diminish the 
purity of light and thus the notion of at-one-ment. 


Continuing our journey, we arrive at the physical plane some distance from the Godhead where we 
find the notions of time, space and light to be roughly the same in terms of sensation or awareness. 
Clocks tick, rulers measure and light beams down from the sun. It all seems rather natural and 
well-ordered from the perspective of a being who lives in this plane, however there is quite a bit of 
drag here because light must move through or ‘compete with' the density of time and space, thereby 
diminishing its purity even more. 


38 


Our sense of individuality is heightened and the notion of at-one-ment we might have felt in one of 
the higher realms, or even the Godhead, is lost. We no longer blend with the light and each other 
the way we did before because time and space have both distorted and impeded the sensation of 
this phenomenon. Indeed, time and space have virtually removed this sensation altogether. 


Moving down further into one of the lower realms, typically a void-like region where anguish 
reigns, we find that time and space begin to overshadow light uniformly. The presence of light is 
severely diminished or vanishes completely depending on how low the realm actually is, leaving an 
observer with the sensation of extreme individuality -- that is to say, complete arrogance and 
ignorance. 


Because time and space begin to overshadow the light, an observer perceives continuous misery in 
a more ‘spatially aware' sense of the word. It seems to be everywhere around him with no letup. It 
is in this sense that time and space finally get the better of this observer, and so they should, 
because our thoughts and actions ultimately form the basis for our spiritual destiny. 


ake 


Even in the physical plane it is quite possible to put yourself in a void-like region by way of your 
thoughts and actions. If you do, it is more than likely you will pass over into such a realm upon 
death, but now your perception of that misery will be heightened by orders of magnitude. 
Conversely, thoughts and actions that are light-filled will do just the opposite -- they will be 
magnified by orders of magnitude upon leaving the earth plane. 


The more we know about the spiritual laws of creation, and creation itself, the better our chances of 
succeeding as souls no matter where we are within the virtual cosmos. For those that have ears to 
hear and eyes to see ... 


ake 


time & space intensify 


| Godhead | light-filled realms ~~> physical plane ~~> darker realms | 


Is The Physical Plane A Fundamental Component Of Creation ? (July 20th/2011) 


Well, we've done our trip through the realms and come to the realization that time, space and light, 
in varying degrees of ‘awareness’, determine the ‘quality and purity' of any particular realm. But the 
question could be asked 'how fundamental are realms to creation and what would happen if they 
didn't exist ?' 


Well, if no realms existed anywhere souls would be confined to the Godhead indefinitely, resting in 
a state of perfect equilibrium with the symmetries of light that dwell there. The active spiritual 
laws of creation, such as the law of harm and suffering, do not apply in this domain and so Noether 
tells us the differentiable mosaic vanishes -- we are back to the empty fabric that existed 
everywhere before this mosaic was brought into being. Conversely, if there is no differentiable 


39 


mosaic, then clearly there are no realms, and this in turn means realms beyond the Godhead are 
indeed a fundamental component of creation. 


In the case of the physical plane it should be clear that if it didn't exist, nor would the Cross. 
Conversely, if there were no Cross, you would have nothing, since the Cross is an event equivalent 
to the action that binds together the open and closed creations. Thus, one could argue the physical 
plane in particular is a fundamental component of creation -- if you lose it, by implication you lose 
everything. 


God, then, has a choice. Either he elects to have a physical plane and induce suffering through it in 
order to bring about the law of harm and suffering, or he finds another way to complete the law 
which avoids this plane altogether. 


If God chooses the latter, he must find a realm above or below what would have been the physical 
plane and stage an event accordingly. Choosing a higher realm would make no sense, and so he is 
left with considering a lower realm made up of discarnate souls who largely suffer ongoing mental 
anguish, amplified by an awareness of their selves. Physical pain, in these lower realms, really 
doesn't exist. 


God opted for a combination of physical and mental anguish in the extreme, which was probably 
the basis for bringing into being the physical plane originally. Without maximum suffering God 
determined that the law of harm and suffering, which forms the underpinning to creation, could not 
be completed. ‘Extreme suffering in exchange for extreme harm’, you might say. 


wee 
In a sense, it appears as though the entire physical plane - universes, galaxies, stars, planets and the 
like - was built by God to pay homage to the Crucifixion. A grand, cosmic tribute to the one who 


completed the law of harm and suffering and thus sustained (became the raison d'etre for) the very 
creation we see before us today. 


And Jesus said “I tell you,” he replied, “if they keep quiet, the stones will cry out.” 


ake 


It is no coincidence the physical plane exists. While it provides souls the best opportunity to grow 
spiritually at rapid rates, it is also the plane that hosted the Crucifixion and bore witness to maximal 
pain and suffering, lest we forget. The physical plane is a fundamental component of creation. 


Realms are also a fundamental component of creation. Necessarily they exist outside the Godhead 
and most likely form a continuum. The existence of realms also lends credence to the idea that 
souls were never meant to remain in the Godhead; rather, they were meant to discover and develop 
the virtual cosmos in accordance with the spiritual laws of creation. Indeed, if you think about it 
more deeply, souls in all likelihood can't stay in the Godhead, which could be seen as a law. 


wae 


40 


To wit, if all souls in the differentiable mosaic remained in the Godhead indefinitely, the active 
spiritual laws of creation cease to exist, which means you are back to the empty fabric containing 
no discernable structure. On the other hand, if souls leave the Godhead then necessarily the 
ifferentiable mosaic exists and so the notion of souls leaving the Godhead becomes a spiritual law 
of creation equivalent to all the other laws -- there never was a ‘fall from grace’. 


We are all very likely subject to the laws according to the notion of ‘principled indifference’, 
jiscussed below. In particular, the law of leaving the Godhead would work this way, and so it is 
loubtful there would be any exceptions -- we would all need to go at some point. 


wae 


We have now extended our knowledge of creation to six fundamental components which are 
lependent on one another. These are symmetries, least action, laws, souls, the physical plane, and 
realms. All six components form a unified whole, connected together through equivalency. Losing 
any one piece means losing the whole. 


fundamental components 


| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
duality <~~> action <~~> laws <~~> souls <~~> realms <~~> physical plane 
| | 
| | 
| | 


ake 


The Law Of Principled Indifference -- A Few Notes (July 29th/2011) 


In order to better understand laws such as ‘purification of the void' or ‘leaving the Godhead’, we 
need to know how all the laws work at a deeper level. In other words, is there a 'traffic cop' law of 
sorts that determines the ethical behavior of each and every one of them ? 


So let's start with Godel where we learn that in any region of the open creation incompleteness and 
inconsistency will exist, thereby making it impossible to 'grasp the big picture’ in its entirety. But 
Godel's theory itself would also be inconsistent and incomplete, and so there is no reason not to 
believe a region of the virtual cosmos exists where Godel's principles do indeed break down. This 
region or ‘singularity’ we have termed the Godhead or God's now. 


Turning to Einstein and Noether, we have learned the Godhead is a region of infinite expanse filled 
with symmetries of light absent the dimensions of time and space. All that ever was, is and will be 
is known here and you could, therefore, say God's now is indeed both wholly consistent and 
complete. 


4l 


In a peculiar kind of way Einstein, Godel and Noether reinforce one other when seen in a more 
spiritual light -- a perspective we must always adopt if we are to attain a deeper understanding of 
things. 


Noether, in particular, tells us there is an intimate relationship between these symmetries of light in 
the Godhead and the law of conservation of truth which exists beyond the membrane (action) that 
divides the two. However, both are equivalent to one another and in fact, you could say each is a 
reflection of the other via the membrane. 


If this is so, then any characteristics or qualities associated with these symmetries would quite 
naturally be inherited by the spiritual laws of creation. Noether, taken one step further, tells us that 
not only do these laws exist by way of the symmetries, but also, inheritance factors are very likely 
preserved because of the reflection. 


The spiritual laws of creation, then, not only exist but form as well a complete and consistent 
unified whole. In short, they must operate in a perfectly ethical manner showing no bias or 
prejudice when carrying out their tasks. We call this the law of ‘principled indifference’ and use it 
throughout this essay to discover other laws and various practical applications. 


Law A | Bane 


> show no bias 
Law C | a ls 


Does The Differentiable Mosaic Rotate About An Axis ? (July 30th/2011) 


Lately, despite my own personal woes, I've been thinking more about this idea, especially when 
considering how realms (rings) might be laid out in concentric fashion about some central axis. 


We have a lot of evidence to support the idea of a Godhead, but if the entire virtual cosmos ‘rotated’ 
it is almost a certainty that at the center of it all you would find a singularity of some kind where 
things break down. Time and e cease to exist here and light, because it is no longer impeded or 
distorted by these dimensions, is of an unimaginable purity. In fact, there would be no fair way to 
characterize this kind of light based on our experiences in the physical plane and indeed, it may be 
incorrect to simplify things in this manner. 


Rotation, too, would lend credence to the idea of rings (realms) at ever increasing 'distances' from 
this center, with time and space ‘intensifying’ the 'further away' you were. Indeed, at some point 
these dimensions, however you wish to define them, would overshadow light to the extent that a 
realm (ring) would seem dark and a soul would become far more aware of itself at the expense of 
others -- the arrogance and ignorance syndrome, if you will. Such realms have been referred to as 
‘the void’. 


42 


In the physical ring we are aware of the law of conservation of angular momentum and know too 
that all physical laws are derived from higher spiritual counterparts. Thus it is not unreasonable to 
suppose a similar law concerning momentum exists in the differentiable mosaic, and so, can only 
bolster our view that the virtual cosmos does indeed ‘rotate’, however you wish to define this 
phenomenon. 


Rotation, then, could play a fundamental role in (a) how realms form and (b) how time, space and 
light interact with one another in each of these individual rings that make up some kind of 
continuum. For example, the closer we get to the Godhead (singularity), the 'faster' a ring might 
spin, thereby leading to purer forms of light at the expense of time and space. A soul in such a 
realm would be more aware of blending with the light and less aware of its own individuality -- just 
the opposite of what you'd expect to see in a distant ring rotating more 'slowly'. 


Noether also validates our ideas here, for her theory tells us angular momentum is conserved under 
rotation by way of an action. Within the virtual cosmos that action can be seen as a membrane of 
sorts, dividing the Godhead from the open creation in which we live and operate, and containing all 
the encoded information and energy needed to build and sustain the differentiable mosaic. 


Because angular momentum is conserved, rings closer to the Godhead would carry less 'mass' but 
spin more quickly, and conversely for the more distant ones. We can't know within this context 
what spin and mass really mean, but no doubt a soul in a less 'massive' ring feels a ‘lightness’ of 
sorts, free of the usual things that seem to burden us down in the physical plane, for example. In a 
darker, more massive ring it would be the opposite -- not only does misery seem to be everywhere 
with no letup, but a soul now feels pulled in and heavily bound to such a realm from which there 
appears to be no escape. 


wae 


Rotation should be seen as that effect which endows each realm (ring) with something we'll call 
resonance. The closer a ring is to the Godhead the purer the light because it is less impeded or 
distorted by dimensions such as time and space. Souls here easily blend with all that is, and are 
less aware of their own individuality. 


A soul finds its way into such a realm because the harmonics of both soul and realm are 
compatible. 


ake 


43 


The Membrane and The Cross - A Comparison (July 20th/2011) 


I thought it would be interesting to say a few things about these two notions, in light of all we've 
learned. We know the membrane is a spiritual structure of sorts that divides the closed and open 
creations and contains, in some encoded format, all that is needed (in terms of information and 
energy) to bring everything into being. We often refer to this membrane as least action and have 
determined it is both unique and equivalent to the event we call the Crucifixion. 


Indeed, if the spiritual laws of creation omitted the law of harm and suffering because it wasn't 
needed, the event we call the Crucifixion would have never been staged and all we'd be left with is 
the membrane. However, there would be no way to characterize this membrane beyond saying that 
it exists, and so, the Cross should be an indication to us that it (the Cross) is special and warrants 
further investigation. 


In this sense, then, the Cross should be seen as an event equivalent to (or emitted by) the action, but 
not nec ily the action itself. The two, however, are inseparable and wholly dependent on one 
another -- losing one means losing the other, most assuredly. 


Passing through the membrane from the outside means entering the Godhead. There a soul will 
find it has reached a state of perfect at-one-ment with the symmetries of light that make up this 
region of infinite expanse, absent the dimensions of time and space. A complete loss of one's sense 
of individuality, you might say, in exchange for total immersion with all that exists here. 


Since the membrane is equivalent to the Crucifixion, one could argue that 'bonding with the Cross’ 
is akin to penetrating this structure. We can never know as souls experiencing in the physical plane 
what it must be like to pass through the membrane directly, but we might, in some religio- 
philosophical sense, recognize the Cross as a gateway of sorts leading to the Godhead. 


Indeed, it may be all that God is asking of us as we strive to attain at-one-ment no matter where we 
are in the virtual cosmos. For those who do, one could argue they are on a path to both a higher 
and more complete understanding of things. 


ake 


Jesus said "No one comes to the Father if not through me." Perhaps we are saying the same thing 


wae 


44 


Godhead <~~> membrane <~~> cosmos 


° ° ° 
| | | 
| | | 
° ° ° 
duality <~~> action <~~> law of truth <~~> union of laws 
° ° ° 
| | | 
| | | 
° ° ° 
Cross 


The Geometric Distribution Of Realms and Sectors (July 23rd/2011) 


At the center of everything is the Godhead or God's now, followed by the membrane (action) that 
divides the B-world from the open creation containing all realms and the physical plane. For lack 
of a better term we could think of these realms as annuli in two dimensions or more, all 
surrounding the Godhead at ever-increasing ‘distances' and forming a continuum. The further out 
the ring (annulus) the darker the realm. 


In M's NDE there is a reference to both 'Leaders of Light’ and 'sectors' throughout the virtual 
cosmos that they manage. It strikes me now that these rings are probably chopped up into pieces 
determined by radial boundaries emanating from the center of the Godhead, not unlike the spokes 
of a wheel. Such a ‘carving up' of things would lead to sectors within any annulus, including the 
physical ring (plane) that contains universes, galaxies, planets, and so on. 


No doubt there are local realms as well, for we read in near-death research about the 'earth-bound' 
plane -- a void of sorts for those who never could detach from their physical addiction to this world 
while invested with a body. However, in this section we are primarily concerned with the bigger 
picture. 


Near-death research also speaks of 'tunnels' transporting a soul to a realm, and it is my view that 
these tunnels probably move a soul from some point in the physical ring to another point in another 
realm (ring) and sector commensurate with that particular soul's resonance. Some mechanism has 
to exist and the tunnel seems like a reasonable choice. 


In the same way that you have ‘Leaders of Light’ and 'Libraries of Light’ mentioned in M's NDE, it 
wouldn't surprise me if the opposite were true in the outermost rings where darkness reigns 
supreme. Sectors here would probably be managed by recalcitrant souls and may, in fact, be highly 
organized. There is some evidence for this kind of thing in Pittman's NDE as a matter of fact, 
though hard-core evidence is lacking in my view. 


The physical ring is perhaps the strangest of all annuli in so much as it divides the higher and lower 
realms, and serves as the final destination for any incarnation where, it is hoped, lessons learned 
will return the soul to a more enlightened plane of understanding upon death. This ring is peppered 
with universes, galaxies, planetary systems and the like, giving any being in this plane the 
overwhelming impression of an endless, eternal physical expanse as measured by the familiar 
dimensions of time, space and light. Truly a remarkable oddity, and yet a necessary one in so much 


45 


as it was designed to host the Crucifixion -- an event upon which everything, everywhere hangs, as 
we now know. 


Most souls are pretty well-behaved, and so it is my guess that a 'median realm' might exist 
somewhere between the Godhead and the physical ring. Here souls would experience life where 
the feeling of at-one-ment with others would persist in a light-filled region of infinite expanse, but 
at the same time, each would be well aware of their own individuality, creative talents and 
uniqueness. Even so, this awareness would always be overshadowed by the blending together of 
everything. 


Why Did The Crucifixion Happen 2000 Years Ago ? (July 27th/2011) 


We probably have enough information now to answer this question, which is a rather deep mystery 
in itself. Noether tells us symmetries of light within the Godhead give rise to the spiritual laws of 
creation by way of an action equivalent to the Cross. Furthermore, we've learned there are at least 
six fundamental components of creation, among them the physical ring which hosted this 
remarkable event we call the Crucifixion about 2000 years ago according to our notion of clocks, 
rods and light. 


So imagine, if you will, a physical ring which has persisted throughout the eons of time, dotted with 
universes that come and go in a seemingly infinite expanse that is literally beyond human 
comprehension. In this ring there is no absolute way to measure time meaningfully except in your 
own local frame of reference, and so, when speaking of the Crucifixion, we must realize the only 
valid perspective is that of the Godhead. Here, as we know, the familiar concepts of time and space 
vanish completely. 


The point at which the Crucifixion took place in the physical ring, from the perspective of the 
Godhead, could be seen as a 'phase transition’ of some kind -- a critical point in creation at which it 
was determined that ‘imparting the Cross' to a particular planet in a particular universe was deemed 
appropriate. Whatever the balances and imbalances are throughout the various realms, including 
the physical plane, they have now reached a point where physical expression of the universal least 
action is necessary, along with the knowledge it imparts. 


To be sure, the law of harm and suffering had to be completed at some point, and by doing so, we 
as souls on the planet that hosted the Crucifixion have been given unique knowledge of what is 
probably the only event in the physical ring that offers us any insight into the inner workings of the 
Godhead. We have, you might say, been allowed to pass through the membrane that divides the 
Godhead from the open creation in which we live and operate, by way of the Cross. 


This knowledge and the power behind it could ultimately be used to rebalance the virtual cosmos, 
using our planet as a base or springboard, if you will, from which to carry out an almost impossible 
task. That is to say, sowing the seeds of understanding throughout the virtual cosmos, according to 
Noether, thereby leading to a deeper impression of things. 


Thus, decoding the mysteries of the Cross is akin to decoding the mysteries of creation. Perhaps 
this is what God is trying to tell us after all ... 


46 


So Who Really Is The One We Call The Christ ? (July 28th/2011) 


The ageless question of who Christ really is can now be answered affirmatively. We recently 
learned of the Law of Leaving the Godhead and know through Noether that symmetries of light 
within the Godhead uphold the law of conservation of truth by way of an action equivalent to the 
Cross. This much is irrefutable, based on our knowledge of things. 


If Christ is a soul like the rest of us, he cannot stay in the B-world; indeed, he must vacate at some 
point otherwise the law of leaving the Godhead would be violated. But if he leaves, he is not a 
symmetry within the Godhead, and thus has no part in upholding the law of conservation of truth. 
Christ, like us, becomes an observer in creation but has no special membership in God's now, 
which is to say, B-space. 


But by definition, Christ was the one who was crucified, thereby completing the law of harm and 
suffering and hence the larger law of conservation of truth by way of equivalency. Thus, we are 
forced into accepting the fact that he really is a symmetry within the Godhead after all, and not a 
soul like the rest of us. Refusing to accept this conclusion only leads to a contradiction. 


As a corollary, it follows that no soul can atone for its acts of harm. That, indeed, has already been 
done, and you could, therefore, say that any effort to atone before God would seem foolish. Our 
job is to recognize how, why and by whom these spiritual laws of creation were brought into being 
and then, of course, to live in harmony and balance with each and every one of them. To be sure, if 
there ever was a sacrificial lamb' in all of this, it is Christ. 


ake 


And Jesus said, "But that you may know that the son of man has power on earth to forgive sins ..." 


wae 


Christ is indeed a symmetry (personality) within the Godhead and you could say that up to 
personality, anyway, Christ is God. There really is no other viable option. 


If Christ does have 'soul-like' qualities, they are unlike anything we would be familiar with -- they 
would be an extension of the characteristics and qualities associated with his essence as a symmetry 
in the Godhead and therefore, not something we could easily comprehend no matter where we were 
in creation. There is evidence for this idea in David Oakford's NDE, for example, and other NDEs 
as well, that speak of the purity of Christ's light. 


ake 


I met a man -- very meek and mild -- almost 40 years ago, in a park who asked me where I was 
going that day. I didn't answer him with much clarity but I remember him telling me to go to 
church. I disagreed and he never spoke to me or looked at me again, that day. 


Later on in life I realized this man was an exact copy of the image of the person you see in the 
Shroud of Turin -- the burial cloth of Christ. Maybe I should have done it differently, looking 
back, especially in light of what I now know. 


47 


What Did It Take To Get To This Point ? (August 7th/2011) 


In some ways, the major theme of this essay was to find out, if we could, who Christ was. To me, 
at least, it has been a lifelong passion and so I'm glad I've had a chance to learn of things from a 
new perspective. Indeed, it is the only perspective that makes any sense from my standpoint. 


Initially, through Noether, we felt there was a duality of sorts within the Godhead that gave rise to 
the law of conservation of truth by way of an unseen action. Nothing more was known at the time 
and even these ideas weren't defined very well. 


duality <--> action <--> law of truth 


We then learned, quite concretely, of the law of harm and suffering through Angie Fenimore's 
NDE, and realized the Cross might be seen as an event that was somehow connected to the action. 
Indeed, this law is one of many contained by truth, so at this point there seems to be a link of sorts 
between symmetries in the Godhead, the action and the Cross, and various laws. 


duality <--> action <--> law of h&és <--> truth 


Things are now beginning to heat up a bit as we discover all laws are equivalent to one another, 
thus making it simpler to recast the bigger picture by saying symmetries in the Godhead lead to the 
larger law of conservation of truth by way of an action that is somehow connected to the Cross. It's 
looking more and more like Christ is involved in all of this, but we really can't be sure just yet. 


duality <~~> action <~~> law of truth 
| 


| 
Cross 


At about the same time we learn Noether can indeed be used to characterize the unfolding of the 
primordial fabric into the differentiable mosaic we have before us today. Both the fabric and 
mosaic are important for our understanding of things to come. 


primordial fabric <--> Noether <--> differentiable mosaic 


Six fundamental components of creation are discovered through Noether, these being symmetries, 
action, laws, souls, realms (rings) and the physical plane. Remarkably, all are proven to be 
equivalent to one another and it is also shown that the Crucifixion is an event equivalent to the 
action. A minor breakthrough, you might say. 


duality <~~> action <~~> law of truth 


48 


Two new spiritual laws of creation are also discovered, these being the law of leaving the Godhead 
and the law of principled indifference. Without them, we really aren't any closer to understanding 
who Christ is. 


Either Christ is an ordinary soul or he isn't. If so, he must leave the Godhead at some point and 
thus has nothing to do with upholding the law of conservation of truth, thereby contradicting his 
involvement with the law of harm and suffering. Christ, it turns out, is a symmetry within the 
Godhead after all, which we refer to as the Father-Son duality. 


duality <~~> action <~~> law of truth 

° ° 

| | 

| | 

° ° 
Father & Son <~~> Cross <~~> law of truth 


In summary, though it took a lot of work to get to this point, one can say the Father-Son duality 
within the Godhead upholds the law of conservation of truth by way of an action equivalent to the 
Cross. Christ is that unique Son. 


Moses, Joshua, John The Baptist and Jesus 


On or around Sep 12th/10 I had a thought on these remarkable figures in history. It's not much, but 
it may serve to justify the Noether connection above. 


Joshua superseded Moses in so much as he led the Israelites into Canaan. Jesus is the English 
translation of the Greek Yehoshua and ditto for Joshua and the Hebrew Yehoshua--the name 
ultimately given to Joshua by good ol' Moses. So we can probably conclude that the Joshua soul 
superseded Moses in some sense, using both the leadership and naming factors as evidence. 


The transfiguration of Jesus also demonstrates 'soul' supersedence' relative to Moses and Elijah, the 
latter being equivalent to John the Baptist, who saw Jesus as a superior, perhaps even divine, 
incarnation. 

One possible conclusion then is that the Joshua and Jesus souls are equivalent, and that this soul is 


somehow ‘above' the souls of Moses and John the Baptist. Certainly Cayce would agree with such 
a conclusion and here's a little graph: 


Moses John the Baptist (precursors) 


Joshua Jesus (equals) 


49 


Incompleteness, Godel and At-one-ment 


I wasn't going to write on this subject, but think it may be appropriate to say a few things after all. 
As L understand it, according to Godel, there is no way to construct a mathematical system which is 
complete and consistent. To me this means that any mathematical system you build will never be 
able to discover, much less prove, all truths it was intended to capture, and within that system, 
many inconsistencies will arise. 


This notion can be extended to the construction of almost any other system outside the bounds of 
at-one-ment. Quite simply, no matter how you build a foundation for that system, it will eventually 
run aground if built outside this boundary. 


By outside the bounds of at-one-ment, I simply mean a state in which the soul-God duality has been 
broken. Such a state exists here on earth and most likely in all other realms as well. This means, 
among other things, that our thought patterns cannot be shaped to fully capture the notion of a 
complete and consistent set of truths which I will simply refer to as 'truth in God’. Perhaps this 
blessing in disguise, especially when you think more deeply about the law of harm and suffering as 
it pertains to an open versus a closed view of creation discussed earlier. 


Creation really was meant to be an open versus a closed design, complete with all the laws that 
would be required in order to allow us to grow, learn, make mistakes, self-correct, forgive and inch 
ever closer to an illusory state referred to as at-one-ment. It is indeed incomplete and inconsistent 
from our perspective as souls, but both complete and consistent from the perspective of the 
Godhead. We are not meant to return to the Godhead, but are meant to discover and develop 
creation in such a way that our actions are in harmony and balance with the spiritual laws that 
brought it into being. 


The Notion Of Infinity and Counting 


I wasn't going to write on this subject either, but around March 10th/2011 I watched a youtube 
series on four rather tragic figures in math and science; namely, Cantor, Boltzmann, Godel and 
Turing. Each man was well ahead of his time in terms of his thinking, but died a rather tragic 
death--a death, no doubt, tied to the futile search for truth. 


How does such a search come about ? It seems to me it starts with the basic notion of counting, 
which leads to numbers and eventually various infinities. The problem with this approach is that it 
isn't long before your ship runs aground and truth eludes you once again. 


For example, the continuum hypothesis is undecidable, which means given our current 
understanding of things, there is no way to know if an infinity of sorts exists between the integers 
and the reals. I suspect most things are like this in any system we construct for ourselves; namely, 
undecidable, assuming you can even uncover them. 


So what do we do ? To me, at least, it seems we need a new way to count and a new way to look at 
infinity. The thought I had involved regions divided by boundaries containing information. Either 
regions are infinite or finite in scope and contain an infinite or finite amount of information. A 
boundary would always divide regions and be of lower dimension. Seen this way, infinity 


50 


becomes less of a mystery in so much as there is now connectedness between the finite and the 
infinite through a boundary, which itself is of lower dimension and may contain information. 


In the current school of thought, you ‘never get to infinity' through some counting process; you 
simply let the counting process go on indefinitely and derive some result accordingly. But in 
reality, there is no such thing as ‘reaching infinity’ or ‘crossing over into infinity’ because the 
counting process is a linear notion that never stops. 


As long as our thinking remains enumerative or 'unwoven' instead of 'woven’, this is what you're 
left with--an illusory view of infinity [nature] brought on by a rather childish notion of counting 
that ultimately leads to inconsistency and incompleteness. 


With 'woven' logic, where [mathematical] objects are now designed in such a way that each would 
have an influence on the other, it may be possible to recast ancient notions like counting and 
infinity in a new light and design a ‘higher language’ through which we begin to understand this 
immensely beautiful and mysterious creation the Father God has given to us. I only wish I knew 
where to go from here. 


wae 


Let's take a simple example, based on an idea I had on May 17th/2011. I was talking to a chap I 
know up at Starbucks and we got to chatting about Noether's Theorem and the (symmetry, action, 
conservation law) connection. Among other things we discussed famous equations in mathematics 
including the only known equation that ties together pi with other numbers. This equation is 


eA(i*m +1=0 


Here is what is interesting about this. If you think of the left-hand side as being the law and the 
right-hand side as being the action, then Noether tells us there is indeed a symmetry amongst 
numbers (presumably) from which the law emerges by way of an action whose value just happens 
to be zero in this case. 


Written out in a slightly fuller form, then, we would have 
<|[> == 0 == eA(i*m) +1 


The == symbol simply means ‘equivalent to' and the <|> simply means 'symmetry'. Whatever the 
symmetry is, the law on the right-hand side comes from this symmetry, which in turn is generated 
from an action that can be associated with a value of 0. There may be many, possibly infinitely 
many, such laws that are generated from symmetries, which in turn are derived from actions whose 
encoded values are 0, 1, 2, ... and so on. 


I suspect, then, that all such useful 'laws' in mathematics can be derived from symmetries, and that 
these symmetries are woven together in a much larger (geometric) mosaic based on actions. If so, 
such a mosaic would lead to many beautiful relationships in number theory, mathematics and 
physics that heretofore have gone undiscovered. Something to think about for the future, for it may 
turn out to be the mother of all Rosetta Stones. 


51 


Where Do We Go Now ? 


When presented with the idea that Christ and God are symmetric duals, you have a choice. You 
can accept the notion as a child would, and believe it to be so, or you can reconcile that duality in 
another way, if such were possible. I have chosen to reason it out by way of the writings above, but 
in order to do so, I've had to consider axioms, conservation laws, symmetries, actions, Godel, 
Noether, Einstein, Jordan, NDEs, etc., and attempt to unravel the mystery over a very long period 
of time. I wonder now if it would have been better to be that child. 


In the end, if you are lucky or marked by favor, I suppose you will probably come to this same very 
basic conclusion, which is to say: 


Father-Son duality <==> Christ <==> Truth <==> Perfection <==> Completeness 


You might also be willing to accept the fact that many other equivalent actions and symmetries 
exist, all of which lead back to Truth. As such, we are obligated to tolerate and encourage one 
another, wherever we are in the virtual space of creation. 


About Me, A Self-Analysis (it's not what you achieve ... it's what you overcome ...) 


You, my friend, are afflicted with Ehlers Danlos Syndrome and most likely Schizoid Personality 
Disorder. Your earthly father was probably the carrier for EDS and your mother the carrier for 
various mental disorders. Whether you willingly took this shell or not is unclear, but there it is--a 
defective, deficient body from the skin to its core which isn't getting any better as the years pass. 


Even worse, you may be from a suicide pool if the psychic in Washington DC was correct. If this 
is so, your experience with God in this, your 23rd incarnation, is probably non-negotiable. People 
who suffer far less stand to gain far more in such a case, because they wouldn't be from such a pool. 


Having said these things, you are probably more of a ‘mathematical spiritualist’ than a 'maniacal 
religionist' and so wouldn't fit in very well with any form of organized worship. You simply aren't 
one of them, and never will be. 


All you can do is try to improve in small steps and not put too much pressure on yourself with the 
time remaining. Whether they did or didn't do the right thing a long time ago is not very important 
now. What's important is learning from this document you've written and apply what you can in a 
practical, useful way. If you can do that, your life in this, your 23rd incarnation, will have served 
its earthly purpose. 


be 
1 Thus says Yahweh to his anointed one, to Cyrus whom, he says, I have grasped by his right hand, 


to make the nations bow before him and to disarm kings, to open gateways before him so that their 
gates be closed no more: 


2 I myself shall go before you, I shall level the heights, I shall shatter the bronze gateways, I shall 
smash the iron bars. 


52 


3 I shall give you secret treasures and hidden hoards of wealth, so that you will know that I am 
Yahweh, who calls you by your name, the God of Israel. 


... Was it really for me ? ... 


ake 


53 


Addenda To The Essay 


The following addenda add insight into this work, both from a 
philosophical and mathematical perspective 


54 


That Strange License Plate 1123 KW 


What are the odds that I cross paths with the license plate 1123 KW, remembering that (a) 11 and 
23 are two numbers that have followed me continuously throughout life and (b) K and W are the 
11th and 23rd letters of the alphabet, and (c) Kevin Williams, the founder and maintainer of the 
website www.near-death.com, has these letters as initials--a website I've been studying rather 
intensely for the last two years ... ... 


List of reasonable assumptions: (* means raised to the power of and * means multiply by): 


plates of form 3 numbers 3 letters or 2 letters 4 numbers or 4 numbers 2 letters : 
1043 * 2643 + 2 * 2642 * 1044 which equals 31,096,000 combinations 


* number of most common cities and towns in BC ~ 100 
* odds of us both being on the road at same time are 1/4 


* odds of both of us being in the same 30 * 30 square foot area given a 5 mile * 5 mile driving area 
in Kelowna are 1 / 774,400 


odds that I look up and see the plate, if we are within the same 900 square foot area at same time 
are 1/10 


Odds that I cross paths with this license plate : 


~ 1/0417) 


31,096,000 * 100 * 4 * 774,400 * 10 


35 


Fundamental Theorem of Creation and Melchizedek 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation of Truth ... by way of an action 
equivalent to the Cross, and vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of the spiritual 
laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


The ancient texts refer to Melchizedek as a priest-king in the time of Abraham, functioning as a 
precursor of sorts to Jesus Christ. In the essay, we identify Christ as a symmetry in the Godhead, 
which can be associated with kingship, and also as an essence in the open creation whose job it was 
to complete the law of harm and suffering. In other words, a high priest of sorts willing to make 
the ultimate sacrifice, and intercede on our behalf where appropriate. 


This hybrid characterization of Christ, using Melchizedek as the example, lends even more 
credence to the Fundamental Theorem of Creation mentioned above, because it allows for both the 
duality within the Godhead and the priestly role outside the Godhead simultaneously. 


How this simultaneity is accomplished via the action or 'membrane' that divides the Godhead from 
the open creation is a mystery, to be sure, but even so, its existence and uniqueness is virtually 
irrefutable. 


We can also see an analogy to the Fundamental Theorem when looking at the inner and outer parts 
of the sanctuary, divided by a veil. The book of Hebrews speaks of this notion, but of course, 
cannot establish the Noether connection. Here, the inner sanctuary would represent the Godhead 
and its symmetries, the outer sanctuary the open creation and its active spiritual laws inherited 
from these symmetries, and the veil a symbolic representation of the membrane (action) binding 
these two pieces together. Since the Cross and the action are equivalent to one another, the Cross 
then becomes a replacement for the veil, and a gateway of sorts into the Godhead. It should come 
as no surprise, therefore, that this veil was torn in half when Christ's work on the Cross was 
complete, for his job was to unify the spiritual laws of creation by completing the law of harm and 
suffering, in particular. 


And this he did, with admirable courage, giving any soul anywhere an opportunity to bind with the 
Godhead permanently, by embracing what is probably the highest form of truth available to us -- 
the Cross, along with all its magic, mystery and redemptive powers ... 


56 


Godel's Theorem, Green Tao Theorem and The Godhead 


It struck me recently that Godel's Incompleteness Theorem is probably equivalent to the recently 
discovered Green Tao Theorem. The latter tells us the prime numbers contain arithmetic sequences 
of arbitrary length, and the former tells us, loosely speaking, no system can ever discover (much 
less prove) all truths it was intended to capture. 


Godel's Theorem = Green Tao Theorem 


If the two are equivalent, then it stands to reason it is impossible to design a perfectly random 
system -- one which has no regions of predictable regularity, anywhere. For if such a perfectly 
random system existed somewhere in the open creation, Godel's Theorem itself would suffer a 
contradiction, and we have seen already that such a contradiction can only exist in the form of a 
singularity, within the Godhead itself. 


This tells us, in turn, the Godhead is not only made up of perfectly balanced symmetries, but also, 
that there are no regions of predictable regularity, anywhere, within this singularity. No matter 
‘where you are’ within the Godhead it would never be possible to identify a region or subspace of 
predictable structure -- you would, in fact, be dwelling within a closed creation that was (a) 
perfectly random and (b) perfectly symmetric. 


Although the two ideas seem at odds with one another, they probably are not, particularly when you 
think of something like a fractal, which is self-similar but never identical, as you move from one 
region of the structure to another. Quite possibly, then, the Godhead too is fractal in nature, but 
well beyond anything the human mind could ever comprehend ... 


An interesting consequence of this rather odd characterization of the Godhead is what I term 
‘perfect uncertainty’ -- an observer dwelling within the closed creation (or without) can never 
determine the Godhead's decision-making process, for there are no arbitrarily long sequences of 
'yeses' or 'noes' that will ever be found anywhere within this singular region. 


It seems, therefore, as ordinary souls operating within the open creation, we can never know how 
the Godhead really thinks or communicates with its constituent parts; that is to say, the echoes that 
are exchanged between the various symmetries here. Indeed, ‘perfect uncertainty’ might make it 
impossible to decode the mysteries of the Godhead altogether, unfortunately. 


Another interesting consequence involves the spiritual (and hence physical) laws of creation 
themselves. We know from the essay the spiritual laws of creation are equivalent to symmetries in 
the Godhead, and that these laws inherit their properties from these symmetries. As such, the laws 
may also be 'perfectly uncertain’, meaning there is no way to characterize them with any degree of 
predictability even though they form a fully consistent and complete framework. 


perfect uncertainty | symmetries Godhead | spiritual laws 


In the same way that it is impossible to decode the Godhead, 'perfect uncertainty’ makes it equally 
impossible to decode the spiritual (and hence physical) laws of creation, suggesting, in turn, that 


57 


they too are fractal in nature. To wit, perfectly random structures which seem to go on forever -- 
were we able to see them ... 


perfectly uncertain perfectly uncertain 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


58 


Green Tao Theorem and Some Consequences 


Green Tao Theorem 


The sequence of prime numbers contains infinitely many, arbitrarily long arithmetic (regular) sub- 
sequences. Prime numbers cannot be generated using any functional algorithm, and thus can be 
considered a random sequence. Arithmetic sequences, though, are always predictable since they 
can be generated by simple algorithms. 


2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29 ... the first few primes 


3, 7, 11, 15, 19, 23, 27, 31... an arithmetic sequence with period 4 


Early Intuitive Consequences 


There is no such thing as a perfectly random system, for if so, it has no regularity (predictability) 
anywhere. However, any random system is 'roughly' equivalent to the primes, but Green Tao tells 
us even the primes contain arbitrarily long, regular sub-sequences throughout. 


There is no such thing as a perfectly random encryption scheme, for if so, it would not only be 
random, but perfectly random everywhere, and this is not possible according to Green Tao. Any 
encryption scheme will always contain arbitrarily long sequences of predictable information. 


The complete number line is a continuum, which is random, since there is no algorithm that can 
predict each and every element. But by Green Tao it is not perfectly random and so contains sub- 
sequences of arbitrary length which can be generated algorithmically, like the integers and 
fractions. 


Any continuum will always contain regions of regularity since no continuum is perfectly random 
everywhere. This may explain why universes, embedded within a larger virtual space, exist and are 
endowed with physical laws. 


Tossing a coin infinitely many times is a random system, but it is not perfectly random according to 
Green Tao. Thus it contains arbitrarily long, regular sub-sequences of just heads and just tails, 
necessarily. 


Free will, meaning the ability to choose freely, infinitely often, is a random system, but not 
perfectly random according to Green Tao. Thus it contains sub-sequences of arbitrary length which 
are predictable. There is no such thing as perfect free will even though you might be fooled into 
believing there is ... 


59 


Noether's Theorem, Commutativity and The Godhead 


Consider an encoding, which we'll define as 45 and written as follows: 
1424+34+44+54+64+7+84+9 <~~> 45 


By reflecting the left-hand side nothing changes, but a law is automatically introduced which is 
known as the Law of Commutativity Under Addition in Mathematics: 


1424+34+44+454+6+7+84+9 


<~~> 45 <~~> Law of Commutativity 
94+84+74+64+54+4434+24+1 


It is the very act of reflection itself which brings this law into being, for without such a symmetry 
no such law could exist. This, in a nutshell, is Noether's Theorem -- symmetries leading to laws 
and vice-versa by way of an action that encodes both. 


In terms of the Fundamental Theorem of Creation the following diagram applies: 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


Two important corollaries follow which we state here: 


Creation would have collapsed had Christ not completed his 
work on the Cross. Although this is self-evident from the 
diagram above, it is a profound notion which is nearly 
impossible for the human mind to grasp. 


You cannot atone for your own acts of harm. Reaching a state 
of at-one-ment with the Godhead means passing through the 
Cross. Only Christ can justify this union between any soul 
and the Father according to the Fundamental Theorem 

of Creation. 


We can expand a bit on the second corollary by noting that at-one-ment is equivalent to zeroing out 
all acts of harm for any soul. Such an equivalency seems reasonable, especially when you consider 


60 


that such a union with the Godhead, by definition, requires the harmonics of a soul to be perfect. 
At the same time, at-one-ment is equivalent to passing through the Cross, according to the 
Fundamental Theorem, implying, in turn, that the Cross itself is equivalent to zeroing out all acts of 
harm. 


at-one-ment with the Godhead <~~> zeroing out all acts of harm 


law of h&s 
And Jesus said, "I have come not to abolish the Law but to complete it ..." 


This brings us back to the second corollary -- no soul can or ever will be able to atone for its own 
acts of harm. It is only granted uniquely through Christ's work on the Cross and least action 
principles. 


The law of harm and suffering (h&s) is a difficult one to interpret, partly because of its 
discretionary nature and partly because it forms the underpinning to all of Creation itself. 
However, if we think of it in contractual terms, using the notions of offer and acceptance, the Cross 
becomes a touchpoint of sorts where the meeting of two minds takes place. 


On the one hand there is the offer of at-one-ment with the Godhead through Christ's work on the 
Cross, and on the other, there is acceptance of this offer by the soul formed through intent and 
understanding. No contract or covenant, if you will, can ever materialize unless there is a meeting 
of the two minds, meaning that the soul, in turn, must reach a point where such an understanding is 
possible. 


In its broadest scope the law of harm and suffering is both necessary and sufficient to remove any 
and all acts of harm throughout the virtual space of Creation, and at the same time ... ... rebalance 
and reharmonize Creation through the notion of at-one-ment. However, the law is also 
discretionary in nature and so cannot go any faster than the 'slower moving parts’. In this sense, it 
is up to each of us to reach a point of understanding and acceptance by embracing the Cross, fully 
and completely, and realizing that it truly is the gateway to the Godhead ... 


61 


Noether's Theorem and The Gospel of John 


I have just finished reading the Gospel of John, and was struck by some of the parallels you find 
there vis-a-vis the Fundamental Theorem of Creation. Let us start by recalling this theorem: 


life way truth 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


And Jesus said, "I am the way, the truth and the life. No one 
can come to the Father except through me." (John 14:6) 


In the Gospel of John, and only here, we read that Christ says 'I am the way, the truth and the life’. 
It is a profound statement which I'm sure has puzzled readers down through the ages, but seen 
within the context of the Fundamental Theorem, has a very deep meaning indeed. 


When Christ said this he was really referring to the Fundamental Theorem above. We can interpret 
way as the action, binding together the symmetries in the Godhead [life] with the spiritual laws of 
creation [truth]. Christ was saying he is all three, and indeed, according to the Fundamental 
Theorem of Creation, all three are equivalent to one another in so much as losing one piece means 
losing the whole. 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Union of Spiritual Laws 


life way truth 


John the Apostle could not have known what he was writing at the time because he didn't have the 
Noether connection leading to the Fundamental Theorem of Creation. As such, it is more than 
likely the statement really was made by Christ, suggesting, in turn, that even Christ himself was 
trying to tell us almost 2000 years ago how he and his Father brought everything into being. 
Evidently, no one was listening ... 


62 


Also in the Gospel of John, we read what is probably the most popular scripture in the entire Bible: 


For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but 
have everlasting life. 


There are some interesting things that can be gleaned from this statement, the first of which is the 
existence and uniqueness of the Son [only begotten] versus the Father. Within the context of the 
Fundamental Theorem, it is a personalized reference to symmetries in the Godhead [Father 
and Son] that give rise to the spiritual laws of creation -- among them, the law of harm and 
suffering, which was completed through Christ's work on the Cross [gave his Son]. 


symmetries Godhead <~~> Cross 


law of h&s 


The remainder of the statement focuses on the notion of offer and acceptance, where the Cross 
serves as a touchpoint of sorts. It is, in reality, commentary on the law of harm and suffering 
without sharing many of the details. More specifically, however, we can say this law functions 
according to the following diagram: 


at-one-ment with the Godhead <~~> zeroing out all acts of harm 


law of h&s 


John 3:16, in all its mystery, is an attempt to describe and interpret the Fundamental Theorem of 
Creation. It actually does a pretty good job and you could say the statement was well ahead of its 
time. No doubt, too, it is authentic, for John himself would not have had the insight to make these 
inferences based on his own understanding of things back then. 


Taken together, these two distinct statements in the Gospel of John (John 3:16 and John 14:6) 
provide a complete framework for the Fundamental Theorem of Creation outlined above. Naturally 
the statements are opaque and so, on their own, anyway, could never establish the connection. But 
they do serve as a nice confirmation of the theorem, looking back in time, just as mathematics, 
physics and current near-death research do, looking forward in time. 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation stands on its own, whether we look to the past or to the 
future for a better understanding of how and why things came into being. When it's all said and 
done, however, we have to believe, necessarily, that all roads lead to Christ ... 


63 


The Axiom of Free Choice and The Law of Harm and Suffering 


We learned in a previous article titled Noether's Theorem, Commutativity and the Godhead that no 
soul can or ever will be able to atone for its own acts of harm. Let us begin by revisiting the 
diagram that illustrates the law of h&s in some detail -- 


at-one-ment with the Godhead <~~> zeroing out all acts of harm 


law of h&s 
every act of harm must be covered by an act of suffering 


We can now ask the question 'why is this so'? Why was creation designed in such a way that souls 
have neither the rights nor the privileges to self-atone ? 


Our starting point is the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, which represents both a framework 
and a design that reflects the principles of least action -- 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Using both diagrams we can see that the singular action of the Cross is both necessary and 
sufficient for the removal of any and all acts of harm throughout the virtual space of Creation, and 
that it (the Cross) is, in fact, a least action (optimal). 


If we now allow any soul the right to self-atone, it's rather like granting that soul a dual form of free 
will -- how to make choices and how to atone for the poor ones. Such a design is doomed to fail 
because the axiom of free choice itself, outside the bounds of at-one-ment leads to many 
inconsistencies which cannot be resolved. By granting a soul the right to self-atone, you inevitably 
run the risk of making things worse, unfortunately, generating even more harm than you had 
initially. 


axiom of free choice ---» acts of harm 
| | 
| | 
| | 


acts of harm <--- self-atone free choice 


64 


This vicious loop can only be broken by removing the notion of self-atonement altogether from the 
axiom of free choice, and cancelling the harm in some other way. That way, according to the 
Fundamental Theorem of Creation, is the Cross -- a single, yet compelling act of profound 
suffering which erases this harm everywhere throughout the virtual cosmos ... 


65 


Energy Wells and The Law of Harm and Suffering 


We have reached a point where we can probably answer the question as to why every act 
of harm must be covered by an act of suffering. Angie Fenimore's NDE tells us this is an axiomatic 
truth, but unfortunately does not tell us why. 


Our starting point is the following diagram -- 


at-one-ment with the Godhead <~~> zeroing out all acts of harm 


law of h&s 
every act of harm must be covered by an act of suffering 


If we think of an act of harm as a deformation within the fabric of the virtual cosmos, caused by the 
presence of negative energy, for example, it stands to reason that at some point this deformation 
will need to be 'smoothed out' by the corresponding presence of a positive energy so that the two do 
indeed cancel one another. 


act of harm ------ > deformation in the cosmos 
| | 
| | 
| | 


act of suffering — <------- smoothed out 


This positive energy finds its source in the Cross [Christ], according to the Fundamental Theorem 
of Creation, but still leaves us with the question as to why suffering was actually required to cancel 
the harm. 


The answer seems to be tied to one's frame of reference, for within the Godhead itself no degree of 
suffering is required and there is nothing to be gained by using this notion to cancel out opposing 
energies. However, outside the Godhead [virtual cosmos], where souls live and operate, tying this 
cancellation of energies back to a compelling act of suffering makes eminent sense, for without 
such an act it is doubtful the typical soul could ever appreciate its offences and self-correct 
accordingly. 


The law of harm and suffering, then, implies not only a /east action [optimal], but also an action 
with physical expression [Cross] designed to teach and instruct so that the soul will indeed learn to 
self-correct at every step of the way in its cosmic journey. To be sure, these acts of harm are 
zeroed out, but at a very deep cost -- something we must always remember as we learn to grow into 
our own spiritual virtuosity ... 


66 


removal of negative energy «~~» zeroing out acts of harm 
| | 
| I 
| | 


Symmetries Godhead ~m Law of H&S 


atonement 
complete and consistent 


67 


Energy Wells and The Law of Harm and Suffering, Part II 


In Part I, we attempted to answer the question as to why every act of harm must be covered by an 
act of suffering -- something we know is true according to Angie Fenimore's NDE, and indeed, is a 
law she says. In this follow-up note, we expand on the notion, somewhat, by offering the following 
diagram -- 


generalized law of h&s 


0A a oc aa ~~» act of harm 
I | | 
| | | 
energy+ <~~membrane (~~ ----------------------------------------=---- ~) Cross ~~» suffering 
| | | 
| | | 
(ew weennnennnnneeee Symmetries Godhead --------------- ~ ~) 
| 
| 
atonement 


every negative energy caused by an act of harm must be 
cancelled by a positive energy caused by an act of suffering 


Rewriting the law of h&s as above, we can see that this law, acting as an agent on behalf of 
symmetries in the Godhead, draws upon a positive energy source [induced by suffering] to cancel 
various negative energies in the open creation associated with corresponding acts of harm. This 
positive source of energy, according to the diagram above, seems to originate within the action 
[Cross] itself -- a boundary of sorts, separating the Godhead and its symmetries from the spiritual 
laws, and containing all the information needed to bring Creation into being, according to Noether. 


But because of equivalency, it really doesn't matter what path you traverse -- the end result is the 
same. By going up the right-hand side, for example, we see that symmetries in the Godhead cancel 
the harm by passing through the Cross. And by going up the left-hand side we see that symmetries 
in the Godhead cancel the negative energy by passing through the membrane. Either way, the law 
of harm and suffering [law of hé&s], operating as an agent on behalf of these symmetries, is actively 
at work, maintaining all the checks and balances that are required in Creation by drawing on a 
positive source to do its job. 


Whether we see this positive source as being associated with the Cross or the membrane [action] is 
irrelevant, since both are equivalent to one another according to the Fundamental Theorem of 
Creation. Without the action [membrane] there is no Cross and without the Cross there is 
no action--each upholds the other and losing either piece means, quite simply, losing all of Creation 
itself. 


68 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


The deeper mystery of the Crucifixion, and why it was needed, can now be explained by using a 
two-fold approach, and keeping in mind the generalized version of the law of h&s. On the one 
hand, suffering on the Cross was done to make the soul aware of its offences and self-correct 
accordingly; we know as much from earlier writings, where we refer to this notion as a frame of 
reference problem. 


But on the other hand, suffering through the Cross, by way of a symmetry in the Godhead, quite 
literally generated all of the positive energy that would ever be required ... to cancel all of the 
negative energy produced, by each and every eventual act of harm, throughout the virtual cosmos.... 


Spiritual Laws 
positive energy <~~> Cross <~~> act of suffering 


Symmetries Godhead 


This positive energy had to come from somewhere and, it seems, the dual action of the Cross was 
chosen as the optimal device through which to get the job done. No doubt this additional energy 
was stored in the action [membrane], where it could be used as needed by the law of h&s to 
balance the books, as they say. Doing so would not only make sense, but also and quite naturally, 
explain both the equivalency and the intimacy shared between the Cross and the membrane that we 
see glimpses of in the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, for example. 


According to the ancient writings, Christ only spent about six hours on the Cross -- roughly one- 
twelfth of the usual amount of time required to cause death using crucifixion as the punishment. It 
seems as though this is all it took in order to generate and store all of the positive energy that would 
eventually be needed to rebalance Creation at large. And a good thing too, for by my reckoning, 
anyway, we probably weren't worth the price of admission into his kingdom to begin with -- a price 
that, by any measure, cannot be comprehended ... 


69 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation and Completeness 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation should be seen as a compact description for the grand 
design itself , which leads us to the question of just how complete and consistent this theorem really 
is-- 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


atonement 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


Godel's Theorem tells us that no matter where we are in the open creation, beyond the Godhead, 
our view of things will be both incomplete and inconsistent. No matter how you try to build a 
framework for knowledge, say, eventually your ship will run aground according to the theory. 


However, the Fundamental Theorem of Creation itself is an all-encompassing prescription, linking 
the Godhead to other constituent parts through equivalency. Since the Godhead is both fully 
consistent and complete, it stands to reason that these other parts must be as well, and so we may 
conclude that the Fundamental Theorem of Creation is not only a design which is both fully 
consistent and complete; but also, one which is optimal because of least action principles. 


This means, for example, that the spiritual laws of creation form a fully consistent and complete 
framework which is optimal; no other approach could, or ever would, result in a better 
configuration replacing what we have now. And, the same can be said for atonement -- it too 
operates in an optimal fashion, without any conflict or inconsistency, because it is a divine process 
[of the Godhead] equivalent to the Cross [law of h&s]. 


Self-atonement, on the other hand, through the axiom of free choice, leads to many conflicts and 
inconsistencies, and so, is not an option within the grand scheme of things. Indeed, you could say it 
has been removed from this axiom altogether, leaving the Godhead, in turn, with no choice but to 
atone on our behalf. But this is a good thing, for it guarantees every soul fair treatment according to 
their actions and intent, showing no bias one way or the other. Creation, it seems, would have it no 
other way ... 


70 


Degenerate Actions and The Primordial Fabric 


In this note we are going to discuss, in a little more detail, the primordial fabric and various actions 
that may have existed there before everything morphed into the beautiful mosaic we see before us 
today. Our starting point, in this case, is the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, shown below -- 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


“High above he pitched a tent for the sun, who comes forth from 
his pavilion like a bridegroom, delights like a champion in the 
course to be run... [ 19th Psalm ] 


The words above from the 19th Psalm are, no doubt, a reflection in the heavenly realms of Christ's 
zeal for his eventual mission here on earth, and in particular, his work on the Cross which would 
ultimately unify and complete the spiritual laws of creation. 


We now know that Christ was indeed successful, and should be seen as both a hero and a champion 
for not only running the course, but finishing it with the admirable courage and dignity he retained 
throughout. But we could also ask the question -- what would have happened had he failed ? 


According to the Fundamental Theorem of Creation depicted above, creation would have collapsed, 
leaving us with no symmetries, no laws, and by implication, no viable action. Indeed, the action, 
seen as a membrane of sorts, would have (a) necessarily dissolved into the primordial fabric itself 
or (b) collapsed into a singularity somewhere within the fabric or out at infinity. Either way, 
however, the encoded energy and information associated with this degenerate action would have 
been preserved, and could be used again to rebuild creation if that was an option. 


Without the completion of Christ's work on the Cross there would be no creation, for there would 
be nothing to hang it on, according to the Fundamental Theorem. Truly a profound... and 
almost incomprehensible result, but one we must accept if Noether and least action principles 
apply. It seems, with all we know, that indeed they do ... 


71 


primordial fabric «~~» Noether «~~» differentiable mosaic 


duality «~~» action «~~» law of truth 


Cross 


Tit ttt 


72 


On The Equivalency of At-one-ment and Atonement 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation is an all-encompassing prescription for the grand design 
itself and, as we now know, one which is not only optimal, but also fully consistent and complete -- 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


~eeeee > atonement 
at-one-ment <~~~~~~~~~~ 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


If we move left to right along the diagram above, we can see that symmetries in the Godhead pass 
through the Cross and into the open creation, where the spiritual laws were unified and completed 
via the law of harm and suffering [law of h&s] -- something referred to as atonement in earlier 
writings. Conversely, a soul moving right to left in the diagram above must pass through the Cross 
in order to enter the Godhead, and achieve a state of at-one-ment, for however long it can be 
maintained. 


Both notions, namely at-one-ment and atonement, are not only equivalent to one another, because 
each is equivalent to the Cross; but also, divine processes under the control of the Godhead and 
beyond the axiom of free choice. As such, no soul can or ever will be able to atone for its own acts 
of harm, and by equivalency, no soul can, by any means possible, reach a state of at-one-ment 
under its own power -- both are only granted uniquely through Christ's work on the Cross and least 
action principles, according to the Fundamental Theorem of Creation. 


Spiritual Laws 
at-one-ment «~~» Cross «~~» atonement 


Symmetries Godhead 


The centerpiece in the grand design, from our vantage point, really is the Cross, for it binds 
together symmetries in the Godhead with the spiritual laws of creation, by way of an action 
[membrane] that gives rise to the equivalent notions of at-one-ment and atonement, simultaneously. 


233 


Each soul, therefore, must ultimately reach a point of understanding and acceptance by embracing 
the Cross, fully and completely, and realizing that it truly is both the essence and the substance 
from which all things in Creation are made, and woven together into a unified whole ... 


74 


On The Equivalency of At-one-ment and Atonement, Part II 


In an earlier note titled Noether's Theorem, Commutativity and the Godhead, we established an 
equivalency between the Cross and zeroing out all acts of harm through the transitive notion of ar- 
one-ment. Here we are going to clarify things a bit more by starting with the Fundamental 
Theorem of Creation, a fully consistent and complete description, which is shown below — 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


Clearly at-one-ment is equivalent to the Cross, according to the diagram above, and it should also 
be clear that in such a state the soul becomes one with the Godhead, implying (necessarily) that all 
acts of harm have been removed. The soul's harmonics are perfect, so to speak. 


at-one-ment ==> zeroing out all acts of harm 


Cross 


In turn, this means the Cross implies zeroing out all acts of harm, and since, by the Fundamental 
Theorem, zeroing out any and all acts of harm necessarily implies the Cross [law of hé&s], the two 
notions must be equivalent. 


Cross «~~ zeroing out all acts of harm —(*) 


This distinct equivalency between the Cross, and removing all acts of harm for any soul, which we 
refer to as atonement, now makes both at-one-ment and atonement equivalent to each other, as 
shown in the following diagram -- 


Spiritual Laws 
at-one-ment «~~» Cross «~~» atonement 


Symmetries Godhead 


75 


Such an event -- the simultaneous experience of at-one-ment and atonement -- must be rare in the 
higher realms and almost certainly would never occur in the physical ring, but it could be seen as a 
lofty ideal to which each and every soul might aspire, as they move along in their cosmic journeys. 
Indeed, according to Thomas Sawyer's NDE, choosing to merge completely with the light of God 
means never returning to physical life again [under our own will], implying that the dual experience 
of at-one-ment and atonement really is the end of the reincarnation cycle for any being in this rather 
fortunate position. 


More generally, the law of h&s [Cross] operates in a discretionary manner, in all likelihood, 
cancelling some acts of harm on behalf of the soul, and retaining others. Forgiveness, 
unconditional love, reincarnation and other expressions of learning can all be used to mitigate 
things somewhat, and will eventually lead to a higher path for the soul, but ultimately the decision 
to cancel these offences rests solely with the Cross, meaning Christ himself. 


To see this more clearly, consider the case where a soul has one and only one act of harm 
associated with its cosmic history. If that soul were allowed to cancel this harm, thereby zeroing 
out all acts of harm, we would be forced to conclude that self-atonement is indeed equivalent to the 
Cross, which is an absurdity (*). Now assume n acts of harm, tied to this soul's history, have been 
cancelled through the Cross, and that an (n+/)-th violation occurs sometime later. By what we 
have just said, the soul cannot self-atone, even in the case of a single, outstanding offence, 
regardless of where it occurs along the cosmic timeline, and so we are forced to conclude that 
the (n+J)-th act of harm really is erased by the Cross after all. 


zeroing out one act of harm 


n acts of harm zeroed out ==> n + 1 acts of harm zeroed out 


Cross 


Thus, by induction we see that no soul can or ever 
is only granted uniquely through Christ's work on tl 
the Fundamental Theorem of Creation. And right 


will be able to atone for its own acts of harm. It 
e Cross and least action principles, according to 
ly so, for if self-atonement really was part of the 


axiom of free choice, it would inevitably cause more problems than it would fix, and alas, become 


the very disease it was intended to cure ... 


76 


A New Heaven and a New Earth 


From what we have learned so far, the Fundamental Theorem tells us that ultimately Creation will 
be rebalanced and reharmonized by way of the Cross. We can see this more clearly by noting that 
souls, too, are a fundamental component of Creation, and so, by virtue of equivalency, have 
already reached a fully consistent and complete state in God's simultaneous now. 


souls <~~> — physicalring <~~> realms 
| | 
| | 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


consistent, complete, optimal 


This means, among other things, that every soul will eventually return to the Light of God, and 
attain a parallel state of complete at-one-ment and atonement, according to the diagram below -- 


Spiritual Laws 
| 
| 


at-one-ment «~~» Cross «~~» atonement 


| 
Symmetries Godhead 


ak a ak ok ok 


‘T knew with total certainty that everything was evolving exactly the way it 
should and that the ultimate destiny for every living being is to return to 
the Source, the Light, pure Love* [Juliet Nightingale's NDE] 


‘For look, Iam going to create new heavens and a new earth, and the past 
will not be remembered and will come no more to mind* [Isaiah 65:17] 


~Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; the first heaven and the first 
earth had disappeared now, and there was no longer any sea* [Rev 21:1] 


Sik aR ae 


When we combine all three statements above, it is not too hard to infer that at some point, however 
far into the distant future, Creation is going to morph into a new kind of mosaic where (a) all souls 


77 


will be in a state of complete at-one-ment with the Godhead and (b) all rings outside the Godhead 
will merge with the Light. 


In this sense, the differentiable mosaic, as we see it today, will no longer exist. A new heaven 
{higher and lower realms] and a new earth [physical ring] will likely emerge, with characteristics 
and qualities similar to those of the Godhead. This new mosaic will, no doubt, be 
more homogeneous in nature, and infused with a uniform resonance that permeates all realms and 
rings everywhere, thus giving any soul anywhere the feeling of being at one with both its Creator 
and all other living things, simultaneously. 


Just how long it's going to take to reach this endpoint is unclear, as many souls today still languish 
in the void and many others still have a desire to experience in the physical plane, for better or 
worse. An estimate is provided in a later note titled How Large Is The Physical Ring, and there the 
number is roughly 10°° earth years, an incomprehensible span no matter the measure. 


In Old Testament writings we read of a long-suffering God, but clearly this is an understatement in 
light of everything we now know. Still, out of love for his Creation, God is willing to wait for the 
day when all is well again. As such, it is up to each and every one of us to do our part, assisting 
where we can and evolving as we must. There really is no other option, when you think about it ... 


*Then Yahweh passed before him and called out, 'Yahweh, Yahweh, 
God of tenderness, and compassion, slow to anger, rich in faithful 
love and constancy .... [Exodus, 34th chapter] 


78 


Love In The Primordial Fabric 


According to all that we know, the Fundamental Theorem of Creation tells us there was a 
primordial fabric of sorts before everything was brought into being. This fabric could not have had 
any discernible structure, and so, should be seen as more of a framework, if you will, containing the 
undifferentiated energy of God everywhere. 


At some point, though, a shift took place [within the fabric], causing symmetries and laws to come 
into being, along with other components, as shown in the diagram below -- 


souls <~~>  physicalring <~~> realms 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


consistent, complete, optimal 


But exactly what caused this shift seems to be a mystery, for there is no reason it ought to appear 
unless, of course, the undifferentiated energy of God [everywhere] expressed a desire for change 
driven by some kind of emotion. 


That emotion [or feeling], might well have been divine love for a creation [child] that didn't exist 
yet, but could be brought forth under pain and suffering [Cross] if the will to do so was there. 


Primordial Fabric ~~» Creation 


Love and Suffering 


Evidently the will existed, for what we have today, according to the Fundamental Theorem, is a 
beautiful mosaic which could be seen as God's offspring -- a creation fully formed, complete and 
consistent within the simultaneous now, one might say. 


For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but 
have everlasting life [John 3:16] 


When we read the words of John above, it actually is a rather remarkable statement, for not only 
does it apply within the context of the differentiable mosaic, but also, the domain of the primordial 
fabric itself. Even before there was a mosaic there was a fabric, and even here there 
was love before there was anything else; a love so strong, evidently, that it was willing to suffer 
grievously for the child it would eventually give birth to ... 


79 


On The Holy Ghost and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation 


Up until now, we have discussed the Fundamental Theorem of Creation through the familiar terms 
shown in the diagram below -- 


Father & Son membrane Holy Spirit 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


In Christian doctrine we read of a Father, Son and Holy Ghost forming a Trinity of sorts, but up 
until now have not considered the third member of this Trinity; namely, the Holy Spirit. The First 
Epistle of John says ‘it is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is Truth’, and so we can infer 
from this that the Holy Ghost itself becomes a moral compass, if you will, acting as an agent on 
behalf of the Godhead. 


Tf our characterization of things is correct here, it would only make sense to equate the Holy Spirit 
with Truth in the diagram above, meaning the spiritual laws of Creation as a whole. Under this 
scenario, the Father & Son duality and the Holy Ghost become reflections of one another via the 
membrane, and so can be thought of as a trio of equivalencies [Trinity], according to the 
Fundamental Theorem. 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation, in its broadest sense, is both fully consistent and complete, 
so if indeed the Holy Spirit does exist as a separate entity, it must exist, perforce, somewhere within 
this description. In James T's NDE, for example, the Holy Ghost is seen as the mind of God and 
made up of antimatter that coexists with matter everywhere. As such we can, if we wish, think of 
the spiritual laws as being infused into the open creation and operating in a perfectly ethical fashion 
at all times [without bias], even though they couldn't be detected by any ordinary means possible. 


Spiritual Laws ~~~» Creation 
| | 
| | 


Holy Ghost ~~~) antimatter 


Whether the Holy Spirit really does exist as a third component within the Christian Trinity is 
somewhat up for grabs in my view. Almost nothing is said about it in the NDE research and no 


80 


one, to my knowledge, has ever seen such a distinct essence. As well, the Fundamental Theorem 
doesn't require anything more than a duality within the Godhead to make everything work -- a 
notion that is only reinforced when you consider least action principles and equivalency among and 
between all of the spiritual laws of Creation. In the final analysis, it may be nothing more than 
terminology, as they say ... 


81 


Relativity Theory and The Spiritual Laws of Creation 


Recently I was thinking a little more deeply about the spiritual laws of creation and wondered if 
there might be a law tying together the very basic ideas of curvature and stress in a more universal 
way. If I take a piece of paper and apply pressure to the edges with my hands, the paper will flex; 
similarly a wind blowing through the trees in a park will cause the branches to bend, and oddly 
enough, if I'm stressed out, my fingers or lips may curl up. 


More generally, then, we might say there is a fundamental duality between curvature and stress 
originating in the spiritual domain, and with a physical counterpart, which goes something like this: 


For any curvature tensor C there exists a stress tensor T such that T 
induces C, and conversely. Properties of C are inherited by T, and 
vice versa, because of duality. 


Let us now apply this law to general relativity by noting first [from the Bianchi identities] that we 
always have, for any smooth, simply-connected manifold, 


cov[R(u,v) - /2*R* g(uv)] = 0. .... (1) 


where cov should be interpreted as the covariant derivative in u or v. There is never a point on the 
manifold for which this is not true, and so because the bracketed expression is a curvature tensor 
[which we'll define as C(u,v)], a stress tensor T(u,v) must exist which induces C(u,v) and inherits 
any of its properties. In other words, 


cov[C(u,v)] =O =cov[T(u,v)] (2) 


for all u,v and all points in the manifold. Thus, by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, we may 
now infer that 


Cuv)=k*Tayvy)+K ou. (3) 


where a numerical scaling constant k has been added and cov(K) = 0. In a nutshell, this is general 
relativity as seen through the eyes of the fundamental curvature-stress duality. 


When you look at (2) above, you can also see hints and glimmers of Noether, in so much as 
symmetries associated with C(u,v) lead to conservation laws associated with T(u,v) through an 
action that just happens to have a value of zero. More generally, I suspect any unified field theory 
in physics, if it is ever found, will always have a curvature tensor C for which cov[C(u,v,w,x, ...)] is 
0, in order to preserve the conservation laws associated with T that follow ever so naturally. 


Just what C or T really are I cannot say, but to be sure, the world of physics today is fraught with 
attempts of one kind or another to build a theory of everything. However, it is my view that until 
we look at things in a more spiritual light, and take our inspiration directly from the Godhead, no 
such theory will ever materialize. Even then, Godel's work may prohibit a fully consistent and 
complete description of Creation outside the bounds of at-one-ment, just as it should ... 


82 


The Continuum Hypothesis and Unified Theories in Physics 


The Continuum Hypothesis tells us we can never decide if there is or isn't a class of numbers S 
sitting between the integers and the reals, given our current understanding of axiomatic set theory. 
Typically, mathematicians assign a cardinal number of N to the integers and ¢ to the reals, and tell 
us we cannot know if there is a cardinal number r corresponding to S such that 


N<r<e 


Turning to physics, we know there are two competing theories which have never been reconciled -- 
Quantum Mechanics on the one hand, and General Relativity on the other. The first theory is 
largely a state-driven probability model over the integers, while the latter should be seen as 
a continuously smooth model over the reals. Intuitively, then, and without loss of generality, one 
can assign a cardinal value of N to Quantum Mechanics, and a cardinal value of ¢ to General 
Relativity, giving us the following diagram : 


Quantum Mechanics | bridging theory | General Relativity 
N r c 


| undecidable | 


In doing so, the question now becomes one of whether or not there really is a bridging theory that 
joins the other two pieces together; in other words, can we move from the tiny world of Quantum 
Mechanics over N to the larger world of General Relativity over ¢ by way of an intermediate theory 
over r which glues everything together ? 


According to the Continuum Hypothesis this question has no answer, meaning if you pose the 
query today or a thousand years from now the response will not change -- quite simply, it cannot be 
decided. Philosophically, then, we are left with no choice but to conclude a unified theory of 
physics spanning Quantum Mechanics to General Relativity really doesn't exist after all, for if it 
did, any bridging theory sitting in between the two would have to emerge at some point, thereby 
contradicting the notion of undecidability. 


Although there is a great deal of activity in physics today devoted to the idea of a theory of 
everything, it is highly unlikely such a theory will ever be found. Godel's work alone tells us such 
a quest is practically futile, and now the Continuum Hypothesis seems to be saying the same thing. 
Until we see things in a more spiritual light and take our inspiration directly from the Godhead, 
unified theories in physics will come and go like the seasons, leaving behind a legacy of confusion 
on the one hand, but a glimmer of hope on the other -- a hope that someday, just maybe, a complete 
description of Creation will finally appear on the horizon ... 


83 


Godel's Theorem and The Green Tao Theorem Revisited 


In an earlier note we postulated that Godel's Theorem and the Green Tao Theorem were equivalent 
notions. Here, using a rather heuristic approach, we are going to offer a little more evidence for 
this idea, and then look at some generalizations. 


Godel's Theorem tells us [roughly] no system § can ever discover (much less prove) all truths it 
was intended to capture, and that within S many inconsistencies will arise. Green Tao, on the other 
hand, tells us the prime numbers P contain arithmetic sequences of arbitrary length, literally 
everywhere. A random system R, almost by definition, ought to be just that -- random throughout, 
but surprisingly, this turns out not to be the case at all, at least with respect to the primes. 


If we think of these regular sequences in P as exceptions [ripples or aberrations which shouldn't be 
there], it becomes rather evident a striking parallel exists between the inconsistencies which surface 
in § and those that appear in P. In other words, the anomalies in S become, if you will, 
the unexpected regions of regularity in P, leading to a correspondence of sorts as shown in the 
diagram below. 


S wennnnnnnnn nnn n neces P 
| | 
Godel Green Tao 
| | 
| | 
anomalies ~) regular regions 


Since ~[Godel] is, by definition, an attribute of the Godhead, it is not much of a leap to suppose 
~[Green Tao] is as well. And, because all attributes in the Godhead are equivalent by virtue of 
symmetry, we may conclude 


~[Godel] = ~[Green Tao] 
| | 
| | 


fully consistent no regularity in 
& complete randomness 


thus proving [at least intuitively] the equivalency of these two theorems in our reality, by taking 
their complements in the expression above. 


Understanding just what ~[Green Tao] means is not an easy task; however, by inference it should 
be clear that any random system R containing predictable regions of arbitrary size is probably not a 
candidate for the Godhead. In particular, this rules out the primes and, at the same time, strongly 
suggests the only kind of system you could ever have [within the Godhead] is one which is 
perfectly random. That is, a random system containing no regions of predictable regularity [of 
arbitrary size], anywhere, you might say. 


84 


Godhead «~~» Symmetries 


perfectly uncertain 


Whether our conclusions are true is hard to tell; however, the Godhead is not going to give up its 
secrets easily, and if we insist on a fully consistent and complete design in accordance with the 
Fundamental Theorem of Creation, perfect uncertainty seems like a good fit here. Indeed, in the 
final analysis Godel may demand it ... 


85 


On The Equivalency of The Spiritual Laws of Creation 


In the essay we gave a rather heuristic argument for the equivalency of the spiritual laws of 
creation. Here we are going to tighten up that proof a little bit, using the Fundamental Theorem as 
our starting point -- 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


Suppose Truth is defined as U{L(i)}, with L(1) being the law of h&s, always. If we now lose the 
Cross then by equivalency we lose the action, and so 


U{L@} = 0, i>=2 


Thus, L(1) =0 ==> LG) =0 for all i >= 1, meaning all laws vanish. Assume now {L(1), ..., L(m)} 
is a set of laws all equivalent to one another, and that L(n+1) is also a law which is not equivalent 
to any element in the previous set. If L(1) = 0 then L(n+1) = 0, so by assumption [equivalency], 
LG) =0 ==> L(n+1) =0 fori <=n. In other words, we have the relationship 


~L(i) ==> ~L(n+l), i<en 


meaning L(n+1) ==> L(i), for any i <=n. Also by assumption, no L(i) ==> L(n+1), for if even 
one did, they all would, making L(n+1) equivalent to each of them. In particular, L(1) does not 
imply L(n+1), but L(1) is equivalent to the action, according to the Fundamental Theorem, and thus 
we have a contradiction. 


By induction, then, we see that all the spiritual laws of creation are indeed equivalent to one 
another -- losing any one of them means losing the whole, most assuredly. In particular, this 
applies to L(1), the law of h&s, and so we may conclude that Creation really is an all-or- 
nothing proposition after all -- either you have a fully consistent and complete set of laws to begin 
with, or you have nothing at all. As such, we must always see things within the simultaneous 
now when looking at the Fundamental Theorem, and move from one frame of reference to another 
when it seems convenient to do so. Creation, it appears, would have it no other way ... 


Bea ok oe ake 


86 


You'll notice in the proof above L(1) functioned as an anchor of sorts, being equivalent to the Cross 
on the one hand, and a spiritual law itself on the other. In fact, it is because L(1) ~ Cross holds that 
we were able to show ail of the spiritual laws of Creation [Truth] are equivalent to one another, 
thereby allowing us to frame the Fundamental Theorem the way we have. Indeed, in the same way 
that breaking L(1) ~ Cross causes the whole of Creation to collapse, forming this equivalency does 
just the opposite -- it causes the whole of Creation to come into being ! 


When Christ said "I have come not to abolish the Law, but to complete it ...", he was very likely 
talking about completing the law of h&s on the Cross; to wit, a necessary physical expression in the 
ordered now which would ultimately unify all of the spiritual laws through equivalency in the 
simultaneous now, and thus Creation itself. As a result, and among other things, only a simple 
duality [Father & Son] would ever be needed within the Godhead to uphold these laws, thereby 
paving the way for the many discoveries the Fundamental Theorem has led to. 


simultaneous now ordered now 


all the laws «~~» membrane «~~ action «~~ Cross «~~» law of h&s 


spiritual frame physical frame 
In a peculiar sense, when you think about it more deeply, Christ might have been trying to tell us a 
little more about the nature of these symmetries in the Godhead when he made this comment, but 
just like today, it is highly unlikely anyone was really listening ... after all, why would they ? 


ae a ok ok ok. 


87 


Perfect Uncertainty and The Spiritual Laws of Creation 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation is both fully consistent and complete, as we know, and so 
by equivalency it should be clear that ~[Godel] is an attribute of T ... ... where T is defined to be 
U{L(i}, the set of laws. Since 


~[Godel] = ~[Green Tao, R] 


where R is any random system, we can also say ~[Green Tao, R] is an attribute of T and thus 
conclude T is indeed perfectly uncertain. 


Godhead “~~ Symmetries = «~~ Laws 


eeicnaiiena dd lad need nhatecenncaee perfectly uncertain 
perfectly uncertain 


Among other things this means the laws are unknowable, just like the corresponding symmetries, 
and so any search for a fully consistent and complete description of these laws, outside the bounds 
of at-one-ment in the current mosaic, will likely be futile. 


The Continuum Hypothesis tells us we can never know if there is or isn't a bridging theory which 
joins together the worlds of Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity, for example, and so 
prevents us from ever finding a unified theory of physics which combines the two. This shouldn't 
come as a surprise now, especially once we understand that perfect uncertainty, by definition, 
means unified theories in general are [unfortunately] nothing more than empty promises in 
disguise. 


88 


In the unified mosaic, however, life will be different. Everything will be in a state of complete at- 
one-ment with the Godhead in those days, but alas, by the time this happens the 
symmetries and laws that currently hold everything together will have disappeared, according to 
the Fundamental Theorem of Creation. A rather ironic end, to what must have seemed like a 
promising start, for those who believed originally, and still believe today, in the notion of absolute 
knowledge beyond the membrane ... 


89 


The Cross, The Crown and The Gold Medal 


This particular note wasn't supposed to be part of the Essay folder, but recently I was looking at the 
gold medal I won back in 1978, on my birthday, and realized there was an odd similarity between 
the engraving on this medal and the geometric layout of the Fundamental Theorem of Creation -- 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


wings owl wings 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


On one side of the medal we see an owl with its wings outstretched, and hovering over a crown. 
The wings, to me at least, represent symmetries in the Godhead, along with the corresponding 
spiritual Jaws of creation, while the owl itself corresponds to action, a structure equivalent to the 
Cross [crown]. 


The owl, according to folklore, is a spirit animal emblematic of a deep connection with wisdom and 
intuitive knowledge, and those who have this totem, it is said, are likely to see what's usually 
hidden to most. With regard to the diagram above, we can see an immediate comparison to Christ, 
where now Christ becomes this magnificent creature with its wings outstretched, and hovering over 
its prey [Cross] -- the ultimate prize in all of Creation, you might say. 


From our perspective in the physical ring, the Crucifixion does appear to be an event which is both 
shameful and humiliating; but in reality and from a spiritual vantage point, the Cross actually 
becomes God's crowning achievement in Creation, for without it everything would have collapsed, 
as we now know. As such, we must always take the spiritual view when considering these 
mysteries, looking beyond what seems familiar to us and moving up into those rarefied spaces 
where only the enlightened ones dwell. 


“High above he pitched a tent for the sun, who comes forth from 
his pavilion like a bridegroom, delights like a champion in the 
course to be run... [ 19th Psalm ] 


90 


On The Equivalency of Noether's Theorem and Closed Systems 


Up until now, we have tacitly assumed Noether's Theorem could be used to describe the morphing 
of the primordial fabric into the differentiable mosaic, which we see before us today -- 


primordial fabric «~~» Noether «~~» differentiable mosaic 


| 
| 
duality «~~» action «~~» law of truth 
| 
| 


Cross 


Now we'd like to tighten things up a little bit by offering a reasonable proof that Noether may have 
been the only available mechanism by which this transition occurred, assuming the geometry of the 
primordial fabric was [and still is] both simply-connected and closed. The first of these two 
properties is always presumed to be true throughout, in what follows ... 


Let us begin by noting that if a Noether solution N exists everywhere on M, then M must be 
simply-connected and closed, for if not, M would roughly be equivalent to S(n) + holes, according 
to Poincare, where S(n) is a sphere of dimension n. But if a singularity exists somewhere on S(n), 
topologically N would cover S(n) almost nowhere [think of poking a hole in the sphere S(2), say, 
and shrinking the resulting infinite plane down to a single point], and so we may conclude M 
cannot contain any singularities after all. It is, in mathematical parlance, homeomorphic to the n- 
sphere, for some integer n. 


On the other hand, if M is a simply-connected and closed manifold, we know by Poincare M ~ 
S(n), and here we can always find a Noether solution, everywhere, for the latter. Thus we have the 
following rather deep equivalency -- 


If M is any simply-connected and closed manifold, there is always a 
Noether solution which covers M, and conversely. In other words, 
for the simply-connected case ... 


NOM <~~> M~ S(n) 


This result is somewhat startling because it tells us, at least geometrically, the primordial Godhead 
may have had no choice but to differentiate itself by way of Noether, assuming the manifold was 
equivalent to S(n) initially. In all likelihood such was the case, implying, a fortiori, a 
rearrangement of the indiscernible primordial energy leading to symmetries and laws by way of an 
action equivalent to the Cross. 


We identify with these symmetries, on a more personal level, as the Father and the Son, according 
to Christian tradition, but any pair of labels would work just as well when thinking back to 
Noether's Rosetta Stone. Indeed, according to Ken Vincent, in his book God Is With Us, the post- 
conscious [or post-conventional] state of moral development is what we all ought to be aiming for 


91 


anyway, where the usual norms and systems of belief are tossed in favor of something that is more 
universally true. In my view, nothing says it better than the Fundamental Theorem of Creation -- a 
fully consistent and complete description of the grand design itself, touching on virtually every 
aspect within the system of things, or so it would seem ... 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


92 


Covering Theorems Over Manifolds In Creation 


In the last note, we discussed Noether's Theorem over a simply-connected manifold M, and saw 
that 


NOM <=> M~S(n)_ (*) 


where N is any Noether covering for M. Here we want to develop the theory just a bit more, and 
look at all theorems {T} for which (*) might be true on a manifold spanning the whole of creation. 


So let's begin by stating the following rather self-evident postulate -- 


"If Tis any fully consistent and complete theorem over M, then necessarily 
T is perfectly uncertain, and conversely. If E(T) is the energy associated 
with T, there will always be one such T for which E(T) is minimal, 
implying symmetry ' 


In other words, 
4 TOM { ~[Godel, T] <=> ~[Green Tao, T] N E(T) <=E(T') UT,T'E {T} (4) 


Philosophically, then, this means no matter what theorem T we come up with, spanning creation, it 
must always be fully consistent and complete on the one hand, and perfectly uncertain on the other, 
in so much as these two attributes go hand in hand because of equivalency. Furthermore, the 
energy associated with T must be minimal, in accordance with variational principles, and so the 
theorem itself would have to function according to some least action principium, whatever this 
finally is. 


Either T is a Noether covering for M or it isn't. If not, then T is most likely a set of laws over M, 
absent a viable action [or boundary] containing any symmetries. However, because of (+), one 
could argue the laws are symmetrically equivalent in this case, and if so, T becomes a degenerate 
Noether covering for M, where the symmetries and laws now become one and the same thing, so to 
speak. Thus, we may conclude -- 


NOM <=> T <=> M~S@) 


In other words, the theorem we are searching for is, in all probability, Noetherian over the n-sphere, 
where symmetries imply laws, and vice-versa, by way of a minimal action linking the two together. 


Such a conclusion makes eminent sense, for nothing could be simpler, more compact or more 
efficient than this description of things, and so we can say, with some confidence, that the 
Fundamental Theorem of Creation is not an arbitrary result -- in all likelihood it emerged, 
necessarily, by way of variational principles associated with both the energy and geometry of the 
original primordial fabric ... 


93 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


LOOKING FORWARD 


Later on, when we study coexistence, we'll learn that for a local observer in B-space, the energy of 
B is always 0. Thus, if T is any theorem here, we must have 


which implies E(T) = 0. Hence, T is always a minimal energy theorem in B-space, implying it must 
be Noetherian. 


94 


Sayings and Musings 


The following are a list of sayings collected over a period of time, while all this research was going 
on. No attempt is made to interpret any of them; rather, the intent is simply to ponder their 
meaning ... 


* just as gold is tested in the fire, so are the chosen tested in the furnace of humiliation ... 
+ I didn't realize the juxtaposition of black and white could be so beautiful ... 
+ he is charged with finding the being who will complete his healing ... 

* your law, my God, is deep within my heart (holy spirit) ... 

+ he traps the crafty in the snare of their own cunning ... 

+ the Cross ... God's crowning achievement in Creation ... 

+ learn to distinguish between the precious and the base ... 

* man will prey on man until man will pray for man ... 

* they are what they need and need what they are ... 

+ silence ... the highest form of enlightenment ... 

* we bind the books ... and then they bind us ... 

* spiritual freedom ... a gift from the Son ... 

+ Taoism ... silence and effortlessness ... 

+ Ididn't give you permission to sin 

* bend my heart to your instructions ... 

+ his suffering justifies the quest ... 

* you cannot inherit moral maturity ... 


Hints and glimmers of the Unified Mosaic ... 
+ when everything has been subjected to him, then the Son himself will be subjected to 
the One who has subjected everything to him, so that God may be all in all ... 
[Cor, 15th chapter] 


+ Jesus, whom heaven must keep till the universal restoration comes ... [Acts, 3rd chapter] 


As 
SS 


4. 


95 


Perfect Uncertainty and The Cross 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation is both fully consistent and complete, as we know, and so 
by equivalency it should be clear that ~[Godel] is an attribute of the Cross. Since 


~[Godel] = ~[Green Tao, R] 


where R is any random system, we can also say ~[Green Tao, R] is an attribute of the Cross and 
thus conclude the Cross is indeed perfectly uncertain. 


Godhead “~~ Symmetries = «~~» Cross 
| | | 
| | | 


conse nn nn nnn n nnn nn nena nn nnnn nnn perfectly uncertain 
perfectly uncertain 
Among other things this means the Cross is unknowable, just like the corresponding symmetries, 


and so any search for a fully consistent and complete description of this action, outside the bounds 
of at-one-ment in the current mosaic, will likely be futile. 


Just as Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle prevents us from ever knowing completely the behavior 
of sub-atomic particles ...... so too does perfect uncertainty place limits on our understanding of 
the Fundamental Theorem of Creation. In particular, this means the Cross will always remain a 
mystery, no matter where you are beyond the membrane, and thus it becomes both a notion and a 
symbol one accepts by faith, and not by knowledge. 


96 


knowledge |<--- 6 ---» perfect uncertainty <--- 0--->| faith 
| 


Cross 
When Christ said 


‘... unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter 
the kingdom of heaven ...' [Matthew, 18th chapter] 


he was really making a comment about the Cross, and more specifically, the attribute of perfect 
uncertainty within the context of the Fundamental Theorem. 


In the final analysis, then, it behooves each of us to set aside our own prejudices and our arrogance, 
by accepting what we cannot understand and believing what we cannot comprehend. In other 
words, becoming that little child who doesn't know any better, were it possible. Theory, it seems, 
will only take you so far ... 


97 


Coexistence and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation 


Up until now, we have, for the most part, used equivalency to explain different ideas associated 
with the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, whether we were looking at foundational or layered 
components ... all of which are woven together into a unified whole through connectedness ... 


Godhead «~~» membrane «~~» cosmos 


| 
| 
duality «~~ action «~~ laws 
| 
| 


Cross 


For example, in the diagram above, there is no difference between the cosmos and the laws, 
mathematically speaking, where the former is defined to be the union of souls, realms and the 
physical ring. Thus, any boundary dividing the symmetries from the laws can also be thought of as 
a boundary dividing the Godhead from the cosmos, thereby making the notion of at-one-ment, in 
particular, much more palatable. 


In reality, it is much more likely the foundational components, defined to be the union of 
symmetries, laws and the action, coexist with the layered components [cosmos], where each has its 
own matter space, according to the diagram below ... 


| % 
souls <~~> physical ring <~~> realms % matter 
| | 9 
Steachecsas TE ERIORE Aen Seen SE Be AA a ae a AA a PRET eee 
Eo euwal 
Symmetries <~~> Action <~~> Laws % antimatter 


Under this scenario, all foundational components in the antimatter world are equivalent to one 
other, as we know, and a very real membrane f exists which divides the symmetries from the laws, 
in accordance with Noether. Similarly, all layered components in the matter world are equivalent 
to one another, and a very real membrane @ exists, which divides this space from its antimatter 
counterpart. 


But because everything is woven together into a unified whole through connectedness and 
equivalency, the a and B membranes are also equivalent to each other, and thus crossing over the a 


98 


boundary and into the Godhead is really no different than passing through the B boundary. At-one- 
ment, it seems, can actually be achieved even under coexistence. 


As such, the Fundamental Theorem of Creation remains the best compact description of things, 
whether or not we choose coexistence as the preferred frame of reference. A fully consistent and 
complete prescription for the grand design itself, you might say, regardless of the vantage point ... 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


99 


Godel's Theorem and The Green Tao Theorem Revisited, Part II 


In Part I we gave a rather heuristic argument for the equivalency of Godel and Green Tao. Here we 
are going to tighten things up a bit by examining processes within the Godhead [G] initially, and 
then moving out from there. So let's start by assuming G actually uses the prime numbers P to make 
positive decisions, which we'll label yes, and that all other decisions are made in the complement 
space, excluding evens, which we'll label ~P. 


(2,3 
| | 
yy 


The entire set of yeses is indeed random, but not perfectly random according to Green Tao, and so 
contains regions of predictable regularity of arbitrary size, throughout. In other words, within 
P there are regular, contiguous intervals or epochs [if you will], of arbitrary size, at which the 
Godhead always responds by saying yes, even though it might not have wanted to. 


P ---------==--- pt+k ------------- p + 2*k -------------- p+3*k 

| | | | 

y y y y 

| I | | 
prime prime prime prime 


Such a constraint infringes unfairly on the Godhead's right to choose freely now, thereby creating 
inconsistencies within this domain that, by definition, cannot exist. The Godhead, by default, is 
both fully consistent and complete according to the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, and so 
cannot admit any random system R containing predictable regions of arbitrary size, anywhere, it 
seems. Thus, we may conclude 


~[Godel] = ~[Green Tao, R] 
| | 
| 


fully consistent no regularity in 
& complete randomness 


within G, implying, in turn, the equivalency of these two theorems. 


Within the current mosaic, then, we could describe the Godhead a little more accurately by saying 
it is probably made up of perfectly uncertain symmetries of Light, absent the familiar dimensions 
of time and space. In other words, a light-filled, perfectly random and perfectly symmetric 
geometry of infinite expanse, you might say, were you able to see this structure. 


Godhead ~~ Symmetries 


perfectly uncertain 


If we are correct here, the Godhead is unknowable, at least in the differentiable mosaic, even 
though earlier writings hint at the simultaneous experience of at-one-ment and atonement ... within 
this particular domain. It's a paradox which can't be reconciled easily, to be sure, but for the vast 
majority of souls living and operating beyond the membrane in the current mosaic, knowing God 
completely would probably seem like a strange idea; so strange, in fact, that it is doubtful they 
would ever take it seriously ... 


101 


On The Equivalency Between The Cross and The Membrane 


The Fundamental Theorem of Creation tells us there is an equivalency between the membrane and 
the Cross, but leaves that more intimate relationship between the two open to interpretation. Here 
we offer an approach by selecting a frame of reference, and analyzing things accordingly -- 


membrane 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


Noether's Theorem tells us symmetries and laws can be unpacked from an action... ... ... where 
the symmetries imply the laws and vice-versa. In the case of the Fundamental Theorem, it should 
be clear that if there were no action there would be no Cross, since the Cross itself is equivalent to 
the law of h&s. Thus the Cross necessarily implies the existence of an action. Conversely, the 
existence of an action necessarily implies the Cross [law of h&s], and so the Cross and the action 
are equivalent to one another. 


Cross ==> Action ==> Cross 
| | | 
| | | 


- law of h&s 


From a spiritual perspective the action really is the membrane that divides the Godhead and its 
symmetries from the laws of creation, but from a physical perspective this same action becomes the 
Cross. The two are equivalent to one another, according to the Fundamental Theorem, but now 
appear to be different structures depending on your frame of reference. 


membrane «~~» action «~~» Cross 


spiritual frame physical frame 


Seen in this light, Christ's sufferings on the Cross become the catalyst that caused all of the 
encoded energy and information to come into being, and in the process, build and sustain all of 
Creation itself, according to God's simultaneous now. 


102 


energy «~~» membrane <~~» action «~~» Cross «~~» sufferings 


spiritual frame physical frame 


Such a conclusion seems reasonable, especially when you think of the generalized law of h&s, 
which tells us that every negative energy caused by an act of harm must be cancelled by a positive 
energy caused by an act of suffering [Cross]. From here, it is not much of a leap to conclude that 
this same suffering extends to all laws, symmetries, realms, souls, the physical ring and, of course, 
the membrane itself. 


We can't be completely sure of our result, but it should be remembered that the Fundamental 
Theorem of Creation is not only both fully consistent and complete, but also optimal because of 
least action. As such, and by equivalency, the Cross has no replacement and so, is the only physical 
expression of suffering allowed by the action leading to laws. 


Thus, the membrane uniquely implies the Cross [fully and completely] and vice-versa, and together 
these two pieces become the same action seen differently in two different frames of reference. 
What we saw 2000 years ago is simply what the dimensions of time and space let us see, but in 
reality, we were very likely witnesses to the unfolding and authenticity of creation itself, which 
concluded with the words of Christ 'It is finished’... 


Spiritual Laws 
creation «~~» Cross «~~ suffering 


Symmetries Godhead 


Whether we look at symmetries in the Godhead, the action or the spiritual laws of creation, there 
seems to be a common thread running through each component; namely, one of duality. 
Symmetries correspond to the Father & Son, for example, while every physical law seems to have a 
spiritual counterpart. It shouldn't come as a surprise, then, that the action also has a dual nature, 
thereby bolstering our view that the frame of reference approach may be the correct way to see 
things after all ... 


103 


The Continuum Hypothesis, Godel and Green Tao 


It struck me recently that undecidability, in all its many forms, could never be an attribute of the 
Godhead, and if so, this means we have an equivalency chain as shown in the diagram below -- 


~[Godel] <=> ~[Green Tao, R] <=> ~[Continuum Hypothesis] (+) 
All three are, in fact, attributes of the Godhead, and thus we may conclude, more specifically -- 
[Green Tao, R] = [Continuum Hypothesis]  (*) 
The Continuum Hypothesis tells us we can never decide if there is or isn't a class of numbers S 
sitting between the integers and the reals, given our current understanding of axiomatic set theory. 


Typically, mathematicians assign a cardinal number of N to the integers and ¢ to the reals, and tell 
us we cannot know if there is a cardinal number r corresponding to S such that 


N<r<e 
the integers | the set S | the reals 
N r c 
| undecidable | 


According to (*), undecidability exists because of [Green Tao, R] and conversely. Thus, it is the 
very principle of regularity within randomness, along the number line, that leads to the notion of 
undecidable theorems, and similarly, undecidable theorems over the reals imply embedded 
regularity within randomness, literally everywhere. They are equivalent ideas, if you will ... 


undecidable theorem T «~~~ regularity within random set R 


This kind of correspondence has to make one wonder just how large the set U of undecidable 
theorems really is, if it can even be ascertained. For example, if card(U) ~ ¢ there would be no way 
to order the elements of this set, and we would be forced to conclude, necessarily, that an 
uncountable number of theorems over the reals are, in fact, inconclusive. 


But regardless, the main thrust of this particular note is to see the connections in (+), and realize the 
Godhead contains many attributes, all of which are equivalent to one another by virtue of 
symmetry. By taking their complements and operating beyond the membrane, as it were, we can, 
from time to time, learn more about the world we live in and perhaps see things in this space from a 
fresh perspective. The relationship depicted in (*) is but one example ... 


104 


On The Equivalency of Attributes in The Godhead 


This could well be our swan song, at least in so far as contributions to the Essay folder are 
concerned. It's been a long road -- these last five years -- with many wonderful concepts and ideas 
flowing from a simple thought (regarding Noether) that struck my mind back in the summer of 
2009. Now, 45 articles later, I'd like to summarize the various attributes in the Godhead I've 
become aware of, and see if there isn't some way to tie it all together. So let's start with the 
following equivalency diagram, which depicts these properties as a simple chain -- 


~[Godel] <=> ~[Green Tao, R] <=> ~[Continuum Hypothesis] 
| | | 
| | | 
| | | 


~[Time] < ~[Space] <=> ~[Light] 


I 
Vv 


Following a two-state model (coexistence) where the Godhead [G] is actually part of antimatter 
space, we can see here that G is a pretty strange locale, wholly comprised of symmetries with the 
following characteristics -- 


+ fully consistent and complete 

* perfectly uncertain 

* no undecidability 

+ no familiar dimensions of time 

+ no familiar dimensions of space 

* anti-photonic light de auro purissimo 


The list above is certainly not exhaustive, but does give us some feel for what it might be like to 
step into this rather exotic region, were we able to pass through the a-f boundaries discussed in 
earlier writings, and shown below -- 


% 
ai <~~> Stil ring <~~> sg % matter 
| | 9 
| |B | 9 
| | | 
Symmetries <~~> Action <~~> Laws ® antimatter 
| | | 
| B| | 9 


Curiously, the photon and anti-photon, in particular, are one and the same thing, according to 
physics, and thus we can say, with some assurance, that light de auro purissimo [of the purest form] 
is not only an attribute of the Godhead; but also, the action and the laws, because of equivalency. 


105 


In other words, the foundational components of Creation are, in all likelihood, made from this 
very same substance -- liquid gold light, if you will -- a notion which ties in nicely with current 
research linked to the Mereon Matrix, for example. 


Beyond the Godhead, and outside the bounds of at-one-ment [in the matter world], we are largely 
encumbered by the inverse of any attributes associated with G, and so can never know with any 
precision how the laws function, for example, or how the Godhead thinks and communicates with 
its constituent parts [symmetries]. Indeed, our view of reality is constrained in part by things like 
incompleteness, imperfect uncertainty, undecidability, time, space and even light itself ... to the 
degree we understand these equivalent impressions. 


When I see an equation like 
E = me? 


am I really any closer to understanding the spiritual laws of creation, or are these opaque 
transcriptions merely dim, shadowy reflections of the pristine structures that exist behind the a 
boundary in this strange, if not bizarre world of the Godhead ? 


It's difficult to say, but one thing is certain and will always remain -- until and unless we find at- 
one-ment with the Creator, we will never unravel the many mysteries which have been laid before 
us ... and so will have to go on being content with discontent itself ... Creation, it seems, would 
have it no other way ... 


106 


A New Heaven and a New Earth, Part II 


In Part I, and according to the Law of Purification of the Void, we noted that every soul will 
eventually return to the Light of God, and attain a parallel state of complete at-one-ment and 
atonement ... ... ... relative to the simultaneous now. As well, we saw that Creation would 
eventually morph into a new kind of structure where all rings beyond the Godhead will have 


merged with the Light, thereby creating a more homogeneous framework which we'll call the 
unified mosaic. 


Primordial Fabric ~~» Differentiable Mosaic ~~» Unified Mosaic 


In the simultaneous now this transition has already occurred, but in the ordered now [our reality] 
things are unfolding just as they should, leaving us with the question as to what exactly the unified 
mosaic will really look like when it's all said and done. 


souls <~~> physical ring <~~> realms 
| | 
| | 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


consistent, complete, optimal 


‘In truth I tell you, till heaven and earth disappear, not one dot, 
not one little stroke, is to disappear from the Law until all its 
purpose is achieved ...' [Matthew, Sth chapter] 


When reading from the Book of Matthew above, the implication seems to be that the differentiable 
mosaic and its laws are going to undergo a change of sorts [or disappear altogether], leaving us 
with a unified structure that has actually merged with the Light. Indeed, in this new state the law of 
h&s won't even be needed, for example, and the axiom of free choice, by default, will be fully 
consistent and complete because of at-one-ment. 


In fact, by losing the law of h&s, either Creation collapses, which is no longer possible, or the 
action extends out to infinity where the laws as a whole become marginalized, so to speak, and 
[mathematically] tend to zero in the limit. As such, the most likely scenario is one in which the 
Godhead literally expands into the current mosaic, everywhere, thereby creating a symmetrical 
union with all that exists here today -- a new heaven [realms] and a new earth [physical ring], as it 
were, where the spiritual laws of creation have been completely subsumed by the Light [life] itself. 


107 


souls | <~~>  physicalring <~~> realms 


| | | 
| | | 
sesoesonse Symmetries Godhead ----------- 
| 
| 


Light 


‘For look, Iam going to create new heavens and a new earth, and the past 
will not be remembered and will come no more to mind* [Isaiah 65:17] 


If the passage above from Isaiah is correct, we can look forward to a day when there no longer is a 
boundary separating the Godhead from its creation. Gone will be the days of suffering and 
hardship, the void and any other traces of darkness altogether. In those days, however far off, the 
Light [life] will become the Law, and the Cross -- the very root of Creation itself, according to the 
Fundamental Theorem -- will vanish. 


In this sense the Cross [law of h&s] should be seen as a temporary structure of sorts, used initially 
to bring Creation into being, and then discarded once the process of purifying the existing mosaic 
has been completed. No doubt the wounds of Christ will also vanish once the law has served its 
purpose, and so they should, for by any norm or standard the long-suffering nature of God has 
already exceeded any reasonable bound or limit, no matter the measure. 


In fact, if the symmetries [in the Godhead] disappear as the action tends to infinity -- something we 
expect -- there will be no Father and Son in the unified mosaic -- only the pure Light of God 
everywhere holding everything together. As such, this familiar duality could also be seen as a 
temporary arrangement, used initially to uphold the spiritual laws of creation within the current 
mosaic, and then discarded once these laws are no longer needed. An illusive means to an end, you 
might say, all made possible through the magic of Noether ... 


Primordial Fabric ~~> Differentiable Mosaic ~~> Unified Mosaic 


death ~~~> resurrection 
| | | 
| | | 
Cross ~~~> Life 
| 
| 
law of h&s 


And Jesus said, 'I am the resurrection and the life ....' [John, 11th chapter] 
‘All shall bend the knee to me, by me every tongue shall swear ...' [Isaiah, 45th chapter] 


108 


A Brief Summary of The Various Fabrics in Creation 


In the beginning, before there was anything else, there was the primordial fabric, containing the 
undifferentiated energy of God, everywhere. Previous studies tell us this particular manifold M 
was probably equivalent to the n-sphere, and endowed with the attribute of perfect certainty ... 


M~S(n) <=> Perfect Certainty 
| 


¢-space 


To understand this attribute more fully, think of travelling through number line, only to find that no 
matter what point you land on, it is always {0}. Such would also be the case for the primordial 
sphere; a uniformly distributed energy field which looked the same no matter where you were on 
this manifold. 


At some point, though, a shift took place, with the Cross acting as a catalyst of sorts, causing 
symmetries and laws to come into being, according to Noether and the Fundamental Theorem of 
Creation. We call this the differentiable or current mosaic, and adopting a two-state model of 
coexistence, can see some of the detail in the following diagram -- 


| | | o 
souls <~~> physical ring <~~> realms % matter 

| | | 9 

pe erraten (SE aE EPSON Pe PO REPRE SE SE RE Sa ENE 
| |B | 9 

| | | 

Symmetries <~~> Action <~~> Laws % antimatter 

| | | 

| B| | 9 


In the B-world all things are perfectly uncertain, for example, whilst in the a-world they are 
imperfectly uncertain. The two attributes are, in fact, complementary and, among other things, 
determine the behavior of the laws in these respective domains. 


Someday, according to the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, a unified mosaic will emerge, where 
the a-B boundaries have disappeared altogether, along with the action and the laws, and the 
symmetries will recombine into a single essence [Light of God] which permeates a purified a- 
space, literally everywhere. 


109 


y-space 
| 
souls <~~> physical ring <~~> realms 
| | | 
| | | 


sorcenoene Symmetries Godhead ----------- 


Light 


Just what attributes this new mosaic will be endowed with is unclear to me, but to be sure, all living 
things will have a clear sense of at-one-ment with both the Light and each other in those days, that 


might best be described as a commingling of sorts ... 


feof ook 


In a nutshell, this is the general sequence of events which depicts the unfolding of Creation, 
according to our studies. Nothing is cast in stone, and indeed, in a-space we have at best an 
incomplete picture of things. Still, if the Fundamental Theorem holds true, it is probably the best 
description we are ever going to get, whether we look to the past or the future for a better 


understanding of how it all came to be ... 


feof 


110 


Undecidability and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation 


Up until now, we have seen the Fundamental Theorem of Creation largely as a prescription for the 
grand design itself -- a prescription which is both fully consistent and complete according to our 
studies ... 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


However the Cross actually resides in a-space, if we adopt the two-state model of coexistence, and 
so we are forced to conclude, necessarily, that imperfect uncertainty [~u] must be one of its 
attributes. Thus, both ~u and its complement 1 are consistent with the Cross simultaneously, 
implying a fortiori that up to attribute, anyway, the Cross must be indeterminate. 


By equivalency, then, the same is true of the Fundamental Theorem [F] -- the set of attributes 
Ain B-space, and their complements ~A in a-space, are consistent with F simultaneously, and 
thus F itself is also inconclusive. 


~A,A <=> F (*) 


In particular, and as a result, the spiritual laws of creation, embedded in the matter world, would 
appear to be incomplete or inconsistent, if you will, showing through more as shadows or weak 
impressions, which come to us from the pristine structures that exist behind the a-boundary in the 
rather bizarre antimatter world of the Godhead. 


Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle is a shining example of this effect, for it tells us we can never 
know exactly the position and momentum of a sub-atomic particle at the same time. The more we 
know about one the less we know about the other. Similarly, solutions to Einstein's field equations 
of general relativity will always have a singularity, according to the work of Hawking and Penrose, 
and the axiom of free choice, both in mathematics and in our daily lives, leads to many 
inconsistencies and conflicts. 


In the same vein, we know from previous research at-one-ment and atonement are equivalent 
notions, and that both are equivalent to the Cross, and therefore F. Hence the relationship in (*) 
must be true for both, and so at-one-ment in particular, embedded in the matter world, would also 
appear to be incomplete or inconsistent, just like the spiritual laws of creation. 


111 


Forming a complete union with Godhead, it seems, is only possible in the antimatter world, 
assuming it's possible at all ... 


As a final example, consider the law of hé&s. It too, embedded in the matter world, would appear to 
be incomplete or inconsistent, but in reality, is simply mirroring our own actions determined 
by choice. A feedback loop, if you will, which was mentioned in the original essay -- 


thought ~~> action ~~> deed ~~> consequence 


Tf (*) really is true can we ever talk sensibly about unified theories in physics, at least in a-space ? 
Probably not, for in our domain there is just enough regularity running through the randomness to 
create the kind of uncertainty that is needed to prevent this from ever happening. Unlike the B- 
world of the Godhead, where all things are perfectly uncertain, such is not the case for us, and so 
any attempt to unify laws or offer a fully consistent and complete description of Creation ... will 
ultimately fail ... necessarily so ... 


regularity in randomness <=> imperfect uncertainty 


112 


On The Nature of Coexistence and Invertible Transforms 


For a while now, I have been thinking a little more deeply about the two-state model of 
coexistence, and how the a-space, in particular, came to be ... 


| | | % 
souls <~~> physical ring <~~> realms % matter 
| | | 9 
seeesaetes Gf aoe nw Bocce cease Sa eee 
| |B | 9 
| | 
Symmetries <~~> Action <~~> Laws % antimatter 


In order for the matter world to exist, and inherit the properties that it has, some mapping or 
transform [A] would have been used, in all likelihood, to create the a-instance from B and endow it 
with an attribute such as imperfect uncertainty... 


perfectly uncertain imperfectly uncertain 


Thus, we can say with some assurance coexistence necessarily implies A. On the other hand, if we 
assume invertibility, which is not unreasonable, then a transform A’ must also exist that does the 
opposite, taking us from the a-world back to B. In other words, the very fact that A‘ exists implies a 
priori the existence of a, and so we have the following equivalency -- 


‘For some invertible transform A, coexistence implies A, 
and conversely its inverse A’ implies coexistence’ 


We can't know much, if anything, about A directly, since here we are operating over a perfectly 
uncertain space B, putting us in no man's land. On the other hand, « and its attributes are something 
we are familiar with, giving us some hope the search for an invertible transform A’ is not totally in 
vain ... assuming coexistence .... 


113 


If A’ can ever be found, we may be able to recast problems in a different light, more the way they 
might be viewed in B-space, for example, were it at all possible. Intractability may yield to 
solvability, in ways we've never seen before, and mysteries along the number line might vanish 
altogether. Indeed, finding A’ could take us one step closer to finding out who or what God really 
is... 


coexistence <=> [A,A‘] 


114 


On The Nature of Coexistence, Spin and Vibration 


In the essay, which I went back and read recently, we spoke about the notion of resonance, and 
suggested that realms within the current mosaic pos this attribute in varying degrees. Here we 
want to offer a little more detail on how the entire process might work ... 


If I stand by the edge of a pond on a still day and throw a stone into the water, waves will be 
created that move with a certain frequency. Throwing more stones into the water at the same time 
generates much more vibration, and tossing an infinite number of stones into the pond, 
simultaneously, will create so much randomness that there will be no regularity left to speak of. 


infinite number of stones ---> 


---) perfectly random 


This is probably what B-space is like -- perfectly random structures made from liquid gold light that 
seem frothy or foamy once all the [infinitely many] superpositions have been added together. 


As you move out from the B-world and into the a-world, via the A transform, say, these vibrations 
will begin to diminish, causing more regularity within the randomness as you go down through the 
realms, like rungs on a ladder. We are throwing fewer and fewer stones into the pond at the same 
time, so to speak, until finally things become still, and there are no vibrations at all. This endpoint 
is the ground state, also referred to as the primordial sphere, or C-space. 


a-world 


| fT spin-states <--» | regularity within randomness 
B-world ---» A ---> 
| | spin-states <-->» 7 regularity within randomness 


Strangely, C-space has no spin and may have no attributes at all, other than perfect certainty, and so 
is very likely a uniformly distributed dark energy field which is constant throughout. A curious 
structure indeed, from whence the differential mosaic may have been built by mapping an 
infinite number of spin-states to B-space initially, and in the same breath, a finite number of spin- 
states to each of the a-subspaces that reside in the matter world. 


BiC->B IN QA:C->a 
or 
YiC--»B ON A:B-->a 
Notice in the diagram above the first pair of transforms taking us from ¢ to B and a, respectively, 
are not the same thing. In fact, the latter [Q] is a convolution, namely A° ‘Y, and thus we may 


conclude that antimatter space [PB] really was built using mathematical principles separate and apart 
from the matter space [a], even though both have a common origin in ¢. 


115 


As an alternative, one could use the second pair of transforms above, and produce the same result. 
Either path is acceptable, mathematically speaking, and so without loss of generality we will focus 
exclusively on the A transform, going forward. It is, after all, the more interesting object to study. 


To create a subspace within the a-domain, A must operate over an infinite number of spin-states, or 
superpositions in B-space, and generate from this an a-realm, with a particular level of vibration 
and regularity. In the extreme case, where A: B ---> C, this is easily done by mapping to {0,1}, 
and on the other end, where A: ---» B, by mapping to {00,0}. 


Somewhere in between these extremes is the a-subspace we are looking for; one in which the 
vibration [v] and measure of regularity [p] within the randomness reinforce each other -- 


A:B -»> a(v,p), Lv<sw, O<p<l 
Xv 


Can such a thing be simulated in the real world we live in ? Can we find a transform A which 
takes us from an infinite number of spin-states over B to a finite number of spin-states over a, 
thereby creating an a-subspace with a certain amount of regularity p running through the 
randomness ? 


It's hard to tell, but if it can be done, we would be nicely on our way to understanding more fully 
how coexistence came into being, and might even be able to say something about the inverse 
transform A’ as well. Indeed, knowing more about A’ could open up a whole new world of 
discovery for us, by shifting our frame of reference to a simulated B-space, for example, and 
solving problems there -- problems which, up until now, would seem intractable by any recent 
standard or measure ... 


116 


On The Undecidability of Attributes in The Unified Mosaic 


For a while now, I've been wondering more and more what the unified mosaic [y-space] is really 
going to look like. It's odd enough to me, anyway, that such a mosaic is inevitable, but supposing it 
to be true, can we say anything about the corresponding attributes ? 


y-space 


souls | <~~>  physicalring <~~> realms 
| | | 
| | | 
seeeeeocee Symmetries Godhead ----------- 
| 
| 


Light 


The unified mosaic is a peculiar marriage between the a and B spaces, where the a-B boundaries 
have been broken, so-to-speak, and the two domains have merged according to the diagram above. 
As such, one could say the Fundamental Theorem of Creation [F] no longer applies here, and thus 
-F is all that remains. If so, then one might also argue 


~A,A <=> ~F (*) 
where A is the set of attributes in B-space and ~A are the complements in a-space. 


In other words, since F is already indeterminate [up to attribute], so is its complement ~F, ergo (*) 
must hold, logically speaking. A very peculiar result, to say the least, but if it's true we can't say 
anything about the attributes of y-space -- the matter is undecidable in mathematical parlance. 


On the one hand, y-space is the complete union between God and Creation; a blending together 
of all that is, if you will. On the other hand, all living things still need to retain their own 
individuality, make choices, learn, develop, discover, and so on, no matter what space they finally 
dwell in. The endpoint cannot be a utopia devoid of the qualities and characteristics that make life 
worth living, for if such were the case, I suppose a reversion to ¢-space [the primordial fabric] 
might be our only alternative. 


M~S(n) <=> _ Primordial Fabric 
| 


¢-space 


But who wants to live on a spinless, stateless sphere coated in a uniformly distributed dark energy 
field throughout, which is probably freezing cold !!_ Even God decided at some point he'd had 
enough, and alas ... a meaningful creation was born according to the words ... 'Let there be light ...' 


117 


How Large Is The Physical Ring 


We know from inflation theory that any universe initially expanded very rapidly in the first 1 / 103° 
seconds, roughly, and that Christ spent about 6 hours on the cross. 


According to the essay, during this time on the cross, the physical ring was lit up with an almost 
infinite number of big bangs, and if these occurred in rapid-fire succession, we can estimate just 
how many universes would have been created: 


N ~ [2x 10** 10% ]/2 ~ 10% universes 


In this calculation, inflationary periods could be longer than 1 / 10°° seconds, and so we divide by 2 
to get some sort of average. 


Recent studies seem to indicate our own universe is somewhere around 10" light-years in diameter, 
and so comprises a volume of roughly: 


U ~ 1/2 * (D3) ~ [10%3]/2 cubic light-years 


Allowing for both future expansion and for a certain amount of distance or sparseness in the 
physical plane, we see to the nearest exponential order of magnitude, the volume of the physical 
ring can be estimated at: 


V ~ [10% * 1092 ]/2 ~ 10*° cubic light-years 


If now, we take all souls ever made and move them to the physical plane, we see that a reasonable 
measure for the number of souls, to the nearest exponential order of magnitude, is also 


est number of souls ~ 107°, 


for the lower bound of 101° would lead to too much sparseness, and the higher estimate of 
107°°° to too much overcrowding. 


These calculations are veryrough, but if they are in the right ballpark, there are about 
10*°° brothers and sisters throughout creation -- in higher realms, lower realms and the physical 
ring. Of this number, some 10° are here on earth -- a virtually insignificant percentage. Indeed, 
the number of souls on the earth is one full exponential order of magnitude below the total number 
of souls ever made. 


Recent studies also show there are roughly 6 x 107? stars in our universe, out of which one in six 
contains an earth-sized orb that may be suitable for life. If so, about 102 stars in our universe meet 
this criterion, which means some 10% stars might be found in the physical ring that have earth-like 
planets. And, if we assume around 107° inhabitants on each planet, this would imply about 1077 
beings in the physical plane, all told, but still well below the very rough estimate of ~ 10*°° souls 
ever created. 


118 


One reasonable conclusion to draw from all of this is that most souls have never incarnated, even 
once. Indeed, the number of souls that have descended into the physical plane since its inception is 
virtually insignificant, with the ratio being somewhere around 


est number of incarnations ~ 1/ 10%° 


And we can also infer most darker entities (about one-third in all) have never incarnated --- they 
simply moved into darker realms from the outset. 


Such a massive transition, involving both souls and angelic beings, was probably brought on by a 
large-scale rebellion in the higher realms initially, for it is doubtful these beings would have gone 
willingly. And so, the transition was more likely an expulsion than anything else, giving rise to the 
notion of ‘fall from grace’, for which there is some biblical evidence. 


The fate of darker angelic beings caught up in this rather unfortunate tragedy is unclear to me --- 
beings in this category are not considered in the essay .. and are not seen as a fundamental 
component of creation. Souls, on the other hand, are a fundamental component, and could be 
protected by the Law of Purification of the Void under any condition. But regardless, darker 
entities as a whole seem determined to damage those parts of creation that are still available to 
them, including the physical ring, where many innocent, well-intentioned souls live and operate 
according to the various cycles of life. 


est number of beings in physical plane ~ 1077 


So how long will it take God to purify the void ? According to the essay, God has no choice but to 
purify the void, and other research suggi about one in every three souls has been lost to the 
darker regions already. If we make the reasonable assumption that purification starts with lessons 
learned in the physical ring, some 


102° /3 
souls need to descend across ~ 10° planets in parallel. 
Yet even if we allow for one descent every second, or thereabouts, it's going to take approximately 
1038 / 3 seconds to complete the task, assuming one incarnation does the trick. However, for a 
darker soul one descent is usually not enough, and so a fairer estimate might be three passes, in 
which case 10*8 seconds is the approximate [minimum] time needed to purify the void. In earth 
years, this number is approximately 


time to purify the void est ~ 3x 108° yrs, 


an almost incomprehensible span no matter the measure ... 


119 


I say minimum time needed to purify the void because shells can ultimately be occupied by higher 
or lower-ordered beings, and so there will be competition for these bodies which is ultimately 
decided by God. On the one hand, higher-ordered beings have every right to make a descent and 
learn the lessons they've mapped out for themselves, but on the other, the void also needs to be 
purified. Creation, it would seem, has some very serious challenges at this juncture. 


If nothing else, these calculations tell us just how vast creation really is, how magnificent the 
Creator really is, and how critically important Christ's role in creation really is. Indeed, without 
Christ, and according to the essay, you don't have a creation -- only the primordial fabric that 
existed before it was all brought into being ... 


120 


Is Heaven At Risk Of Becoming A Ghost Town 


In our last addendum, we addressed the issue, to the degree that we can, of just how large the 
physical ring might be. One of the interesting consequences of this note was that a massive 
expulsion in the higher realms likely occurred early on in creation, brought on, in turn, by a 
rebellion or failed coup attempt that resulted in the fall of about one-third of all angelic beings and 
souls. 


Truly an incomprehensible event when, to the nearest exponential order of magnitude, you realize 
some 10*°° such beings may have been created originally. 


We also know, from the essay, that incarnations can be either progressive or regressive, and may 
not necessarily return a soul back to the safety of the higher realms upon death. Indeed, a full third 
of all such descents may be regressive, in which case souls run the risk of winding up in some 
region of the void -- at least among those who choose to incarnate. 


The total number of incarnations since the beginning of creation is very small indeed; in fact, 
virtually insignificant with an estimate of only one soul in ~ 10°° that has ever made a descent into 
the physical ring. Even so, as the process continues more and more souls are being lost to the void, 
and at some point, unless things are reversed, a critical mass will be reached where more than half 
of all souls ever created can no longer call the higher realms their home. 


Assuming at each iterative cycle one-third don't actually make it back [where a cycle is defined as 
the length of time it takes for all higher-ordered souls to have incarnated at least once before 
starting anew], we can see that after n such cycles you have, fractionally, 
(2/3) 4n 
souls left in the upper realms, and 
(1/3) * [ 1 + (2/3) + (2/3)2 + ... + (2/3) * (n- 1) ] 
souls caught up in the void. 


Initially, with n = 0, and before the expulsion, all beings would have been in the higher realms, but 
this changes to (2/3, 1/3) at n = 1, and to (4/9, 5/9) at n = 2, and so on. 


God has a two-fold problem here; namely (a) how to extricate souls from the void regardless of 
what put them there in the first place and (b) how to slow down or even reverse the flow of souls 
into the void because of failed incarnations. 


It's a massive undertaking for which a mere mortal such as myself has no useful solution. Indeed, 
about all I can do is appreciate the complexities here and, in turn, do my best to walk with God on a 
daily basis. Perhaps when I get back to the higher realms [assuming I do], there will be more of an 
opportunity to make a contribution ... 


121 


Is Heaven At Risk Of Becoming A Ghost Town, Part II 


In previous research connected to this topic .. .. we learned that it was going to take approximately 
3x 108° yrs 


to purify the void, if we assumed 10'°° souls throughout creation, and didn't factor in any 
incarnations originating in the higher realms, which almost surely will lead to additional failure. 


Here we are going to construct a simple flow model which allows for incarnations originating 
in both the higher and lower realms simultaneously, where available shells are evenly apportioned, 
and the axiom of free choice functions in a normally distributed fashion. 


axiom of free choice ~ [2/3, 1/3] 


Under these assumptions, a higher-order being is expected to succeed about two-thirds of the time, 
by descending into the physical ring, and a lower-ordered being about one-third of the time. Since 
two-thirds of all souls still dwell in realms above the physical plane, according to our recent 
studies, the expected flow rate © can be calculated as follows, with 4 = 1/2... 


@ = A*[23 -13] + (1-2) *[13 -23])=0 


In other words, the expected flow rate is zero, which is bad, because it means that over the eons and 
eons of what I call cosmic time, on balance the void will not be purified ... regardless of where in a- 
space the incarnation originated. Dividing the shells evenly is a wash, so to speak and positive 
values of © imply an expanding void, strangely enough. 


feof 


Also, © will change if available shells aren't divided equally -- by weighting them 2:1 in favor of 
higher-ordered descents, for example, the expression above becomes 1/9, and this can only make 
one wonder what the deeper meaning behind reincarnation truly is. Could it be that the Creator, all 
along, intended to use the physical plane as the primary mechanism for purifying the void, 
according to some bias or preference, by asking many souls in higher rings to eventually play a 
part, even if there was some risk ? 


It's hard to tell, but (*) is a rather sensitive calculation, which relies heavily on some participation in 
the higher realms to begin with, otherwise the flow rate could easily vanish or turn positive. To see 
this more clearly note that (*) can be rewritten as 


© = [20 - 1)/3 


where A is the proportion of shells assigned to higher-ordered incarnations. In order to have 
a negative flow rate, we must always have i < 1/2, and thus it becomes a balancing act of sorts. If, 
for example, two-thirds of all potential incarnations originated in higher realms, and the other 
third in lower realms, and shells were evenly apportioned, 4 would be 1/2, and © would be zero -- 


122 


the void would never be purified in this case, irrespective of how many higher-ordered beings 
wanted to descend into the physical plane at any point in time ... 


o00OO0O288 o0o0oOoOLke o00OO88 
© ie) 1o) io) ie) io) 


It seems learning harm may be fundamental to our progress after all ..... no matter where we are in 
the virtual space of creation, for without this knowledge there are no viable gains to speak of, and 
of course, those in the void would continue to languish ... 


afeokoke sok 


It is now an easy matter to calculate the time needed to purify creation, using our previous 
knowledge of things, and assuming many beings eventually become part of the reincarnation cycle. 
Applying a 2:1 weighting in favor of lower-ordered descents, which seems to be the more ‘natural’ 
choice, | © | becomes 1/9 and so -- 


time to purify the void est ~ [ (102°) /3 ]/[ © * 10% ] 


U 


9x 10°° yrs 


higher < 


o00O0O288 o0o0oOoOLke8 o00OO88 
io) © ome) io) 1o) 


This number is in good agreement with the original calculation, where we omitted higher-ordered 
incarnations altogether ...._ Either way, assuming a second-order exponential estimate for the total 
number of souls ever made, we're looking at an incomprehensible span of time, no matter the 
measure. But perhaps this too is good, for if God really wants to make the unified mosaic a risk- 
free reality, it's probably better to be safe than sorry, by waiting for as long as it takes to make 
things right again ... 


y-space 


souls | <~~>  physicalring <~~> realms 
| | | 
| | | 
- Symmetries Godhead 
| 
| 


Light 


123 


On The Nature of Coexistence, Spin and Vibration, Part II 


In Part I, we discussed spin-states inside the a-B context, and saw that higher-vibrational realms 
contained Jess regularity within randomness, while the opposite was true for lower-vibrational 
worlds. Let us begin by revisiting the diagram which depicts this relationship in some detail -- 


a-world 


| f spin-statesv «<--» | regularity p within randomness 
B-world ---» A ---> 
| | spin-statesv «<---> 7 regularity p within randomness 


In the ground state, or C-space, we are on the primordial sphere, so to speak, and here we said this 
was very likely a uniformly distributed dark energy field, which is constant throughout. In other 
words, a perfectly certain structure, if you will, as show in the diagram below ... 


M~S(n) <=> _ Primordial Fabric <=> perfectly certain 
| | | 
| | | 


¢-space <=> Dark Energy <=> no spin-states 


Looking at these illustrations, it only makes sense to associate p with dark energy, in varying 
amounts, which diminishes as you move up into the higher realms, for example, and finally in B- 
space, vanishes altogether. 


dark energy «~~~» regularity within randomness 
g p v 


One conclusion to be drawn from this is that anti-photonic light, in the B-world, is of the purest 
form possible because there is no dark energy here; apparently, it only exists as an ‘attribute! in a- 
space where light, at least to some degree, appears to be degraded by its presence. 


As such, and in passing, we shouldn't think of dark energy as an attribute at all, because it really 
doesn't have a legitimate complement in B-space. In other words, in order to make sense of the 
expression 


[~A,A] <=> [-F,F] 


regardless of the fabric, any attribute and its complement must have meaning in some sense of the 
word, otherwise it's rather like taking the dual of {0}, which yields nothing. 


While it is true that the familiar dimensions of time and space don't exist in B, which might have 
some bearing on the quality and purity of light here, it is probably more correct to say their 
complements, along with the absence of dark energy, contribute synergistically to light in B-space, 
just as any corresponding properties or attributes would in a-space ... 


~[Time] <=>  ~[Space] <=> ~[Light] ..... B-space 
or 
[Time] <=> [Space] <=> [Light] ..... d-space 


---- dark energy ---- 


In our domain, for example, scientists tell us about two-thirds of the universe is indeed dark energy. 
If this is so, a reasonable estimate for p within the physical ring might also be ~ 2/3, which would 
make the physical plane, in turn, predominantly regular and thus of relatively low vibration. 
Most a-realms, it seems, are of a much higher resonance, while roughly one-third -- the so-called 
darker regions -- are of a much Jower resonance, by comparison. 


This shouldn't come as a surprise to us now, because smoothed out over long periods, even the 
axiom of free choice is going to lead to unfortunate consequences about one-third of the time, 
assuming things are normally distributed. 


axiom of free choice ~ [2/3, 1/3] 


In a peculiar way, then, the distribution of light and dark realms within a-space could be seen as a 
reflection of our own thoughts and actions; that is to say, our choices. Somewhere along the line, 
the Creator knew this -- most likely in the primordial fabric, before anything was built, 
but everything considered -- and fashioned a design accordingly. It appears there are no 
coincidences after all, for even when looking at the large-scale structure of realms and rings 
throughout creation, a distribution emerges which seems to be wholly compatible with our 
evolution as souls, no matter where we are, beyond the membrane ... 


125 


On The Nature of Coexistence, Spin and Vibration, Part III 


In this particular note we are going to study, in a little more detail, the attributes of time and space, 
to the degree that we can, as we move through the various fabrics in creation. So let's start with the 
following diagram, familiar to us now from previous studies -- 


a-world 


| ft spin-statesv «<--> | regularity p within randomness 
B-world ---» A ---> 
| | spin-statesv «<--> 7 regularity p within randomness 


As you descend the various a-realms, dark energy increases, light diminishes and time & space 
‘intensify’, in so much as any experiencer will feel these two attributes more acutely with each 
downward step, like rungs on a ladder. Eventually, in the ground state, or C-space, we are on the 
primordial sphere, and here the ‘intensity’ becomes infinite, in that the ‘distance’ between any two 
points on this manifold becomes {0}, whether we are measuring clock ticks, proper length, or even 
dark energy itself. There is no separation of variables in C-space, so to speak, irrespective of your 
position, because this is a perfectly certain structure throughout. 


lim dist(p,q) ---» 0 as v ---» 0 © a (forall a) 


In B-space, just the opposite is true. Dark energy vanishes altogether, because this is a perfectly 
random structure; light is of the purest form possible and the ‘distance’ between any two points is 
now infinite, whether we are looking at clock ticks or proper length, say. A second may as well be 
a minute or an hour or a billion years, and similarly, an inch may as well be a foot or a mile or 
trillions of miles. In an instant, you are able to grasp any fragment of creation or the whole of 
creation, simultaneously, and no doubt, this is how God perceives things, at least within the B- 
domain. 


lim dist(p,q) ---» © as v ---» © © a (forall a) 


In a-space, we do not have this luxury, for in any subspace you are going to have the presence of 
dark energy which will diminish the light coming to us from the B-world. Time and space will 
intensify as the vibrations lessen, for example, and any experiencer in these lower realms could feel 
‘pressed in' or even ‘bored’ as a result. A mile might seem like half-a-mile, say, and one hour like 
two hours, giving any observer here the feeling of living in ‘cramped quarters’ or that time is 
‘dragging itself along’. Needless to say, just the opposite would be true in higher-vibrational realms 


To see this more clearly consider sitting in a prison cell that feels like it's 6' x 6'. In reality the cell 
is double this size, but in your mind there has been a length contraction which produces this 
illusion. Similarly, if you are bored at work, one hour might feel like two, because in your mind the 
‘distance’ between perceived clock ticks has shortened -- for every two units of time you believe 
went by, only one elapsed, in actuality, giving the impression of a 'slow day on the job’. In all 


126 


likelihood this is what experiencers feel as you descend the various a-realms, and just the reverse as 
you go up - the ‘distance’ between meaningful points on the manifold will decrease or increase, 
accordingly ... 


| unitoftime | unit of time | .. perceived 

Qeoeennen= unit of time ----------- > ie real 
Are time and space really attributes within the a-B domains ? I think so, provided we interpret 
things correctly, for they seem to be more modes by which we experience reality than actual 
dimensions. To say that time and space have no complements in B is the equivalent of saying they 
both take on a value of {0} here. 
Such a constraint seems unreasonable to me, especially when you consider that even B-space itself 
was fashioned from the primordial sphere by transforming a layer of the dark energy, and stamping 
it as antimatter. Why, in turn, should this mean forfeiting time and space ? Doesn't God have the 
right to enjoy his own reality as he sees fit, even if it means making these attributes more elastic ? 
Me thinks he does ... 

WiC->B AN QA:C->a 


or 


WiC->B AN A:B--->a 


127 


The Heart, Mind and Soul of God - AC 


ontextual Interpretation 


For a long time now, I have wondered about the heart, mind and soul of God, if they really exist, 


and if they do, what we might be able to say about each wii 


thin the current mosaic. Let us begin by 


offering the following diagram, as a prelude to this short note -- 


heart soul 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action < 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the 


mind 


~~> Law of Truth 


Law of Conservation 


of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


In James T's NDE, for example, the Holy Ghost is seen as the mind of God and made up of 


antimatter that coexists with matter everywhere. Thus it on! 


ly makes sense to associate this attribute 


with the spiritual /aws of creation, in accordance with our previous research. 


'... for He is not a man that He shou 
mind ...' [ 1 Samuel, 15th Chapter 


id change His 
] 


The lifeblood of the Fundamental Theorem, however, really is the Godhead, in so much as 
symmetries here give rise to the laws by way of some mysterious action. It becomes the beating 
heart of the entire system, you might say, and so it only makes sense to associate this attribute with 


these symmetries, as shown in the diagram above. 


'... The Lord has sought out for Himself a man after 


His own heart ....' [ 1 Samuel, 13t! 


Chapter | 


That leaves us with the soul of God, at least within the current context, and here we can associate 
this peculiar attribute with the action -- a boundary or membrane of sorts, containing encoded 


energy and information, which is equivalent to the Cross. 


... He hath poured out His soul, even unto death ...' 


[ Isaiah, 53rd Chapter ] 


Naturally our interpretation of things is purely metaphorical, but it does serve to differentiate the 


notions of heart, mind and soul of God, at least within the 


current mosaic. Not much can be said 


about corresponding properties when we consider the primordial fabric, for example, and according 
to our recent studies, attributes in the unified mosaic are undecidable, mathematically speaking. 


128 


y-space 
| 
souls) <~~> physical ring <~~> realms 
| | | 
| | | 
serenscnee Symmetries Godhead ----------- 
| 
| 


Light 


Thus, when trying to understand God, or label God, as it were, we have to remember that no 
language, set of symbols, or detailed constructions are ever going to give us an accurate picture of 
things ... Indeed, even the Fundamental Theorem of Creation [F] itself is undecidable, according to 
our more recent research, and that, on its own, ought to be enough to give us some pause for 
thought, always ... 


[-A,A] <=> [~F,F] 


129 


The Continuum Hypothesis, Godel and Green Tao, Part II 


In Part I, we established a relationship between various attributes in the Godhead [G], and showed 
that 


~[Godel] <=> ~[Green Tao,R] <=> ~[Continuum Hypothesis] (*) 


Among other things, this led to the interesting conclusion that undecidable theorems over a random 
set R exist because of [Green Tao, R] and conversely. Here we are going to study the primes [P] a 
little more closely and 'show' the following -- 


‘If U is the set of undecidable theorems over P then 
the cardinality of U is at least c' 


Let us begin by defining any irrational number 0 on the interval between 0 and | as 
Q@ = .xyzw...., 


where the individual digits run from 0 to 9 and form an infinite sequence as shown above. Now 
define the set of primes P'c P according to the following algorithm -- 


skip x primes in P and take the following two, say 
skip y primes in P and take the following two, say 


... and so on ..... 


As an example, if @ = 0.314159 ... [1/10], we would skip the first three primes, but retain the next 
two; skip the next prime but retain the following two; then skip the next four and retain two, etc. In 
so doing, our set P', which is unique to 8, would look like -- 


P' = {7, 11, 17, 19, 41, 43, ...} 


We will begin by assuming there are one or more undecidable theorems U' over P'. There has to be 
at least one, otherwise P' itself would be perfectly random according to (*), which is not allowed 
beyond G. Now write P' = S'UT', where U' is defined to be undecidable over T' if at least one 
member of U' is undecidable over any element in P' [if the test passes, the element is moved to T', 
otherwise it is moved to S', and so on, for each element in P'). Under this construction, S' cannot 
be infinite, or else it too would be perfectly uncertain according to (*), which is not possible in ~G. 


Either T' corresponds to some 6' in [0,1] or it doesn't. If no, set 8' = @ and continue on, as we now 
have a unique association in place. If yes, then either 6' = @ because S' is null or T' hashes to some 
value of 0'4 0. 


In the latter case, since S' is finite, there must be a point @, beyond which all elements of T' agree 
with P', and if @' is the number in [0,1] corresponding to T', there must also be a relative point p, 
beyond which ail digits in 6' agree with 8 [the w-point is the largest number in S']. 


130 


T' = P' beyond ==> digits(6') = digits(®) beyond B 


This means, in turn, the digits in 0 and 6' differ in only finitely many places, and hence 6' itself must 
also be irrational, in the case where T' maps to some value of 6'# 0 initially [if 6' can be derived 
from © # 0, then the digits in 9 and © must also differ in only finitely many places ... an important 
notion when contemplating uncountability]. 


To see this more clearly, suppose S'= {7, 11} and T' = {17, 19, 41, 43, ...}, in our example above, 
where 


P' = {7, 11, 17, 19, 41, 43, ...} 
Then beyond @ = 11, T' and P' are identical, and comparing 0 and 6' now, we have ... 
6'= 0.64159... 8 =0.314159 ... 


Thus, 6' is indeed irrational and uniquely defines T’, in the particular case where T' maps to some 
value of 6'# @ initially. Notice too that the digits in 6 and 6' differ in only finitely many places. 


More generally, since there are uncountably many irrationals in the unit interval [0,1], even after 
excluding derivatives like 6' or mirrors like ©, this approach tells us the cardinality of U has to 
be = c, for with each set T' there must always be at least one corresponding undecidable theorem, 
otherwise T' itself would be perfectly random according to (*), which is not allowed in ~G. 


It seems undecidability is everywhere, and indeed, there could easily be more theorems of this kind 
over the reals than statements which can actually be proved. From a more spiritual perspective, 
indeterminacy implies regularity within randomness, and here we know from previous studies the 
latter leads to conflict and inconsistency, especially when considering the axiom of free choice, for 
example. All the more reason to guard our thoughts carefully, as they say, and do our best on a 
daily basis to make the best choices that we can, given the many obstacles that we face ... 


undecidable theorem T «~~~» regularity within random set R 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


It could happen that we need to skip more than nine primes in our construction of a particular set. 
For example, if @ = 0.31 41 59 ... [2/10], we would skip the first 31 primes, then take 2; skip the 
next 41 primes and take 2 again; then skip 5 primes and take 2, and so on. 


By underlining where applicable, we are effectively creating another instance of the same irrational 
number [x/10 in this case], and so long as we are willing to count it as such, forming sets and 
establishing uncountability, as we did above, should give us the result we are looking for ... ... 


131 


Relativity Theory and The Spiritual Laws of Creation, Part II 


In Part I, we said there was a fundamental curvature-stress duality [D] originating in the spiritual 
domain [8], and with a physical counterpart, which goes something like this: 


For any curvature tensor C there exists a stress tensor T such that T 
induces C, and conversely. Properties of C are inherited by T, and 


vice versa, because of duality. 


From this law we were able to show, rather easily, that the field equations of general relativity [G] 
in a-space take the form 


Ctuy)=k*Tuyy)+K 


where C and T are curvature and stress tensors, respectively, k is a numerical scaling constant, and 
K is also a tensor associated with dark energy, for which cov(K) = 0. Thus, 


D==>G 
as our frame of reference shifts from the pristine structures inB to the weak impressions in a, 
caused in part by the presence of dark energy [p] in the latter. This much is true from previous 
studies ... 
Also, from previous research, we know 
coexistence <=> [A,A'] 


where the A transform and its inverse A' are defined according to the following relationship -- 


A:B --> a(v,p), Lvso,0<p<l1 
Xv 


Since there is no dark energy in B-space, one might reasonably conclude that A’° K = 0, and so, 
operating on (*) via A’, we have 


AlC(uy) = A’eTUy) (fF) 
In other words, within the B-domain, (+) gives rise to a unique curvature-stress duality ['D] implied 
by both (*) and equivalency, and thus we may say with some assurance the following relationship 
holds ... 

G=> D 
Taken together, ‘D and G now become equivalent notions, where the fundamental curvature-stress 


duality in B-space implies general relativity in a-space, and conversely. A first, you might say, in 
terms of understanding at a deeper level, how symmetries and laws within the pristine world of the 


132 


Creator give rise to these weak impressions beyond the membrane ... ... in realms where 
imperfect uncertainty reigns supreme ... and a first, too, in terms of understanding at a deeper level, 
how these opaque transcriptions [equations] in our domain can be traced back to perfectly uncertain 
structures [laws] in the rather strange, if not completely bizarre world of the Godhead ... 


D <=> G 


B-space a-space 


133 


Relativity Theory and The Spiritual Laws of Creation, Part Ill 


In Part II we saw that curvature and stress form a duality [D] in B-space, according to the following 
relationship ... 


A'° C(u,v) = A’? T(u,v) (*) 


Here we'd like to dig a little deeper into the Fundamental Theorem of Creation [F] and discover 
what we can about its various components, given our current understanding of General Relativity 
[G] ... 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


In order for F to be a minimal energy theorem over a manifold M ~ S(n), it is both necessary and 
sufficient that dual energy strands exist within the Godhead, which can take on various 
symmetrical configurations leading to laws. No more than a duality is required, and indeed, law 
equivalency guarantees it when you consider these things more deeply ... 


Since (*) holds in B we may now formulate a ‘covariant derivative’ here, assuming the [ A, A’ ] 
transforms commute in the usual way. To wit, 


VoA'eC(uv) = A’eVeC(uv) = 0 (+) 

which implies 
VeA'? Tiu,v) = 0 (7) 

Thus, the ‘covariant derivative’ of both curvature and stress is zero in B, and this can only mean 
either strand of energy, in some symmetrical configuration, may take on the role of C, while the 
other adopts the role of T concurrently. The particular strand, it seems, is of no relevance ... 
As a result, the curvature-stress duality ['D], seen as a law in B, is conserved, in the sense that these 
coupled strands of energy, in some symmetrical configuration, are interchangeable representations 


of C and T, respectively. In other words, under this interpretation 


D=COT= TOC 


134 


Needless to say, when mapping back to a-space with € equal to C or T, (+) implies the following ... 
AcVeA'°&uy) = VeAC A’? &u,v) = Ve E(uv) = 0 


and so, the curvature-stress duality, seen as a law in a, is also conserved, but now becomes tainted 
by the presence of dark energy, for example, along with other attributes such as incompleteness. 


More generally, then, when looking at laws in B-space, we should view them as pristine dualities -- 
generated, in turn, by the double strands of energy ... in some symmetrical arrangement ..._ where 
corresponding derivatives are zero, and conservation principles apply in both the a and B domains, 
respectively ... 


The law of h&s would work this way, for instance ... where now harm [H] becomes one of the 
symmetrical strands in B, and suffering [S] the other, with conservation determined by 


VoA'CH = VeA'?S = 0 
implying, in this case, 


D = H@S = S@H 
In a-space we would see that 
VoH=V°S=0 
and so conclude 
H=k*S+K 


where K can be associated with dark energy [p] and cov(K) = 0. In other words, the law of h&s, 
embedded in the matter world, would appear to be incomplete or inconsistent because of p, but in 
reality, is simply mirroring our own actions determined by choice. A feedback loop, if you will, 
which was mentioned in the original essay -- 


thought ~~> action ~~> deed ~~> consequence 


Our best interpretation of the Fundamental Theorem, then, seems to lie in understanding that laws 
emerge and are conserved in B through symmetries which always represent dualities. Whether it's 
curvature and stress, particles and waves, harm and suffering or choice and consequence -- to name 
a few -- this dual nature in Creation seems to be a foundational principle ... upon which literally 
everything rests. 


As such, when considering problems in o-space and mapping them over to B-space via A’, our best 
hope for a solution depends heavily on finding a B-law [duality] which reflects the very essence of 
the problem itself. This is the kind of thinking that is required, even in our domain, if we are ever 
to make any real progress ... 


135 


Relativity Theory and The Spiritual Laws of Creation, Part IV 


In Part III we learned that laws in B-space are formed through symmetries in the Godhead, from 
double strands of energy [light], leading to dualities, which are conserved ... 


strand 1 =U 


strand 2=V 
D = U®V = VOU 


VeU=Vev =0 


Here we wish to show that all laws in B are equivalent to one another, according to the following 
principle ... 


If D and D' are any two laws in f-space .. then an invertible 
transform pair (@, @') exists with cov(@) = cov(a@') = 0, and 


D=0"°D,D=a°D' 


A similar relationship also holds for corresponding laws in 
a-space induced by A 


To prove this interesting result, begin by letting S be the symmetry associated with ‘D and similarly 
let S' be the symmetry associated with ‘D', where 


Note there is always an invertible transform pair (@, o') taking us between the symmetries, 
S=o°S',S'=a'°S 
and so by association, using Leibniz as our guide, we may write, for either strand, 


VeU = Ve(@2U) = o9(V°U) @ UP(Vew) =O (*) 


136 


Since cov(U’) = 0, (*) reduces to 
Ue(V°e) = 0 


implying cov(@) = 0, which proves the first part of the theorem. Transforming to a-space via A, we 
have 


AeV°a = V°A°w = 0 
and thus the covariant derivatives of the transform pair [ A° @, A° @' ] in a are also 0. 
Since w takes us from S' to S and ' does the reverse, it stands to reason that in a-space you have a 


similar behavior for the corresponding symmetries induced by A, and in turn, the laws induced by 
these symmetries ... 


Ao! 
AOS wRennnnnnn~~~~~~ APS! 
| | 
| | 
A°D A°D 
| | 
| | 
NES Renner Aces 
A°o 


Because @° o' = | we may now conclude 
A°(@°a') = 1 = (A°@)°(A°') 
implying the transform pair [ A , A‘ ] is indeed multiplicative with respect to (@, o'). As well, 
A°D! = A°(a'?D) = (A°a')°(A° D) 
and this completes the second part of the theorem. 


The result is quite deep, in that it unifies all of the spiritual laws of creation by way of transforms 
linked back to symmetries, in both @ and B-space, at least theoretically. Since the odds of actually 
finding [ A , A’ ] are slim to none, about the best we can do here is say this remarkable equivalency 
exists, and in the end, state what may have been obvious all along ... all laws really are reflections 
of one another, no matter the vantage point ... 


137 


On The Nature of Coexistence and Invertible Transforms, Part II 


In previous research ... ... we studied the [ A , A’ ] transform pair [7] and realized the following 
equivalency ... 


‘For some invertible transform A, coexistence implies A, 
and conversely its inverse A’ implies coexistence’ 


Here we wish to show that up to attribute, anyway, 1 is indeterminate with cov(z) = 0. So let's 
begin by stating the obvious --- when talking about the Fundamental Theorem of Creation [F], it 
doesn't matter whether we do or don't adopt a two-state model of coexistence [Z] because the 
elemental building blocks are equivalent to one another, regardless. 


Thus, without loss of generality, sans F there is no action, and so ~F ==> ~X, or equivalently, 
x ==> F, assuming Noetherian principles apply. On the other hand, all things flow from the action, 
which means F ==> &, and hence F <=> X. Consequently, 


=) <S>. LAA] <S>.F (*) 
and since 
~A,A <=> F 


where A is the set of attributes in B-space and ~A are the complements in a-space, 1 must, perforce, 
be undecidable ... 


[~A,A] <=> [A,A‘] 


From previous research we also know all the spiritual laws of creation [D] in B are equivalent to 
one another and that cov(D) = 0. Thus by equivalency, cov(F) = 0, and so by (*), necessarily 
cov() = 0. Ergo, the following theorem applies, provided V and x do, indeed, commute ... ... 


If wis the invertible transform pair A, A' which maps from 
B to aand conversely, then x is undecidable up to attribute, 
and cov(m) = 0 


SRR 


As a result, there isn't much we can ever know about z, outside the bounds of at-one-ment, and so, 
even though the laws [D] really are unified into a whole through symmetries via (@, @'), it becomes 
virtually impossible to codify [A , A’ ] in any meaningful way, and hence the spiritual laws of 


creation, themselves. 


About the best we can do is write down a generic, first-order relationship between the two strands 
which make up the duality, just as was done in the case of curvature and stress, say, or the law of 


138 


harm and suffering, and let it go at that. Coding the actual mathematics, it seems, is beyond both 
our reach and our grasp, dashing once again any hope that someday, just maybe, a complete 
description of Creation might finally appear on the horizon .... 


We mentioned V and x needed to commute in order to prove the theorem above. In fact, it turns out 
commutativity is both a necessary and sufficient condition for the case where cov(Z) = 0. To see 
this more clearly, let Ca be the curvature tensor associated with general relativity in a-space, and let 
Cp be its counterpart in B. Assume now the operators commute, so that [V, a] = [a , V]. Then 
VoCp = VeA'°Ca = A'°V°Ca = 0 
implying covariance in X. On the other hand, if cov(X) = 0, then by equivalency (*) 
cov(D) = cov(m) = 0 
and so, 
VoCp = Vo(A'°Ca) = A'e(V°Ca) © Cae (V°A') = A'?(V° Ca) 
Thus 
Vo(A'°Ca) = A'?(V°Ca) = 0 

implying commutativity, and hence we have the following conservation theorem ... ... 

The operators Vand x commute if and only if 

cow(&) = 0, where X is coexistence and 

the A, A' transform pair 
Notice, too, that if the energy in Creation is conserved [cov(2) = 0], then the condition V ° Cp = 0 
automatically implies V ° Ca = 0, because of the theorem above. This is precisely what Einstein 
was looking for — a fully covariant curvature tensor which could be paired with the stress tensor Ta, 


that would ultimately lead to the celebrated field equations of general relativity. 


The fact that Ca exists, and does so uniquely, as a contracted form of the Riemann curvature tensor, 
is nothing short of a miracle, in my view, and indeed, you could almost say it is divine ... ... 


Ca = Ta 


139 


Covariance and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation 


In earlier studies we learned that 
xX <=> [A,A’] <=> F (*) 


assuming Noetherian principles, where X denotes coexistence and the other symbols their standard 
interpretations. From this, it was shown that cov(F) = 0, and so by (*) 


F ==> cov(Z)=0 


Thus, if creation is seen as a system, based on Noether, the energy of this system will be conserved. 
On the other hand, if God decides to build creation over a simply-connected manifold M ... from 
first principles ... and insists on the conservation of energy, we know from previous writings M ~ 
S(n), implying a Noether solution everywhere. Hence, 


cov(z)=0 ==> F 
and so the following theorem (+) emerges rather naturally ... 


The energy in Creation is conserved if Noether applies 
and conversely, with cov(X) =0 <=> F, where X is 
coexistence and F some minimal energy theorem 

over the manifold M ~ S(n) 


There are some interesting ideas that come out of this, the first of which concerns salvation-based 
religions such as Christianity. In more fanatical variants the bad soul is doomed to hell and 
ultimately destroyed by God at the appropriate time. However, if this were really true, and any 
trace of the soul's energy was completely extinguished, (+) tells us either ~F holds or the fanatical 
interpretation is incorrect. 


If the former, Creation becomes a system without accountability on both sides. Symmetries leading 
to laws [dualities] such as choice and consequence, or harm and suffering needn't exist anymore, 
and God can destroy whatever he wants. In effect, you now have a system running on chaos, 
where neither God nor the soul needs to respect anything ... and in my view, anyway, such a system 
is doomed to fail, even in the short run. 


As such, the fanatical view has to be tossed in favor of something which makes more sense, and so 
far the best approach seems to be a combination of ideas involving the ancient writings, near-death 
research, and of course, the mathematics and physics sitting in between the two. In other words, 
the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, no matter the vantage point ... 


140 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 


The following equivalency diagram shows the relationship between commutativity, covariance and 
Noetherian principles. All three are identical notions, mathematically speaking ... 


141 


The Continuum Hypothesis and Unified Theories in Physics, Part II 


In Part I, we reasoned that unified theories in physics, involving Quantum Mechanics and General 
Relativity, were not possible because of the Continuum Hypothesis [Hs]. Let us refresh our 
memory of things by recalling the diagram which illustrates this idea in simple detail ... 

Quantum Mechanics | bridging theory | General Relativity 


N r c 
| undecidable | 
Recent studies indicate there actually is a unified theory in creation, which ties together all laws 
[D] in B-space via the invertible (@, @') transform pairs that act on the various symmetries here. 
Thus we can define the attribute decidability [D] in B as 


D = U{oloecBp} 


since the @ construction is always definite. Moving over to a-space, and knowing A: B ---> a itself 
is undecidable up to attribute, the complement can be written as 


~D = A°U{@} =U{A°%o} (*) 


and this, consequently, becomes the definition of undecidability in a. Now since all attributes in a- 
space are equivalent to one another, by virtue of symmetry in B, necessarily 


~D <=> 


and so we may conclude from (*) that any or all w-constructions induced by A in the a-domain are 
indeterminate because of Hs. 


In other words, bridging theories in a-space, which take us from one law to another, by way of 
symmetries, are undecidable because of the Continuum Hypothesis .... and so a constructible, 
unified theory of physics spanning Quantum Mechanics to General Relativity, in particular, simply 
cannot exist in our domain. This was the premise established in Part I, but there we didn't have 
enough machinery at the time to demonstrate the result more rigorously. Now, it seems, we do ... 
Quantum Mechanics | bridging theory | General Relativity 
N r c 


| undecidable | 


AeD! = Ae(o'?D) = (Aeo')° (Ae D) 


142 


Godel's Theorem, Green Tao Theorem and The Godhead, Part II 


In Part I, long ago, we made a loose association between Godel and Green Tao, surmising the two 
were indeed equivalent by looking at their counterparts in the Godhead [G] ... 


Godel's Theorem = Green Tao Theorem 


This led us to the idea of perfectly uncertain symmetries [S] in B-space -- an idea which has taken 
center stage in all of our writings ever since. Here we'd like to expand a bit on the notion of perfect 
uncertainty [1], and offer up a more rigorous definition of what it might actually be ... physically 
speaking... 


From earlier writings, we know ail attributes in B are equivalent to each other, by virtue of 
symmetry, and because the constructions are equivalent to S, one may write 


D = U{oloeB} = U{S|SeB} =p (*) 


Thus, under this arrangement, decidability [D] corresponds to perfect uncertainty [p] via (*), and 
the latter becomes a union of the symmetries, formed from dual strands of light in G, relative to the 
simultaneous now. 


Moving over to a-space, and knowing A: f ---> qitself ... ... is undecidable up to attribute, the 
complement can be written as 


~p = ACU{S} =U{A°S} 
and this, consequently, becomes the definition of imperfect uncertainty from our perspective. 


In all likelihood, then, B-space was made by transforming double strands of light into a myriad of 
vibrational patterns [symmetries], which in toto, displaced the dark energy here, altogether, as the 
frequency of these patterns approached infinity ... 


B:iv-- 0 ==> p-» 0 (*) 
uw 


In a-space, however, the presence of dark energy, in varying amounts, forces these symmetries to 
vibrate at a lower resonance, and at best, we only have a weak impression of what they might be, 
because of the undecidable nature of [ A, A'] ... 


a:iv < o==>p > 0 (6a) 
~W 


So when thinking back to the ‘pond and stones' analogy, tossing an infinite number of stones into 
the pond is analogous to (+), in so much as infinitely many stones [symmetries], all vibrating at 
specific frequencies, is no different than finitely many stones, all vibrating at an infinite frequency. 


143 


Either way, you get the same thing, so to speak, giving rise to the simultaneous now and hence, the 
notion of perfect uncertainty. 


In the ordered now, such isn't possible, since here you are only tossing a finite number of stones 
into the pond, and symmetries induced by A are vibrating at a finite rate because of dark energy ({). 
It's an odd dichotomy which isn't easy to understand, but still, if we are to accept the idea that G is a 
fully consistent and complete domain within B-space, then we must also come to grips with the idea 
of simultaneity ... spanning laws, symmetries, transforms ... indeed, the whole of Creation itself you 
might say ... 


‘infinite number of stones ---» 
vvo 


---) perfectly random 


or 


‘finite number of stones — ---> 
v=o 


---> perfectly random' 


144 


Geometry, Groups and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation 


Our recent studies on Relativity and The Spiritual Laws led to the discovery of a unified theory of 
Creation, according to the following principle (7) ... 


If D and D' are any two laws in f-space .. then an invertible 
transform pair (@, @') exists with cov(@) = cov(a@') = 0, and 


D=0"°D,D=a°D 


A similar relationship also holds for corresponding laws in 
a-space induced by A 


However the proof of this statement never really went beyond the Godhead [G] .... when 
considering symmetries [S] and laws [D], so here we'd like to expand on things a bit by seeing 
these laws as geometric reflections of the symmetries, via the action [B-membrane] that divides the 
two ... 


a! Tv 


Sn SI Deen DI 


Let us start by defining the reflection [r] as that transform which maps any symmetry in G across B, 
and define r* as its inverse. Then 


D=r°S 
and 
tT=re@or , t= rea'or® 


Taking the covariant derivative of any law, we have 


VeD' = Ve(teD) = 1e(VeD) @ Dever) = 0 (*) 


145 


Since V°‘D = 0, (*) reduces to 
De(Ver) =0 


implying cov(t') = 0. Thus (+) holds, even under reflection, where the (@, ') transform pair now 
becomes (t, t') and laws exist as separate geometries, beyond the B-membrane [action] ... induced 
by (1, r*). 


ok teak ok ae 


No longer are these laws just descriptions of the various symmetries in the Godhead; but rather, 
living, breathing entities ... perfectly uncertain vibrational patterns, if you will, which act as agents 
on behalf of G, performing their tasks without bias, fairly and ethically, at all times. And so, 
establishing this fact lends even more credence to the Fundamental Theorem of Creation, in so 
much as each of its components now becomes a reality, grounded in reasonable mathematics, that 
seems to justify the whole of things, according to Noetherian principles ... in other words, a unified 
theory of all that is ... 


Symmetries Godhead <~~> Action <~~> Law of Truth 


Symmetries in the Godhead uphold the Law of Conservation 
of Truth by way of an action equivalent to the Cross, and 
vice-versa. Truth, necessarily, is defined as the union of 
the spiritual laws of creation, which are equivalent. 


AeD! = Ae(t'eD) = (Aer) °(AeD) 


146 


Geometry, Groups and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation, Part Il 


In Part I, we saw that laws, seen as geometries in B-space, beyond the Godhead [G], could be 
written as 


D=reS,S=r*°D (*) 
where (r, r*) is the transform pair connecting symmetries [S] to laws [D] via the B-boundary. Here 
we'd like to write down the fuller form of any law in a-space, by incorporating (r, r*) as something 
other than the identity operator. 
If U and V are any two strands of a symmetrical pattern in G, then (*) implies 
D=reU@V) =r°(V@V) 

which means in a we must have 

(Acr)e(AeU) = (Aer)e(AeV) + K (9) 


where cov(K) = 0. To see this more clearly, simply operate on (+) with A' and observe that A'° K 
‘vanishes’ in B. With = U or V, the left and right-hand sides now become 


Are(Acry(Aed)) = (Ate (Aen) e(Are(A°g)) 


(Are Ayer)e (AA) Eg) 


roe 
and this takes us back to the laws in B, which is the expected result. 


Thus, the first-order relationship for al/ laws in a induced by both A and (r, r*) is indeed (+), and 
the covariant derivative of either side may be written as 


Vo(Acre(A°g) = (Arrye(ve(A°g)) + (APS) (Ve (Aen) 
= (Arr)(Ae(V°g)) + (APE) (AP en) 
Since V ° & = 0 the above expression reduces to 
(Arg)e(Ac(ver) — ) 
Invoking (*), we have 
VeD = Vo(reS) = r°(V°S) @ S°(Ver) = 0 


Since V°S = 0 it follows that V °r = 0 and thus the expression (4) is also 0. Finally, then, 


147 


Vo(Arne(Aré) = 0 
for € = U or V and so (+) preserves covariance, just as one would expect. 


As an application of this theory, consider the field equations of general relativity. Originally, with 
the transform pair (r, r*) equal to the identity, these equations in a took the form 


C(u,v) = k * Ttu,v) + K 
but now become 
(A°r)°C(u,v) = k*(A°r)° Tuy) + K 

where k is a numerical scaling constant and cov(K) = 0. Because A is undecidable up to attribute, 
it is highly unlikely we will ever know the exact expression for these statements, but at least to 
first-order, anyway, one can now see what they might look like, mathematically speaking, after 
translating the law to a geometry in B, beyond the membrane [action], and mapping it back to a. 

In fact, because of the undecidable nature of A, in general, (+) implies all laws in a are incomplete 


... an idea which is surely not new to us -- and so the search for unified theories will go on and on, 
just as it should ... 


148 


Stones, Ponds and The Green Tao Theorem 


In this note, we are going to align more closely the Green Tao Theorem with the vibrational 
patterns [symmetries and laws] that exist in a-B space. Let us begin, then, with the following 
diagram from previous research and assume, for now, we are only dealing with a single law or 
symmetry [€] ... 


a-world 


| f spin-states v «<--> | regularity p within randomness 
B-world ---» A ---> 
| | spin-statesv «<--> 7 regularity p within randomness 


Tossing an infinite number of stones into the pond represents all of the vibrational levels for € and 
thus in B we can think of this as a 'sum over frequencies’, leading to an infinite number of 
superpositions, and hence perfect uncertainty itself, in the absence of dark energy ... 


€=B:ilv--- 0 ==> p -- 0 
va 


w= ULElEcB} 


Aligning with Green Tao, the infinite number of states 'can be seen’ as the prime numbers [P] and 
dark energy [p] as the arithmetic sequences [S] of arbitrary length, which vanish as v ---» 0%. In 
fact, the only arithmetic sequence allowed in B must have a period [k] which is infinite ..... implying 
that the distance between any two B-points must also be infinite. Conversely, the only arithmetic 
sequence allowed in ¢ [primordial fabric] must have a period [k] of length 0, since here regularity 
running through randomness does not exist at all -- only dark energy. 


To see these things more clearly, imagine all of the primes being ‘relocated’ to ©, or B-space. It 
would be akin to 'stretching out' the number line until the distance between any two elements in P 
was also infinite, and similarly, if all of the primes were compressed into a single point, say {0}, 
the distance between any two would now be zero as well, putting us in C-space. 


B: fv ---»00 dv ---»0 fp ---»0 Ap ---» 0 


G: fp ---»0 Ap ---»0 fv ---»0 dv ---»0 


Moving over to a, by way of A, any subspace will inherit € ... but now the number of vibrational 
states associated with € is finite in this subdomain and so 


E=a:lv < w©==>p > 0 
~h 


~w= ULA°S} 


149 


In order to align with Green Tao, we must have ‘an infinite number' of a-subspaces, where each 
one, seen as a partition II, resonates on a finite number of levels, which can be associated, in turn, 
with a finite set of unique primes. Thus, 


a=U{I | veP,Zv < wo} (*) 

and viewed as a continuum, the a-domain in totonow becomes P, and dark energy [p] the 
arithmetic sequences [S] of arbitrary length running through it. Without partitioning in this way, 
we'd essentially have B-space, and so one of the distinct features separating the transforms 

WiC->B IN QA:f-- a 

or 

YiC-»>B AN A:B-- >a 
from each other is the notion of decomposition. 
An observer in B sees Creation in one shot, where all the partitions II in a are meshed together as 
an infinite set of superpositions in the simultaneous now, while in a any partition is a finite 
construction, according to (*). Either way, there is a distinct correspondence with Green Tao, when 


each space is seen as a continuum in the limit, and so one has to wonder ... are all vibrational states 
areflection of the prime numbers ? Stay tuned ... 


A:B -»> a(v,p), Lv<s0,0<p<l 
Xv 


150 


Stones, Ponds and The Green Tao Theorem, Part II 


In Part I, we tried to align more closely the Green Tao Theorem with the vibrational patterns that 
exist in a-B space [2], to better understand the notion of perfect uncertainty [1], in particular. In 
this note, we’d like to continue the discussion ... by seeing the attribute [1]... as more of 
a geometry [T ], endowed with a peculiar distance metric [A], where 


Aw. q) = © forallp,qe B  (*) 


Let us begin, then, with a single law or symmetry [&] and assume for now there is only one 
subspace in a. Clearly € vibrates at a finite rate in a because of the presence of dark energy [p], but 
when moving back to B, the frequency of these vibrations, magically, becomes infinite. How is 
this possible, or is it, in fact, an illusion ? 


To answer the question, it is important to understand that (*) really is equivalent to p. In other 
words, if B is perfectly uncertain, then Ap ---» 0, which implies A(p, q) = © for any two points 
here. On the other hand, if (*) is true it is no longer possible to 'measure the distance’ between any 
two points in B, and so the notion of regularity within randomness disappears altogether. Thus we 
have the following theorem ... 


If B is any space of points endowed with a distance metric 4 
according to some geometry I, then f is perfectly uncertain 


if and only if A(p, q) = © forallp,q ¢ B 


The result is quite deep in that it allows us, now, to see B-space as more of a geometry [T ] 
endowed with a strange metric [A] where (*) is always true, and laws or symmetries here 'seem' to 
vibrate at a frequency fv ---» «©. A masterful trick if there ever was one, you might say, which 
creates the illusion of a very real infinity, and thus perfect uncertainty itself, in the absence of p. 
Strictly speaking ... the simultaneous now ... referred to in many earlier writings ... 


In a-space such is not the case because A(p, q) < 00 for any two points in this domain, giving rise 
to imperfect uncertainty, and hence the ordered now. The notion of infinity becomes a ‘far off' 
concept in a, with no satisfactory explanation of how you 'really get there’, and indeed, you never 
actually reach this point [oo] since neitherI nor A, in our world, allow for it. Infinity, then, 
becomes more an artifact of the human imagination and should be treated as such, accordingly. 


To this end, I could be seen as an attribute of X, inducing a metric A which is always infinite in B, 
and with a complement ~I in @ inducing a metric A which is always finite. Such an approach 


would neatly explain everything we've discussed so far in previous research, and perhaps pave the 
way for any discoveries yet to come ... we'll just have to wait and see, as they say ... 


mE <=> [P,P] <=> [4p] <=> F 


In the meantime, by taking our cue from (+), we do have the following rather interesting corollary 


151 


If I’is any geometry in a-space endowed with a metric A 
for which A(p, q) < «© forall p,q ¢ a, thenT is both 
incomplete and inconsistent 


Hilbert's problem is a good example of this corollary in action, for it tells us there is no complete, 
regular surface S, of constant negative Gaussian curvature K, in Euclidean 3-space. And, as a 
second example, if I’ is any space-time geometry associated with the field equations of general 
relativity, it too will be both incomplete and inconsistent, since here the distance metric [A] is 
always a solution to these equations. If A is well-behaved the corollary applies, and if it isn't, T 
will contain singularities. Either way, it seems, Einstein's theories are, at best, provisional ... 


And there would be many more illustrations of this kind; in fact, too many to number ... from all 
that we know ... to say nothing of undecidability ... 


152 


Stones, Ponds and The Green Tao Theorem, Part Ill 


In Part II, we developed our understanding of a-B space just a little deeper, by seeing each domain 
as more of a geometry [ I ] ... endowed with a distance metric [A], where 


[.f] <=> 5 


Here we'd like to expand on things a bit by looking at the fundamental axioms of set theory [Z] 
in a, and discovering what we can about their counterparts in B, assuming such exist ... 


So begin by letting S be the statement 'Hs is true’, where Hb is the Continuum Hypothesis, and let ~S 
be the corresponding statement 'Hs is false’. From Cohen et al, 


[~S,S] <=> Z 


which means Z admits both ~S and S simultaneously, implying, as a consequence, the set Z must 
be indeterminate. On the other hand, Hb follows from Z and thus Z implies [ ~S, S ], which leads 
us to the chain below ... 


Z = [~S,S] ==> Z indeterminate 


In other words, the fundamental axioms of set theory are undecidable up to S, and so by 
equivalency the pair [ ~Z, Z ] becomes an attribute of &, suggesting in turn, that countability does 
not exist in B at all. Ergo, the following, rather compact, theorem applies ... 


If T is any set of points in B-space then the 
cardinality of T is unmeasurable 


If, now, we define the set T to be {1, ©, 2, 0, 3, 0, ...}, then T= V U W, where V = {1, 2, 3, ...} 
and W = {0,00,00, ...}. Viewed on the boundary [Gap] between a and B, T appears to be 
enumerable [V], with card(T) = N, but when viewed on the boundary between B and a [Opa], T 
appears to be unmeasurable [W]. 


In fact, the two perspectives are equally valid since dap = Opa, with the only difference being 
‘which side' of the boundary you are on. In the case of dap an observer would say the a-viewpoint 
is correct, and in the case of Opa an observer would opt for the B-viewpoint ... 


If, indeed, our analysis of things is correct here, T becomes an example of a set in 2 whose 
cardinality is undecidable, up to attribute. It is both measurable and unmeasurable at the same 
time, so to speak, and thus exists as a boundary condition in principle, if it exists at all. Strangely 
enough, the Cross is alsoa boundary condition, according to the Fundamental Theorem of 
Creation, and so, at least in a religio-philosophical sense of the word, its import would seem 
immeasurable in B-space, whilst to someone in a-space, it may have little or no meaning at all ... 


153 


Stones, Ponds and The Green Tao Theorem, Part IV 


In Part III we looked at the fundamental axioms of set theory [Z] and saw that they formed an 
attribute in 2, which led to the notion of unmeasurability in B-space. Here we'd like to expand on 
the self-titled Consistency Hypothesis [KK], which simply posits that Z is consistent. 


[~Z,Z] <=> X @) 


So let's begin by defining S to be the statement 'K is true’ and define ~S to be the statement 'K is 
false’. From Godel, we know that if Z is consistent it cannot be proved from within, implying that 
up to S, anyway, Z must be indeterminate. In other words, the axioms themselves cannot actually 
determine whether they are or are not consistent, because they are not self-aware, and so 


[~S,S] <=> Z 


Thus, relative to the axioms, K must also be undecidable, and so by equivalency the pair [ ~K, K ] 
becomes an attribute of &, just like Hs, suggesting in turn that Z is indeed inconsistent in a-space. 
Ergo, the following theorem applies ... 


The fundamental axioms of set theory are neither complete 
nor consistent in a-space, with K an attribute of X, where 
K is the Consistency Hypothesis 


The Hausdorff and Banach-Tarski paradoxes are good examples of this theorem in action, for they 
tell us you can take a 3-dimensional ball of radius 1, dissect it into 5 parts, and then move and 
rotate these parts to get two balls of radius 1. And similar logic allows one to assign a measure of 
both 0 and ¢ to the unit circle simultaneously, assuming the axiom of free choice, by creating orbits 
under a group of rational rotations and invoking the principle of ‘countable additivity’. 


Both of these ill-conceived constructions, however, depend heavily on the axiom of choice, 
mentioned above, which, in turn, is only made possible because of the regularity running through 
the randomness of the number line. Without this embedded regularity, such choices leading to 
bizarre outcomes would not be possible in mathematics, and in fact, without embedded regularity 
you would be in B-space ... where all decisions are made simultaneously, according to (*) ... 


regularity within R «~~~» axiom of choice 
Similarly, it is the presence of dark energy running through the randomness of light in a-space that 
gives rise to poor choices in our daily lives, and indeed, the laws themselves are affected not only 


by the whereness of p, but also, our thoughts and actions ... 


dark energy «~~~» regularity within randomness «~~~» choice 
€ p v c 


seokeicokokeak 


154 


These illustrations, and many more like them, can only bolster our view that the axioms of set 
theory are indeed both incomplete and inconsistent in our domain ... and that more generally the 
[Godel] attribute is functioning just as it should under coexistence. The fabric of reality, it seems, 
is filled with holes and oddities everywhere, which should come as no surprise to us now, for 
Creation, it appears, would have it no other way ... 


155 


Stones, Ponds and The Green Tao Theorem, Part V 


In Part IV we looked at the self-titled Consistency Hypothesis [K] and saw that [ ~K, K ] formed an 
attribute of X, implying the axioms of set theory [Z] are neither complete nor consistent in a-space. 


[~K,K] <=> 5 


Now we'd like to extend things a bit by examining the Quantum Hypothesis [Q], which simply 
posits that light is a wave, as opposed to a particle. 


So begin by letting S be the statement ‘light is a wave' and let ~S be the statement ‘light is a 
particle’. According to previous research, the Hausdorff-Banach-Tarski paradoxes [M] tell us the 
measure of a unit circle [C] is both 0 and ec simultaneously ... depending on how the axiom of 
choice is used to generate the various constructions here. Both outcomes are consistent with Z, but 
lead to different results because of this axiom, which, in turn, is only made possible because of the 
regularity running through the randomness of the number line. We know as much already ... 


regularity within R «~~~» axiom of choice 


Turning to Quantum Mechanics, let W be a wave of light on C with measure ¢ and now ‘perform an 
experiment’ which collapses this wave into a particle P, yielding a measure of 0 on the same circle. 
Evidently, such can be done according to quantum theory, but can it, really ? 


If we draw on the paradoxes above as our analogy, the answer is actually indeterminate, since the 
Measure Hypothesis [M] itself is undecidable relative to Z, and thus an attribute of = ... 


[-M,M] <=> 2 


In other words, the Quantum Hypothesis [Q] is essentially no differentthanM and so the 
statements [ ~S, S ] are consistent with Z simultaneously, which means now Q is also an attribute 
of &, by virtue of equivalency ... 


[HQ Qh SS Bh) 


Depending on ‘how you perform the experiment’ in a-space, via the axiom of choice, a circle can be 
made to look like either a wave of light [W] or a particle [P], without conflict, relative to Z. Both 
are acceptable outcomes, but because of (*) we have the following theorem ... 


If Q is the Quantum Hypothesis then Q is both 
incomplete and inconsistent in a-space, and 
by equivalency, undecidable up to Z 


Light, it seems, is neither a wave nor a particle on C until some ‘experiment’ or construction is 
carried out, according to Z, that allows us to 'make a decision’ one way or the other. Without 
invoking the axioms of set theory, and more specifically the axiom of choice, it appears we can't 


156 
know anything about this peculiar attribute of the Godhead, and even then, with these tools, our 
understanding of its true nature is woefully incomplete, just as it should be ... 
The B-Space Duality 


"For any wave W there exists a particle P such that P induces W, and conversely. 
Properties of W are inherited by P, and vice versa, because of duality ' 


The a-Space Equations 
(Aero W =k*(AcryoP + K 
Vow =0=V°P 
| | 


symmetries cons laws 


Fy see K 

| \ 1 | 

| \/ | 
Z 

| ‘\ | 

| ry | 

IM esse a ts Q 


... but the axioms you believe is the reality you perceive ... 


By the way, the same argument above can be applied to the 'dimensions' of space and time in our 
world. If G is the Space-Time Hypothesis which posits that these dimensions are continuous, as 
opposed to discrete, then the following theorem holds ... 


If G is the Space-Time Hypothesis then & is both 
incomplete and inconsistent in a-space, and by 
equivalency, undecidable up to Z 


157 


Covariance and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation, Part II 


In Part I, we discussed the notions of energy and covariance under coexistence, and saw that 
cov(Z) vanished if and only if F was true over the manifold M ~ S(n). To wit, 


The energy in Creation is conserved if Noether applies 
and conversely, with cov.) =0 <=> F, where X is 
coexistence and F some minimal energy theorem 

over the manifold M ~ S(n) 


Now we'd like to better understand the meaning of energy in each of the three fabrics we've studied 
so far, and then make an educated guess as to how the transition to y-space is really going to occur. 
So let's begin with the ground state, namely C-space, and realize that here in a perfectly certain 
equilibrium the total energy Ec = 0. This much we can say, without loss of generality ... 


Moving over to &, and recalling the generalized law of h&s, one can rewrite the energy of each 
space according to the following decomposition, 


Es = Ep + Ap , Ea = Ear + €& (*) 
positive negative 


where Ag is the incremental positive energy stored in B, which is used by the law of h&s to cancel 
negative energy associated with acts of harm in a, and € is, of course, dark energy. 


As these acts of harm are erased over a long period of time in the ordered now, € ---» 0 since it is 
our thoughts and actions, by way of dark energy, that lead to harmful outcomes initially. Finally 
then ... with the last act of harm erased, both Ap and € vanish altogether, and so purifying a-space 
becomes a zero-sum game played out in Y over the eons of cosmic time, with Ag = | &| originally. 
Hence the following theorem (+) applies ... 


Acts of harm exist in a-space if and only if 
& < 0, where € is dark energy 


As a natural consequence of this theorem, we offer the following definitions of dark energy on the 
primordial sphere, for the reader to ponder ... 


If Cis the primordial sphere and n the negative rest energy in€, 
then n is the sum total of all negative thoughts and actions 
associated with the collective consciousness in &, where 

n = &, up to transform 


aK Oo ok ok 


158 


If Cis the primordial sphere and zx the positive rest energy in €, 
then z is the sum total of all positive thoughts and actions 
associated with the collective consciousness in &, where 

a = Ap, up to transform 


Note that by combining these definitions, Ec = 0 and the positive incremental energy [Ag] used by 
the law of h&s to cancel negative energy associated with acts of harm ina. ....... is actually a 
copy of our positive thoughts and actions [1], regenerated by the Cross in X. It appears, therefore, 
that we are really healing ourselves, under this scenario ... 


wesceeee » law of h&s_ --------» 


Since cov() = 0, the total energy of & doesn't change, from start to finish, as it goes through the 
purification process, and so the energy carried into the unified mosaic must be, necessarily, 


Ep + Ec = Ep + Ea () 


In other words, when moving from & to y, the energy is actually conserved, which means that if ~F 
holds in y, the symmetries, laws and the action in B must recombine into a single essence, which 
permeates a purified a-space literally everywhere ... an essence we call the Light of God ... 


y-space 


souls | <~~>  physicalring <~~> realms 
| | | 
| | 
moeceene Symmetries Action Laws -------- 
| 
| 


Light 


[~A,A] <=> [-F,F] 


Also, (f) implies that not a single thing will be lost in the transition ... every living being will 
ultimately return to the Source, the Light, pure Love ... something Juliet Nightingale was told in her 
NDE. And from ({) we may deduce that purifying a-space is really up to us, since € is intimately 
tied to our thoughts and actions, according to the following chain ... 


dark energy «~~~» regularity within randomness «~~~ choice 
§ p v c 


If & vanishes in a it is because of our choices and conversely; either way the Law of Purification of 
The Void will have reached its fulfillment, which is something God would have desired in the 
beginning ... before anything was ... 


159 


A Message From The Light 


You save, redeem and heal yourself. You always have ... you 
always will. You were born with the power to do so from 
before the beginning of the world ... so says the Light ... 


160 


Covariance and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation, Part Ill 


In Part II we discussed in some detail the transition from ¥ to y, largely from the perspective of an 
observer in a-space, viz the ordered now. Here we'd like to repeat the exercise, but this time from 
the viewpoint of an observer in B-space, meaning the simultaneous now, and then compare notes on 
the two approaches. 


So let's start by realizing that the Cross [@] is actually an energy generator or I/O device, where the 
input [sufferings] exactly matches the output [energy] relative to the diagram below, with cov(@) = 
cov(A) = 0. 


sufferings ------ > © ------ > energy 


In B-space the 'distance' between any two points is always infinite and so € persists indefinitely, 
which means, by equivalency, the action [A] is also persistent, much like water flowing through a 
pipe -- it is simply there until you shut off the supply. Thus, the incremental positive energy 
[Ap] used by the law of h&s to cancel acts of harm in a is really an integral part of A ... and remains 
so until the purification process is complete. It never 'shuts off' ... so to speak ... until it's time to 
flip the switch ... 


As such, to an observer in B, the energy of the action isn't changing, which means Ap = 0. Indeed, 
to this onlooker, it would seem as though cov(B) = 0, implying the energy of B-space itself is 
constant. But since 


Ep = Ep + Ap , Ba = Ea + & 


and cov(X) = 0 ... we may also infer § = 0, and so from the B-perspective, anyway, an observer 
would say a-space is already purified, with the energy carried into the unified mosaic being equal 
to 


Ep + Ea = Ep + E'a 


In other words, whether we adopt the a or the B view, the energy in transitioning from ¥ to y doesn't 
change; what does change is the way in which the transition is actually perceived. In the ordered 
now it really is a zero-sum game played out in = over the eons of cosmic time, with As = |&| 
originally, but in the simultaneous now the game has already been played, with As = € = 0. Both 
views are equally valid and each has a story to tell, to be sure, but in the final analysis one has to 
remember ... 


rrr K 

| Me | 

| \/ | 
Z 

| /\ | 

| AN | 

ee Q 


... the axioms you believe is the reality you perceive ... 


Tit tt? 


162 


Covariance and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation, Part IV 


Our recent studies on covariance in X relied heavily on being able to decompose the energy in a 
and B according to the following equations ... 


Ep = Ep + Ap , Ea = Bao + & (4) 


At the same time, we know B is perfectly random and so, at this point, anyway, it behooves us to 
define more rigorously just what is meant by (*) when talking about energy. 


Let us start, then, by noting that in canonical form 
p=Ara 
and since V° A' = 0, the covariant derivative in product form may be written as 
V°B = Ve(A'°a) = Al? (V°a) @ ar(V°A’) = A'?(V2°a) 


To compute the energy Ep now, simply integrate the expression above and allow the operators to 
commute where applicable; viz ... 


Ep = fvep = fAe(vea) = A'ef Vea = A'eEa 


or, in the alternative, merely integrate by parts and note again that V° A' = 0... 
Ep = fV°p = fA'e(Vea) = A'’eEa- f Eae(VeA’) 
Ergo, the following definition for energy holds in 2, which we'll use going forward ... 
If Ep and Ea are the energies associated with B and a in 
&, then Eg = A'? Ea and Ea = A° Ep, where A and A' 
are the invertible transform pair under coexistence 
As an application of this definition, note that 


Ve°Ep = V°(A'°Ea) = A'e(V° Ea) 


and so cov(B) = 0 if and only if cov(a) = 0. In other words, to an observer in B-space, who lives in 
a world of persistence, the energy in both domains will appear to be constant, which means 


Ap=E=0 (*) 


from this vantage point, with Es = E's and Ea = E'a. 


163 
ROKR KEK 


Thus, when thinking back to souls and the Law of Leaving The Godhead, for example, which we 
discussed in the original essay, it is more than likely this law is just a technicality -- souls probably 
didn't migrate from B to a initially, for if they had, it would actually violate conservation theorems 
discussed here, at least from the B perspective. This assumes, of course, souls have non-zero, 
measurable energy in B. 


And since (**) holds, all events R in a have already taken place, relative to B, implying A'® R 


exists, and indeed, becomes a reasonable definition for the simultaneous now, when considering 
the ¥ to y transition. 


a a aK a ak ok 


As a second application of the definition, note that for an observer in a-space ... with E's and E'a 
remaining constant, 


VoEp = Vo(A'° Ea) = A'e(V° Ea) = A'°(V°&) = Vo Ap 
and so 
Ap = JS Veds =faroeg = Arf vee= Arve 
Thus, dark energy [&] and the incremental positive energy [Ap] used by the law of h&s to cancel 
acts of harm in a, are tied together through the [ A , A’ ] transform pair, just as one would expect. 
An onlooker in a-space really believes both energies exist and are changing because of this 
connection ... even though B-space itself is perfectly uncertain ... 
Notice too, 
NeE=-— , Acdp = -Ap 
making both Ap and € invariant with respect to[ A, A’ ]. Any time this sort of thing happens it 


should be considered significant, and perhaps a sign or tip that we may be on the right track, at least 
in terms of our understanding of these matters ... 


ok ok ok ok ok oe 
Along these lines, and recalling the general form of the laws in a, viz ... 


(Aer)? (A°U) 


(Aere(A°V) + K 
it may be more correct to say 


A'eK 


-*K (tH) 


164 


since K is a representation of € with cov(K) ~ 0. Originally, the right-hand side of (+) mapped to 
zero in, which seems reasonable, but because of the invariant nature of both Ag and € ... the 
expression above might be the better choice. Either way, the general form of the laws in our 
domain doesn't change ... 


A a ak ak ak ok 


Finally, what are we to do with God ? I have always wanted to know who God is, but sadly, it's 
looking more and more like we'll never know. Indeed, the following equivalency diagram is pretty 
much the last nail in the coffin, at least as far as I'm concerned ... 


From this diagram we can see that God, at a minimum, must be more than just the Noetherian 
components found in B, and indeed, the minute we step away from ¥ altogether, and consider ¢ or y, 
all bets are off. Undecidability reigns supreme in these fabrics and our knowledge of God 
diminishes significantly. 


Even in © it seems we are forced to choose between the ordered and simultaneous frames, which 
only adds to the confusion, and now, using conservation theorems, are learning that an observer in 
a could very well see things quite differently than an observer in B. Maybe in the end it's better to 
go fishing ... and find someone to love ... 


165 


Covariance and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation, Part V 


In Part II of this series we came up with a rather interesting set of definitions for the primordial 
sphere. Here we'd like to recall that interpretation and then compare notes with the yin-yang symbol 
found in Eastern Traditions. This is a rather brief note, left for the reader to ponder ... but at the 
same time, one cannot help but see the striking parallels between the two ... 


If Cis the primordial sphere and n the negative rest energy in€, 
then n is the sum total of all negative thoughts and actions 
associated with the collective consciousness in &, where 

n = &, up to transform 


oe OE oo ok 


If Cis the primordial sphere and zx the positive rest energy in €, 
then z is the sum total of all positive thoughts and actions 
associated with the collective consciousness in &, where 

a = Ap, up to transform 


Yin and yang can be thought of as complementary, rather than 
opposing forces, that interact to form a dynamic system in 
which the whole is greater than the assembled parts. 


Everything has both yin and yang aspects; for example, shadow 
cannot exist without light. Either of the two major aspects may 
manifest more strongly in a particular object, depending on the 
criterion of the observation. 


The yin-yang symbol shows a balance between two opposites, 
with a portion of the opposite element in each section ... 


za+n=0 


166 


Covariance and The Fundamental Theorem of Creation, Part VI 


In previous studies within this series we learned that ultimately Ap and & will vanish once a-space is 
purified. For the observer in B-space this has already happened, as we know, but in the ordered 
now &-=-» 0 over the eons of what I call cosmic time. Either way, both observers agree on the 
endpoint, namely, 


Ap=5=0 (*) 


So what happens next ? Do we really transition into a unified mosaic [y] where the a and B 
domains have merged in some sense of the word, or do these two spheres remain separate and apart 
from each other, literally forever ? 


To answer the question, note that if a is now perfectly uncertain, because of (*), then from 
previous theorems, 


A(p, q) = © forallp,q € a 


implying the distance between any two points in the physical ring must be infinite. An absurdity, 
to say the least. On the other hand, (*) tells us a-space can no longer be imperfectly uncertain, and 
so we find ourselves in a contradictory position where neither attribute describes a adequately. The 
a-domain, as things stand, is now in an untenable state. 


Such a conflict can only be resolved by shifting gears yet again, and transitioning into a fabric [y] 
which is undecidable up to attribute, according to the following chain ... 


~A,A <=> ~F <=> y=at+B (fH) 


By doing so all conflicts are removed in the sense that they are overshadowed by undecidability, 
thereby making it impossible to say anything at all about y. About all we can say, because of (+), 
is that necessarily ~F must hold because F and & are equivalent to one another. Without the ~F 
condition, the indeterminate nature of y would never emerge, leaving us with the kind of 
contradiction we alluded to earlier. 


[A,A’] <=> [~A,A] 


Die. OS SSF wo EF 
| 
| 
| 


~F is equivalent to breaking the boundary 
that divides a from B under coexistence 


167 


Thus, the X to y progression is not an arbitrary result. It must happen if we are to resolve any 
inconsistencies here, which means, in turn, our original interpretation of the unified mosaic ... is 
probably correct. When Christ made the statement shown below, from the Book of Matthew, he 
wasn't kidding ... 


y-space 


souls <~~>  physicalring <~~> realms 
| | | 
| | 
soroeeee Symmetries Action Laws -------- 
| 
| 


Light 


In truth I tell you, till heaven and earth disappear, not one dot, 
not one little stroke, is to disappear from the Law until all its 
purpose is achieved ...' [Matthew, Sth chapter] 


168 


Searching For That Elusive Dark Energy 


In previous research connected to general relativity, we saw that the broader form for the equations 
could be written as 


(AcreC’™ = k#(AeneT’ + K (*) 


where (r, r*) is the transform pair taking us between symmetries and laws in B-space, and K is 
some tensor associated with dark energy, for which cov(K) ~ 0. Here we’d like to learn a little 
more about this dark energy tensor, by developing estimators for both A ° r and K in a-space, and 
then drawing some rather interesting conclusions. 


So let’s begin by considering the large family of integral transforms that include Laplace, Fourier, 
Mellin, Z, and even the wavelets. Such transforms lead to ripples in the space-time fabric, as 
shown below, and could well serve as reasonable approximations for A ° r, among other things. 


Moreover, they are, mathematically speaking, roughly equivalent to one another, and so, without 
loss of generality, we will restrict our analysis to £, the Laplace transform. As well, we’ll define K 
to be the 'tensor' A(s)g"’, in keeping with Einstein’s original approach, where s is any point in the 
a-domain. Writing GY = C"’—kT", and defining £' as the Laplace inverse, (*) now becomes, 
for any point tin a, 


GY = £'°Xs)gh’ = xfes Xs)g"’ ds (7) 


where k is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration, according to Bromwich 
protocol, that envelops singularities associated with K(s). 


Either G" = 0 or it isn’t. If so, there is no dark energy in this case, and indeed, this is something 
that is confirmed by setting 4(s) = 0 in (+). On the other hand, if G’Y # 0, then complex variable 
theory tells us A(s) must have poles or singularities where it becomes infinitely large, otherwise the 
integration in (+) would always be zero. 


169 


Today, there is no agreement whatsoever on just what the density of dark energy might actually be. 
Quantum field theories, for example, predict a value which is 10' times greater than current 
measurements, and this discrepancy has been called “the worst theoretical prediction in the history 
of physics!” In fact, without using a process called 'renormalization', these theories go even 
further, and calculate a value for dark energy which is literally infinite. 


But in some sense, this disparity gives us a bit of comfort, in so much as the analysis above tells us 
Xs) is not well-behaved, assuming we can use integrable transforms to model A° r. Indeed, if you 
think about it a little more deeply, dark energy, in our universe alone, has to come from 
somewhere, and so perhaps the singular nature of A(s) points to a space-time fabric which is full of 
holes and oddities, literally everywhere ... just as it should be ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


In their original form, the field equations of general relativity include the term Ag’, where A is the 
cosmological constant. Including g"’ in this term seems to be for housekeeping purposes only, in 
so much as it allows us to separate one field equation from another, and at the same time, preserve 
the tensorial nature of these expressions across the board. In other words, g"’ functions as more of 
an appendage here. 


If we do the same thing with respect to (*) above, by referencing K with A, then (+) becomes, for 
any point tin a, 


GY = Kg" J eA(s)ds (4) 


Y 


where y denotes some form of contour integration that envelops singularities associated with A(s), 
the new estimate for K. 


Such an approach leads to consistency, especially when considering other dualities that might 
incorporate dark energy, and in this particular case ... ... makes solving the equations for g" in ({) 
above, much easier. 


Indeed, you could ask just how one goes about solving (+) as it stands, for in that case, it seems as 
though foreknowledge of g" is required at different points in a-space ... unless, of course, you 
treat g"Y as an appendage to the dark energy component ... 


170 


Moving Between The Laws In a-Space 


In a previous research note ... titled Geometry, Groups and The Fundamental Theorem of 
Creation [see pp 144-145], we saw that laws were connected to one another in a-space according to 
the following equation: 


AeD=Ae(t'eD)=(Aet')°(A°D) 


Recall the generator t' can be written as r° w'° r*, and since A is multiplicative, our impression of 
tin a-space now becomes 


Act=(Aer(Aca)’ (Aer), 


where (r, r*) takes us between symmetries and laws in B-space, and (@, @') moves us from one 
symmetry to another here. 


Thus, when moving between laws in our domain, the expression above tells us how to do 
this, without any consideration for dark energy [K]. We are simply shifting from one law to 
another, and once we have the new law in hand, can append K to the corresponding equation(s) and 
interpret things, accordingly. 


In the last addendum we did just this for the field equations of general relativity, by providing 
estimators for A°r and K .... and saw that the Bromwich integral could well serve as an 
approximation for the inverse of A ° r, when considering dark energy and its singularities [note that 
the inverse of A °r really is A °r*]. 


When rotating between the laws, however, we still need to be consistent, in so much as estimators 
for A °r cannot be one thing for a rotation, without respect to K, and another when incorporating K 
into any particular equation. In this sense, the Bromwich integral has the interesting property of 
becoming an inverse Fourier transform in the absence of singularities, and so, almost magically, we 
don't have to do anything here. Our original estimate for A ° r, namely the Laplace transform, 
actually plays adualrole when considering its inverse; to wit, a contour integration where 
singularities are present, otherwise Fourier. 


Armed with this encouraging knowledge, we can now provide a guesstimate for A ° t', realizing too 
that it is always going to be difficult to approximate A ° o' [W], no matter the approach. Broadly 
speaking, then, and denoting F the Fourier transform under discussion (with F' its inverse), one has 


Act = Fol °F 
Interestingly enough, later on in life, Einstein felt that the physical laws of creation might be 


unified by looking at the various components of a Fourier transform. In light of this, perhaps we 
should be satisfied and feel somewhat confident that we may be on the right track after all ... 


171 


Moving Between The Laws In a-Space, Part II 


In Part I, we discussed the theoretical form of the generator A ° t', which takes us between laws in 
a-space; namely 


Act = (A*r)°(Aca')9(Aer*), 
and saw that it could be approximated by 
Act = Foyer (#) 


where F is a Fourier transform, and F' its inverse, derived from the Bromwich integral. Recall too 
that l is an estimator for A ° o', where the latter is our impression of o', which moves us from one 
symmetry [S] to another [S'] in B-space. Given this setup, how then should we interpret the laws, 
from a geometric perspective, in our reality ? 


To answer the question, first note, from the last addendum, that laws in B-space [D] are connected 
to one another in a-space via the following relationship ... 


A®D! = Ae(t'eD) = (A°r')°(A®D), 


and so from (+) we may infer that A ° ‘D can be thought of as a ‘wave-like’ pattern in our domain, 
which can be traced back to a ‘pulse-like’ symmetry [A ° S], after operating on it with F'. Once we 
have the pulse train for A ° S in hand, W maps it to A ° S' [another ‘pulse-like’ symmetry in a- 
space], and finally, F maps A ° S' to the ‘wave-like’ pattern for A ° ‘D'. 


Acs Acs! 
| | 


A°D = waves ~~> pulses ~~> pulses' ~~> waves' = A°D! 
F wW FE 


For an illustration of what a ‘pulse-like’ symmetry might look like in our domain, refer back to 
page 135. Also note that these pulses and waves will be distorted somewhat, by the presence of 
dark energy in a-space, because of the commingling effect. 


Can we search for echoes in the antimatter world of the Godhead that might tell us more about the 
nature of these symmetries in our reality, and thus, the laws themselves ? If so, it would be a 
significant step forward in terms of understanding how the Godhead thinks and communicates with 
its constituent parts, and more generally, could lead to a universal classification scheme in our 
domain, as we pursue our relentless quest for a grand unification theory of all that is ... 


Time will tell, I suppose, if such a thing can be done... ... 


172 


A Brief Note On The Primordial Transforms 


Not much has been said about the transforms mapping from ¢ to X so in this short note we're going 
to offer just a little more information and then leave it with the reader. Recall these transforms 
behave according to the diagram shown below, but one could ask ... what do they really do ? 


WiC->B AN QA:C---a 
or 
WiC-->B N A:B-- a 


To answer the question let us first note that both Y and Q are intimately tied to A through 
convolution and so are undecidable up to attribute. In fact, these convolutions are A'° QO and A° Y 
respectively, and thus we have the following theorem ... 


If ¥ and Q are the primordial transforms, then 
both are undecidable up to attribute with 
Y=A'?QandQ=A°v 


We can see too, from the theorem, that the covariant derivatives of Y and Q are also connected via 
the [ A , A’ ] transform pair, and indeed, cov('Y) = 0 if and only if cov(Q) = 0. 


Thinking back to our series on Stones and Ponds, we learned that & could be characterized as 
separate geometries [ I ], along with a distance metric, according to the following chain ... 


XY <=> [~T,T] <=> [yu] <=> F 


Thus, if we view the action [A] as one giant, highly efficient piece of machine code, and ['¥ , Q ] 
as sub-routines callable by A, then it is possible these routines were responsible for hollowing out a 
space for both a and B by creating these geometries, and endowing each with a measure [A] of 
some kind. 


Once this was done, both a and B could be populated with the elemental building blocks we have 
become familiar with, via the algorithms in A, and alas, a creation is born according to Noetherian 
principles. 


There is no way to know if this actually happened, but common sense tells us you can't put 
furniture into a room before the room itself is built. Since the primordial sphere is largely a 
structure comprised of thought energy, which contains all of the plans for Creation in blueprint 
form, that energy, and the corresponding plans, need to be translated into something concrete in 
order to make the cosmos an eventual reality. In this sense, perhaps and Q played a pivotal role 


C ---) zx 


thought reality 


173 


A Brief Note On The Unified Transforms 


In this short note we wish to extend the idea of transforms to the unified mosaic, so a complete 
picture of all three fabrics emerges, simultaneously. To wit, ... 


In the diagram above, the unified transforms [, 7] take us from a and B to y, respectively, and so 
r=o0°A,o=7°A' 


Thus, the energy carried into y from each domain in © is 


n°E'p = (@° A)° E's @°(A°E') = 0° Bla 
and similarly, 


OB = YE CF) 


In other words, for any unified transform pair [@, 2], the energy mapped to y from either a or B is 
always the same, which means, necessarily, we must have 


Ep = Ea = 0 (*) 
and ditto in reverse for all primordial transform pairs [Q, ‘?]. 
To see this more clearly note that any canonical transform ought to be independent of the object it's 
acting on and so, for example, if E's = E'a for any value E's we care to choose, then z = o holds. 
On the other hand, if E's = -E'a for arbitrary E's, then = -@, and thus we have a dependency 


conflict, in so much as the transforms, now, are bound by the energy states in a and B. Such a 
conflict can only be resolved if we assume (*) ... 


a a ak ak ok ok 


To prove the second result observe that A and A' are both the negative identity operator and so, 


Ea = A°E® = -1°E's = -ES 


174 


Continuing, 


Ergo 1 = -@, up to reflection, but this is not an acceptable solution because among other things, A 
and A' are no longer undecidable up to attribute ... both in this case and in the case where m = @. 


ak a a ak ok ok 


Thus Ey = 0 and by extension, Ex = = 0, and hence one has the following theorem ... 


For any fabric in Creation the total energy in 
that fabric is always 0. That is to say, 


Ec = Es = Ey = 0 
Such a result makes eminent sense since all along we felt Creation, no matter the fabric, was built 
on a manifold M ~ S(n). Ergo, there can be no leaks -- energy can be rearranged on M ... but it 
cannot be destroyed or manufactured out of nothing ... 
C o> zx o> Y 
thought reality exotic 
And, this theorem only bolsters our view that no living being will ever be destroyed as a result of 


the purification process. In good time, each and every being will return to the Source, the Light, 
pure Love ... just as Juliet Nightingale was told in her NDE ... 


Bk ak ak ake ake oe 


Finally, if Q and ¥ do play a role in mapping the negative and positive rest energies from ¢ to &, at 
least from the a-perspective, with 


Q°eg- =& , Vea+ = Ap 
then 
a = O°E = (PPA)PE = B'(A'°E) = BO Ap = 94 
This seems to imply these energies are indeed mirror images of one another, but with opposite sign, 
and indeed, since ¢ is a perfectly certain structure or singularity, such a conclusion would make 


sense... ... 


Notice too from (+) the undifferentiated energy of God in ¢ is 0, implying that this energy somehow 
commingles with g- and 3+, whilst at the same time remaining separate and apart from the two ... 


175 


The Case For Negative Mass In a-Space 


Our recent studies on the unified transforms led us to the conclusion that both E's and E'a are 0, no 
matter the frame of reference. In particular, E'a = 0, which means the energy of a-space itself 
must be zero, excluding the dark energy component [&]. In this short note, we wish to investigate 
the case for negative mass in a-space, and see if it is even feasible. 


Suppose now we let m+ be the positive mass associated with a-space, and m- the negative mass, if 
such exists. According to Einstein, 


Ea = (m- + myc = 0 (*) 


implying that negative mass must reside within the a-domain, which exactly balances its positive 
counterpart. Indeed, (*) can only be true under this condition. 


Oddly enough, recent research on this subject has shown solutions to Einstein’s general theory of 
relativity also exist, that allow for negative mass, without breaking any essential assumptions. See, 
for example, the work of Mbarek and Paranjape, where they treat n- as a perfect fluid, which leads 
to a reasonable Schwarzschild metric over the de Sitter manifold. 


And then there are those wormholes. Today, theoretical physicists can actually show how negative 
mass could be used to create these strange objects, providing the so-called energy condition is 
relaxed. This condition simply asserts that only reasonable states of matter and non-gravitational 
fields are admissible when using general relativity. 


If (*) is true then we should expect to see negative mass everywhere throughout both our universe 
and a-space, at large. In turn, this will lead to many new ideas and even bizarre notions that, up to 
now anyway, would seem more like science fiction. 


But these conclusions rely heavily on our interpretation of the unified transforms, discussed in 
previous research; namely, that 


n°E's = (0° A)°E® = @° (APE) = 0° Ba 


for all possible [x, w]. Our best understanding of these identities leads us to believe E's and E'a 
must always be zero, no matter where you are standing in 2 ... 


Es = Ea = 0 


176 


The Case For Negative Mass In a-Space, Part Il 


In Part I, we put forward the idea of negative mass in o-space, excluding the dark energy 
component [&], and saw that 


Ea = (m- + m+)c? = 0 


Here we’d like to explore the energy-mass connection a little more, according to the following 
duality, which [we’ll assume] finds its origins in B-space. 


For any energy E there exists a mass ty such that m induces E, and conversely. 
Properties of E are inherited by m, and vice versa, because of duality. 


Previous theorems now tell us the corresponding equations for energy-mass in a-space take the 
form 


(AerneE=k*(Acrem+K (Ff) 
where A °r is our impression of the transform [r], which moves us between symmetries and laws in 
B-space, k is a numerical scaling constant, and K is a density function of sorts, associated with dark 
energy [&]. Furthermore, these theorems imply the covariant derivative of both E and m is zero in 
a-space, 
VoE=0=V°m 

suggesting, in turn, conservation laws with respect to this coupling. 

And along these lines, because we are dealing with Noetherian principles throughout, one can say 
that symmetries associated with E imply conservation laws in m, and similarly, symmetries 


associated with m imply conservation laws in E. 


In the case where K is 0, there is no dark energy here, and (f) reduces to the familiar Einstein 
equation, with k = c?, where c is the speed of light. 


E = me’ 
In the case where K # 0, we know from previous studies this density function very likely contains 


singularities, and so, using the Bromwich integral as our estimator for the inverse of A°r ... (f) 
now becomes, for any point t in a, 


E ~ me? + xf e*Kisyds (*) 
% 


where k is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration, in multiple dimensions, 
that envelops any singularities associated with K(s). 


177 


Now let us ‘convert’ the rightmost term in (*) to a ‘mass equivalent’, at least mathematically 
speaking, by doing the following, 


[me]e? = xfer K(s)ds 
* 


where me can be thought of as a ‘special mass’ associated with dark energy. Then for any point t in 
a, we have ... 


E = (m + mee” (h) 


which is the covariant form of the energy-mass equation in our domain, that incorporates dark 
energy, and is a reflection of the corresponding energy-mass duality found in the antimatter world 
of the Godhead; that is to say, B-space. 


Is Einstein’s famous equation just an ‘accidental discovery’ or can it be traced back to fundamental 
symmetries and laws in the B-world, where all things began ? I guess it depends on your 
philosophical view here, but in the end, physics could well be the study and pursuit of all things 
spiritual ... 


“All physical things are first formed in the spiritual world ... including laws ...’ 


---from the NDE research, Emanuel Swedenborg, et al ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


One can apply de Broglie’s law to ({) above by imagining a single particle, such as a photon, 
situated at a point t in o (or a train of photons passing through t). Then at this point, 


EB = hv © (m + mec? 


which is the extended form of the law that incorporates dark energy, where h is Planck’s constant, 
1m is the ‘mass’ of the photon, and v its frequency. Note that if there is no dark energy you recover 
the classical expression for de Broglie, and if there is, it seems to have an influence on v, all else 
being equal ... 


178 


The Wave-Particle Duality, General Relativity and Covariance 


In our Stones and Ponds section [pp 155-6], we discussed the Quantum Hypothesis and formulated 
an expression for the wave-particle duality, according to the following principle: 


The B-Space Duality 


"For any wave W there exists a particle P such that P induces W, and conversely. 
Properties of W are inherited by P, and vice versa, because of duality ' 


The a-Space Equations 
(Aero W = k*(Acr)oP + K 


Vow =0=V°P 


symmetries cons laws 


Here, as in all other dualities, A ° r is our impression of the transform [r], which takes us between 
symmetries and laws in B-space, k is a ‘bridging connector’, and K is a density function of sorts, 
associated with dark energy. As well, previous theorems tell us the covariant derivative [V] of both 
W and P is always 0, however we wish to invoke the notion of covariance for various 
representations of ‘wave’ and ‘particle’. 


But is there any evidence to support the a-space equations above, thus giving us some confidence 
that they really do find their origins in the antimatter world of the Godhead [B-space] ? The answer 
is actually yes. 


Some years ago, the physicist Christopher Hill gave a talk on symmetry in physics and noted that 
the law of conservation of charge, with respect to an electron, could be traced back to symmetries 
in the corresponding wave (typically a phase shift or translation). For a long time, he says, the 
actual symmetry wasn’t known or understood, but today that is no longer the case. 


And indeed, this is what the a-space equations above are actually saying, in the broader sense, 
when considering their behavior over a manifold M ~ S(n) in creation: 


“for any wave-particle duality ... symmetries associated with 
conserved currents in W imply conservation laws in P .. and 
conversely .. symmetries associated with conserved currents 
in P imply conservation laws in W’ 


Now let us turn our attention to general relativity. Here the broader form of the equations is ... 
(AcreC’’ = k* (Aero TY + K 


wee =0=Wr (H 


179 


where C" is the Einstein curvature tensor, T"’ the relativistic stress tensor, and Vu the covariant 
derivative in u or v, indicating a sum over indices. Given this setup, how then are we to interpret 
(+) above ? 


To answer the question, imagine an arbitrarily small, four-dimensional space-time cube or block 
situated at a fixed point p in a-space, whose volume is not changing. As material flows through this 
cube, say into the block along a spatial direction, and out of the block along the temporal direction, 
the block’s shape is going to change, as its interfaces become deformed because of the flow. An 
inward flow will naturally cause an inward deformation of the corresponding interface(s), and just 
the reverse, in the case of an outward flow. 


However, because the volume of the cube is not changing at p, flow in must match flow out, and 
this is precisely what the right-hand side of (+) is saying. The stress tensor T" exhibits covariance 
for both momentum and energy, across spatial and temporal directions, irrespective of the cube’s 
shape, because the volume of the block at p is constant. 


ViT"’ = 0 


Now let’s deal with the left-hand side of (+). As material flows into the cube along a spatial 
irection, say, the corresponding interface suffers an inward deformation, which means the cube 
itself sees its volume decrease here — an effect which is exactly balanced by material leaving the 
block along the temporal direction ... ... where the corresponding interface suffers an outward 
formation, leading to a volume increase here. In other words sectional volume’ lost along 
one interface, due to inward flow, is exactly matched by ‘sectional volume’ gained along another, 
ue to outward flow. 


Although the left-hand side of (+) references a curvature tensor, it can be thought of as a metric 
which measures the change in sectional volumes of a cube, as material moves in and out of the 
block along different directions. 


To see this more clearly, let us move over into differential notation, and multiply the left-hand side 
of (+) by the volume of the block; namely, AxAyAzAt. With u = 1 (the x-axis) and v travelling 
between | and 4, one has 


AC! AyAzAt + AC!?AxAzAt + AC!3AxAyAt + AC!4AxAyAz = 0 


sectional vol sectional vol sectional vol sectional vol 
across I/F 1 across I/F 2 across I/F 3 across I/F 4 


since the sectional volumes exist and are unique for 
any given flow, the same must be true of C"” 


where AC" is to be interpreted as the covariant differential along a particular direction. It is these 
pieces in the summation above that represent the various sectional volumes, when considering 
material flow through the cube, in the primary direction of u, where 1 < u < 4. 


180 


Thus we have a mathematical object which exhibits covariance, and indeed, it is the only contracted 
form of the Riemann curvature tensor that does this uniquely, after factoring in a shadow term [its 
algebraic description is most easily discovered by studying Riemannian properties of the 2-sphere]. 


Writing C"Y = R"Y - Rg", where R"" is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar ... one has the 
following, remarkable identity ... 


wow =0 


Thus, general relativity is really an accounting law, where the books are exactly balanced by 
comparing the law of conservation of ‘sectional volumes’ with the law of conservation of 
momentum and energy, when examining material flow through an arbitrarily small space-time 
cube. In my opinion, this is the simplest way to understand the curvature-stress duality, in its 
broadest sense. 


And finally, because we are dealing with Noetherian principles throughout, one can say that 
symmetries associated with conserved currents in CY ... imply conservation laws in T“, and 
conversely, symmetries associated with conserved currents in T"’ ... imply conservation laws in 
Cc" ... a general notion that is true for all foundational dualities ... 


181 


The Wave-Particle Duality and The Riemann Hypothesis 


The Riemann Hypothesis is a long-standing problem in mathematics, which seeks to understand 
just where the non-trivial zeroes of the Riemann zeta function [C(s)] lie in the critical strip of the 
complex plane C. The critical strip S is the entire space for which 0 < Re(z) < 1, where z is any 
complex number, and the critical line Y is defined to be Re(z) = 1/2. 


Here we are going to offer our thoughts on this conjecture, by drawing parallels to the wave- 
particle duality, and then put forth some interesting conclusions. So let’s begin by recalling 
Riemann’s functional equation in C; to wit, 


((s) = 2’x*'P(1-s)C(1-s)sin(as/2)  (*) 
where I(s) is the gamma function. 


We can see from (*) that there are two distinct components which form a ‘wave-particle’ duality of 
sorts, with W = sin(ms/2) playing the role of the wave, and P = C(s) the particle. Previous studies 
now tell us that 


“for any wave-particle duality ... symmetries associated with 
conserved currents in W imply conservation laws in P .. and 
conversely .. symmetries associated with conserved currents 
in P imply conservation laws in W’ 


and so, for example, the continuous set T of simple translations s ---» s + 6, of the wave function W, 
lead to conservation laws in P. These conservation laws, or conserved currents in P, can be thought 
of as the non-trivial zeroes of C(s), forming vertical strands in S, where the strands are symmetric 
under reflection about Y, and also the x-axis. Thus, the zeroes here are conserved under reflection — 
a remarkable thing, in and of itself, and indeed, it is these symmetries (reflections) in P that imply 
conservation laws in W, like energy, say. 


Since T is an uncountable set, we cannot associate, with each translation in T, a unique current in 
P, for if we could, ¢(s) would have uncountably many, non-trivial zeroes — a contradiction. The 
simplest alternative, using Noether and Jeast action principles, is to map T to a single current y in P, 
and, conversely, we choose the simplest symmetry in P, tied to y, that leads to conservation laws in 
W. This symmetry would be reflection across the x-axis, which follows naturally from properties 
of C(s) ... implying, in turn, that y really is a single-stranded current. 


In other words, reflection across the critical line Y, in the critical strip S, isn’t needed, in order to 
satisfy the requirements of the wave-particle duality associated with (*), when considering Noether 
and /east action principles. It can be discarded altogether, without losing any information, and to 
me, at least, this seems to be the best approach when considering the Riemann Hypothesis. 


Indeed, it may be the way forward, and if so, tells us that all non-trivial zeroes of C(s) must lie 
exactly on Y ... 


182 


Consciousness, Mach’s Principle, and The Dark Energy Contour Integral 


What is dark energy [€] ? In previous research, we offered a definition [pp 157-8], which is shown 
below ... 


If Cis the primordial sphere and n the negative rest energy in€, 
then n is the sum total of all negative thoughts and actions 
associated with the collective consciousness in &, where 

n = €, upto transform 


Thus, dark energy is really our own negative thoughts and actions, made material in the current 
mosaic [2], and is slowly dissipating over very long spans of time, as we learn to heal from acts of 
harm we have caused one another. In other words, dark energy is part of our consciousness, and so, 
its presence ‘over there’ throughout our universe, say, affects us ‘over here’. 


This is Mach’s Principle, in a nutshell, and a postulate Einstein vigorously embraced in his early 
years, when working with general relativity. 


But what does ‘over there’? mean in this context ? Well, previous studies [pp 168-9] tell us the 
density of dark energy is probably quantumlike, containing many singularities [S] throughout our 
universe alone, and so ‘over there’ could reasonably be identified with these singularities. On the 
other hand, ‘over here’ is any point t in our space-time fabric affected by S, and thus, if we are 
looking for a mathematical object that embraces Mach’s Principle, within the context of dark 
energy ... the Bromwich integral quickly becomes a very interesting candidate. 


Recalling the highlights from these studies, we have, in the case where g" is coupled directly to 
the dark energy density [A(s)] itself ... 


GY = £eXs)gh = «fe Xs)g"* ds 


over here over there 


Here G"Y = C"’— kT", where C"" and T"” are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively, and £' denotes the Laplace inverse. 


Thus, we can collapse ‘over there’ into a single point by way of a contour integration, according to 
Bromwich protocol, and so preserve both the conscious and quantumlike natures of dark energy 
simultaneously, when incorporating it into the field equations of general relativity. To me, at least, 
such an approach seems very promising indeed, and merits further investigation ... 


183 


Covariance and The Dark Energy Contour Integral 


Einstein would probably be rolling over in his grave if we didn’t say something about the covariant 
nature of the dark energy contour integral, so in this note, which is largely a follow-on to the last 
few addenda, we are going to outline an approach that seeks to demonstrate this property. 


Let us begin, then, with the simplest option, where g"’ is not coupled directly to the dark energy 
density function itself [A(s)], in which case [see pp 168-9] ... 


GY = Kg] eA(s)ds_ (*) 
Y 


Here G"Y = CY — kT", where C"’ and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively, K is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration, according to 
Bromwich protocol, that envelops any singularities associated with (s). Further to this, we will 
assume that A(s) has no branching points, but that it does have both countably many zeroes and 
simple poles. 


With {Ci, G, Cs, ...} representing the zeroes, and {@1, @2, ws, ...} the poles, we may write, over all é 
{and for illustrative purposes only] ... 


Ms) = I(s—G)/ IIs - wi) 
Now define 
As | @j) = (s— @)A(s) 


so that A(s | «j) is just A(s), less the singularity at @;. Then for any point t in a-space, the right-hand 
side of (*), at least symbolically and up to any constants, can be written over all ias ... 


HQ) ~ ge ZA@; lade (4) 
As an example, suppose j = 1. Then 
Ms | or) = (s—G)(s— &)(s—G) .../ (S— @2)(8 — 3) «.- 
and thus, 
Moi] 1) = (@1-G)(@1— &)(@1-G) ... / (@1 = @2)(@1 — @s) ... 


At the origin, or even near the origin, assuming we can recover something here, one can discard the 
exponential term in (+), since it is exactly (or approximately) 1. Doing so gives us, over alli... 


YO) ~ g'” ZAC: | oi) 


184 


But notice, now, in the expression for ‘¥(0) above, that (a) g"’ is surely covariant, no matter the 
frame of reference (as is G"'’), and (b) A(@; | @j) is always invariant under a coordinate translation, 
for any é. Thus, if I am at the point t in the current frame S, it can always be made to ‘look like’ the 
origin in another frame S', through translation, and so ‘¥(0), in any frame of reference, exhibits 
covariance. 


To see this more clearly, suppose in the frame S 
Xs) = (s—6)(s—7)/(s— 1(s- 2) 


Then the residue at @ = | is -30e' and the residue at @ = 2 is 207", If we now shift the origin to 10, 
say, then in this new frame S', 


As) = (s+ 4)(s + 3)/(s + 9s + 8) 


-9t -8t 


and the residue at m = -9 is -30e7", whilst the residue at m = -8 is 20e”’. Notice that at t = 0, in 
either frame, the corresponding residues are equal, and of course, sum to the same value in both S 
and S', respectively !! 


Thus, ‘¥(0), in any frame of reference, generated by translation, really does exhibit covariance, 
according to (a) and (b) above, which is what we wanted to establish initially. 


A similar argument can be made where g"’ is coupled directly to X(s) [see pp 168-9], in which case 


Ge = Eng! = Kf et Ae" ds 
Y 


Here again, GY = C"’— kT", where C"" and T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, and £' denotes the Laplace inverse. 


In conclusion, the point of this addendum was to try and show, rather heuristically, that the case for 
a dark energy contour integral, which exhibits covariance, can in fact, be made. However, the 
approach is not complete, nor is it guaranteed to be perfectly accurate; rather, more of a roadmap or 
sketch, that might be used for demonstrating the property of covariance, in general, when dealing 
with very real, guantumlike densities. As such, we should feel optimistic about things, going 
forward. 


And finally, it should be pointed out that the residues are really a measure of our conscious or 
subconscious perception of dark energy. As such, solving the field equations of general relativity 
in different frames of reference could lead to different solutions. But this is to be expected, because 
we are no longer dealing with a uniform density here. Dark energy singularities that are nearer to 
the origin in one frame of reference [say S], may be further away from the origin in another frame 
[S'], and this, most certainly, will have an impact on these solutions. Needless to say, more 
research needs to be done on this very interesting topic ... 


185 


Covariance and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part II 


In the last addendum, we outlined a method that might be used to illustrate the covariant nature of 
the dark energy contour integral. However, the approach was somewhat heuristic, so here we’d 
like to tighten things up a bit by looking more closely at the following expression, over alli... 


HO ~ gZre@ilore™ (4) 
Our goal is to show that ‘¥(0), in any frame of reference, exhibits covariance, but in order to do this, 
we really need to formulate a proper derivative for (+), which we’ll label Vu'?, and demonstrate that 


under certain circumstances, Vu'¥(0) = 0. 


Using the product form for covariant differentiation, we may write, at least symbolically, and over 
allé... 


Vet) ~ (Vag) DA@i lope + gL oir(aifope 


Since the foundational tensor g"’ is fully covariant, the first term in (*) vanishes at t = 0, and the 
second term will always vanish at t = 0, provided, over all é... 


Lo Aoji]o) =0 

Thus we have the following result ... 

If 1(s) is a rational density function with countably many 

zeroes {Ci, C2, 63, ...j, and simple poles {@1, @2, 03, ...}, 

then ¥(0) always exhibits covariance ... in any frame of. 

reference, generated by translation, if ({) is true. 
Mathematical theorems dictate that there be more poles than zeroes, in order to recover the residues 
using a Bromwich integral, but this is a detail which doesn’t affect the overall discussion here. And 
so, without further ado, we’ll lead with the example below ... 
Suppose we define our dark energy density function to be 

Xs) = s(s—4)(s + 4)/(s —6)(s — 2)(s + 2)(s + 6) 
Then the residues [A(@j | i)] for each é are as follows, at t= 0... 
Res[-6] = 120/384 ; Res[-2] = 24/128 ; Res[+2] = 24/128 ; Res[+6] = 120/384 

and the left-hand side of ({) is indeed 0, since 


-6Res[-6] - 2Res[-2] + 2Res[2] + 6Res[6] = 0 


186 


More generally, we may conclude that ({) is always true, if both the zeroes and simple poles of A(s) 
are symmetric about the origin ... in any frame of reference [not unlike the red and black squares 
on a checkerboard of infinite size]. 


The red squares might represent the zeroes of A(s) ... and 
the black squares the poles. As you move around on the 
board ... .. your perception of the layout doesn’t change. 


Thus, if we are searching for a quantumlike density function for dark energy, say, our best hope lies 
in finding one which exhibits this kind of symmetry. If we can, we needn’t worry anymore about 
the covariant nature of ‘P(t), in general, because under translation, the point t in frame S can always 
be made to ‘look like’ the origin in another frame S'. 


Needless to say, more research needs to be done on this very interesting topic, but hopefully, there 
is enough here, to give the reader some guidance on how to go forward with these ideas, assuming 
our approach is feasible ... 


187 


Covariance and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part III 


In Part II, we looked at the covariant nature of the dark energy contour integral, in the case where 
g'’ is not coupled directly to the dark energy density function [A(s)], and saw that over all é... 


LY oid(@i | oi) = 0 


could well be the condition that we need, in order to establish covariance at the origin, in any frame 
of reference. In this case, at least with respect to general relativity, 


GY = Kg" | e* X(s)ds 
Y 


Here G"'Y = C"’— kT", where C"’ and T"” are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively, K is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration, according to 
Bromwich protocol, that envelops any singularities associated with A(s). 


In the case where g"’ is coupled directly to X(s), with £' the Laplace inverse, 


GY = £eXs)gh? = xfes Xs)g"* ds (4) 
Y 


and we can still say something about covariance, but now, need to realize that g"’ is actually part 
of the residue calculation, and so the right-hand side of (+), at least symbolically and over all é, is to 
be written as ... 


VQ) ~ Zgh A@i| ae 


Here g"” is evaluated at the poles of A(s), and thus, is a fixed entity, in so much as it is no longer a 
function of t. Hence, the covariant derivative of Y(t) may be written as ... 


Vt) ~ Lg oii foe (4) 
and so Vu‘¥(0) = 0, provided (at t = 0) the right-hand side of ({) is also zero ... 
Ve oA@iloi) = 0 () 
To show this is actually possible, for rational densities [A(s)] that are symmetric about the origin in 
any frame of reference [see the last addendum], consider a ‘Schwarzschild-like’ solution for a 


perfect star in our universe. Choose the origin [O] to be the center of the star ... and solve (+) for 
g"’, assuming we can. 


188 


We expect g"’ (a measure of the gravitational field strength) to be symmetric about O as well, 
which means this symmetry is actually retained in (*) above, at the simple poles [@;] of our density 
function [A(s]. In other words, since we already have the precondition 


LY ido; | oi) = 0 


it is not much of a leap to suppose (*), by virtue of symmetry, and so, even in the case where g" is 
coupled directly to the dark energy density function, one can argue P(t) exhibits covariance at the 
origin, in any frame of reference, generated by translation. 


This is good news, because it gives us some confidence that the Bromwich integral is a credible 
choice when deciding how we want to merge the classical piece of general relativity, say, with the 
more quantumlike density associated with dark energy. The evidence, to use a cliche, is starting to 
mount up ... 


We can summarize our findings by appealing to Noether and noting that 


symmetries associated with conserved currents in A(s) 
imply conservation laws in P(t) ... ... and conversely 
symmetries associated with conserved currents in ‘P(t) 
imply conservation laws in A(s) 


With O the origin in any frame of reference S, the following diagram illustrates this duality rather 
nicely ... 


Xs) Y(t) 
| | 
reflection about O symmetry translating O 
| | | 
LY odo; | oi) = 0 current Vu'P(0) = 0 
oo 2 2 a 


For now, this concludes our series on Covariance and The Dark Energy Contour Integral. Perhaps 
the reader has benefited from these discussions, and if so, may feel inspired to develop the ideas put 
forth here, in even greater detail. 


But that would be a good thing, in my opinion, because since the time of Einstein, it doesn’t seem 
as though we’ve made much progress in this area. Maybe it’s finally time to change things ... 


189 


A Quantumlike Density For The Two-Dimensional Plane 


In our previous series on Covariance and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, we saw that if the 
contour integral itself was to exhibit a measure of covariance at the origin [O], in any frame of 
reference S, then the dark energy density function [A(s)] needed to be symmetric about O as well. 


Let us start, then, with the diagram below, which is a grid of circles and solid dots, where the 
circles represent the zeroes of X(s), and the dots represent the poles. The diagram is intended to 
cover the whole plane, but here we show just a small piece of it. 


e ° e ° e ° . y=4 
fe} * fo) bad ° ™ ° 
e ° e ° e ° . y=0 
fe} ® ° © fo} > ° 
° o ° . ol 

x=0 


Notice that if we move the origin to any point on the grid, our perception of the layout does not 
change. Thus A(s) is symmetric, relative to O, in any frame of reference generated by translation, 
when looking at the zeroes and the poles, in particular. 


Now let the horizontal or vertical distance between any two closest circles be 4 units, and similarly 
for the dots. Then our rational density function at y = 0 can be written, over all x, as 


x, 0) = x(x — 4)(x + 4) ... /(x — 6)(x — 2)(x + 2)(K + 6)... 
and at y = 2, over all x, as 
Mx, 2) = (x —6)(x — 2)(x + 2)(x + 6) ... /x(x — 4)(K + 4)(K — 8)(K + 8)... 


Observe that A(x, 0)-A(x, 2) = 1, and so to connect the points between y = 0 and y = 2, we simply 
interpolate, between the grid, according to the following expression ... 


Mx, y) = (A(x, 2) - A(x, O))y + A(x,0), Os y < 2 


Similarly, to connect the points between y = 2 and y = 4, we interpolate again ... and realizing that 
A(x, 4) is actually a copy of X(x, 0), now have ... 


Mx, y) = (A(x, 0) - A(x, 2))y + 2X(x, 2) - A(X,0), 2s y <4 


190 


More generally, for the upper plane, one has the following expressions, with the integer n > 0... 


Fe 


A(x, y) = Ya (A(x, 2) - A(x, O))y + (2n + LAX, 0) - (2n+ O)A(x, 2), 
4n+0 < y < 4n+2, for all eligible x 
and 
A(x, y) = Ya (A(x, 0) - A(x, 2))y + (2n + 2)A(x, 2) - (2n+ I)A(x, 0), 


4n+2 < y < 4n+4, forall eligible x 


A similar thing can be done for the lower plane, but we omit the calculations here, and so ... one 
finally arrives at a formulation for A(x, y) over the entire two-dimensional plane, using the methods 
outlined above. 


We can now take this density function [A(x, y)] and bolt it into a Bromwich integral of sorts, which 
is going to be multidimensional, and calculate the residues, accordingly. If the poles of A(x, y) 
were simply along the x-axis or the y-axis, it would be a no-brainer, as they say, but here we have 
poles scattered all over the plane, and so more care needs to be taken ... when deciding on an 
approach. Then, too, one has to move up into higher dimensions in the case of general relativity. 


And finally, if we are looking at a ‘Schwarzschild-like’ solution, for a perfect star centered about 
the origin O, in a set frame of reference S, then previous studies tell us that g"’ will be symmetric 
about O as well. Thus, one might only consider residues in the negative x, y, z, and t directions. 


Hopefully this note has been of some assistance to the reader who is interested in this material, and 
if so, perhaps the individual may feel inspired to develop the ideas put forth here, in even greater 
detail. Ultimately, our goal is to build a marriage between the classical piece of general relativity 
[G"*], and the quantumlike density associated with the dark energy contour integral, as we’ve said 
before. 


To me, at least, such a goal is well within our reach, now that most of the conceptual details have 
been ironed out. But there is more work to do, and maybe in future addenda we’ll address some of 
those issues; yet for now, we should rest content in knowing that quantumlike densities, in higher 
dimensions, can indeed be constructed, which can then be linked back to the Bromwich integral ... 


191 


A Quantumlike Density For The Two-Dimensional Plane, Part II 


In Part I we put forth a description for a guantumlike density [A(x, y)] in the plane, but did not deal 
with the issue of residues in much detail. Here we are going to do just that — a proposal, if you will, 
using a diagonalization argument, for capturing residues over the entire plane, as opposed to just 
the x and y-axes. 


Let us start, then, with the diagram below, which is our grid of circles and solid dots, where the 
circles represent the zeroes of (s), and the dots represent the poles. The diagram is intended to 
cover the whole plane, but here we show just a small piece of it. 


. fo} . ° . ° . y=4 
| 

fe} i ° ° ° * ao 
| 

. ° . ° ° fo} * y=0 
| 

fe} * ° s oO * ° 
| 

° o ° . o. 
| 
x=0 


Define S(n) to be the point (n, n), where n can be any even integer, be it positive, negative or zero, 
and let {aj | n} be the set of all poles along the line to the left of S(n), and along the line down from 
S(n) [note: n itself is an index, and not a pole in {@;{ | n}]. 


For example, if n = 0, we would be on the x-y axes, and so our horizontal and vertical poles would 
be located at {-2, -6, -10, ... | 0}, in keeping with Part I of this series. If n = -2, then the poles 
would be {-4, -8, -12, ... | -2}, and at n = -4, {-6, -10, -14, ... | -4}, and so on. 


For any point t = (ti, t2) in a-space, with K some constant, the two-dimensional Bromwich integral 
at S(O) can be written as ... 


HE ]0) = «Lae, yet dxdy 


%o% 


where Yo denotes the imaginary axis at S(O), perpendicular to the plane, and coming out of the page. 
The line integrals are to be completed with an arc, along which, things vanish as the radius of the 
arc approaches ©, and so we may evaluate (+) by calculating residues. 


192 


These two closed contours envelop the poles associated with S(O), in the horizontal and vertical 
directions, respectively, so first we perform the inner integration leaving us with a function we’ll 
label &(ti, t2, y), say, and then we perform the outer contour integration against E(t, t2, y), yielding 


(ti, t2). 
Now we can move on to S(-2), by first relocating our imaginary z-axis to (-2, -2) and calling it Y.2, 


say. The poles here are {-4, -8, -12, ... | -2} in the horizontal and vertical directions, and thus (+) 
becomes ... 


W(t] -2) = «Sf fre, yyeX! +98 dxdy 
Veet 
2-2 


The entire lower left region of the plane can be covered in this way, and when it’s all said and done, 
we may write, in the case where g"’ is not coupled directly to A(s), and for all evenn < 0... 


Gy = gh Zw] n) 


Here GY 
respectively. 


'Y__ kT“, where C"'Y and TY are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 


In the case where the foundational tensor g"’ is coupled directly to A(s), it becomes part of the 
residue calculation, but other than that, the two cases are essentially the same. And, it goes without 
saying that generalizations to higher dimensions follow a similar line of reasoning ... 


This is our diagonal approach to capturing residues over all or part of the two-dimensional plane. 
We say all here because n is an arbitrary even number. By letting n ---» «©, we can, at least in 
theory, do this. Care has to be taken not to double-count at the origin, and where possible, 
symmetry arguments should be used to reduce the actual number of calculations required. A 
computer wouldn’t be a bad idea either. 


But if what we’ve done is correct here, we are, perhaps for the first time, seeing how one might 
merge the classical part of general relativity [G"’] with a quantumlike density for dark energy, by 
way of the Bromwich integral. To me, at least, it’s an exciting moment ... 


193 


A Quantumlike Density For The Two-Dimensional Plane, Part Ill 


In the previous two addenda in this series, we looked at a hypothetical guantumlike density [A(s)] in 
the two-dimensional plane, and saw how it might be replicated everywhere ... and then bolted into 
a Bromwich integral, itself multidimensional. But one could ask the question ‘what does this 
density really look like, if we could graph it ?° 


There is no easy answer to the question, but from previous studies we do know the zeroes and the 
poles of A(s) are probably symmetric, relative to the origin [O], in any frame of reference [S], 
which means there is a good chance A(s) is also symmetric in the same way. If this is so, then 
perhaps the following picture is a fair representation of the dark energy density function, which fills 
our universe, in particular ... 


In the diagram above, the valleys are the dark-shaded areas, where A(s) ~ 0, and the peaks are the 
light-shaded areas, where A(s) ---» 0. In other words ... the zeroes and the poles of the density 
function, respectively. 


One can imagine the intensity of A(s) falling off rather quickly ... as you move away from a 
singularity, which means that if we were to try and measure the strength of A(s) with some kind of 
instrument, we could easily be deceived into believing it was essentially zero everywhere. The 
instrument, it seems, cannot detect the singularities associated with the guantumlike nature of the 
dark energy density function, itself. 


Even so, these singularities exist, in all likelihood, which means we need a mathematical object that 
traps them, if we are going to merge the classical piece of general relativity [G"’] with X(s). Our 
best hope for doing this, in my opinion, is the Bromwich integral, which joins together these two 
worlds, rather nicely ... 


194 


A Quantumlike Density For The Two-Dimensional Plane, Part IV 


In Part II] we mentioned some of the attributes we'd like to see in a very real quantumlike density 
for dark energy, that might fill our universe, for example. Here such a density [A(s)] is presented, 
for the two-dimensional plane, after fiddling around a bit on the WolframAlpha website. 


Most notably, we mentioned that the zeroes and the poles of A(s) should be symmetric about the 
origin O in any frame of reference S, and that this property should also apply to A(s), in general. 
Without further ado, then, here is the formula and the accompanying picture ... 


1 1 1 
xXxX+yyY “oe bw-h+-Dy-bD * ae Dw+ Det D+) 7 


plot 


(x+D(x+)D+Q-DY-D iJ (x-Dw-)+yeDy+D 


An algebraic representation for part 
of A(x,y) .... that meets our criteria 


The corresponding 3D plot of (x,y) 


In future addenda, we may work more with this density function to see how the residues measure 
out, and it looks like generalizations to higher dimensions should be doable as well. Stay tuned, as 
they say, but in the meantime, to me at least, this particular density construction is well worth 
pondering ... 


195 


A Quantumlike Density For The Two-Dimensional Plane, Part V 


In Part IV of this series, we put forth a rather plausible definition for the dark energy density 
function in the two-dimensional plane. Here, we want to explore functions of this type a little more 
closely, but before we do, some remarks are in order concerning the inverse of a two-dimensional 
Laplace transform. 


Strictly speaking ... if we play by the rules ... this inverse is performed according to the following 
expression [see Part II in this series], 


ef Sre yer? aay 
Vey, 


where Yo is an imaginary axis perpendicular to the x-y plane, which forms part of a double contour 
integration, that envelops all poles associated with A(s) in the x and y directions, respectively. 


Thus, in terms of calculating residues, we are only interested in the mathematical poles of Xx, y), 
first in the x-direction, associated with the inner contour integration, and then in the y-direction, 
associated with the outer contour integration. Almost by definition, this seems to be the correct 
interpretation of (*) when reading the literature, even though physically the singularities affiliated 
with A(x, y) are scattered everywhere, throughout the plane. As such, we will, going forward, 
abandon the diagonalization argument put forth in Part II, with a tinge of sadness, and learn to play 
by the rules ... 


To see this more clearly suppose, in one dimension, our density function was defined to be ... 
Mx) = 1/0? + 1) 


There are no physical singularities here . . but there are two imaginary poles that are used in 
calculating the Laplace inverse; namely é and -i, and thus the Bromwich integral becomes ... 


sin(t) = x frope™ dx 


% 


where Yo denotes a contour in the complex plane that envelops these two poles. 


Hence the rational density expression associated with A(x) above becomes a wave under inversion, 
and this should be of some interest to us, since in our previous series titled Moving Between The 
Laws In a-Space, Parts I and II (pp 170-71), we saw that from a geometric perspective, anyway, all 
laws could be perceived as wavelike patterns. Does this mean, in turn, the dark energy density 
function that we are really searching for should be a rational construct as well ? Remember, all 
foundational laws are embedded in a field of dark energy, where both the law and the dark energy 
are tied together via the Laplace transform and its inverse ... 


196 


If we believe that A(s) is a rational function of sorts, then previous research tells us that the zeroes 
and the singularities of X(s) should be symmetric about the origin O, in any frame of reference S. 
Additionally, we think that as you move away from a singularity, the intensity of A(s) diminishes 
very rapidly. Thus, expressions of the following kind are probably suitable candidates for the 
density of dark energy, in the two-dimensional plane, where the sum is to be taken over all physical 
singularities located at (m, n) in 7, and k is any integer > 1. 


dO, y) = D((-m)"* + (yn) (4) 


mn 


The picture below shows part of A(s), in the case where k = 1. It thus becomes an inverse power of 
2 relationship. 


Can functions of type (+) really be used to simulate the density of dark energy, and can we really 
calculate the Laplace inverse, accordingly ? These are tough questions to answer, but my hunch is 
that we are on the right track. Our goal, ultimately, is to create a union between the classical piece 
of general relativity, say, and the guantumlike nature of A(s). In the case where the foundational 
tensor g"’ is not coupled directly to A(s), we may write, at least in the case of our two-dimensional 
plane ... 


Ge = «gt f Pic, yet #7" axay 
% % 


Here G"Y = C"'’— kT"’, where C"" and T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively, and k is some constant. Generalizations to higher dimensions are also apparent ... 


197 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral 


Now that we have a better understanding of how things bolt together, I thought it might be 
instructive to show how one might write down the field equations of general relativity, for a perfect 
star centered about the origin O, in a frame of reference S$. We will assume, in this simple 
illustration, that there is only one physical singularity associated with the density of dark energy 
[A(s)], in the vicinity of the star, and that it is located atO. And further to this, we will assume that 


Ms) © o/s? 


where o is some constant, and s is the distance from O. 


1000 ¢ 


500 |, 


A picture of A(s) with a singularity 
at the center of the perfect star 


Since this is a perfect star, we may take a Schwarzschild approach to solving the problem near O, 
and beyond, by assuming that only the radial and timelike directions are of interest to us. We 
associate these two parts with G!! and G*“ respectively, but also know that g"’, a measure of the 
gravitational field strength, is going to be a function of the radial distance [r] only. Thus, in the 
case where g"’ is not coupled directly to A(s), we may write, for any r ... 


GY’ = Kg’ ] e A(s)ds 
i 


Here GY = CY’ — kT’, where CY and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, k is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration that 
envelops any singularities tied to (s). 


198 


Evaluating the expression above, we have, 


Gey 


u 


xog'’ | (e/s2)ds (*) 
7 


= org’ 


In the case where g"’’ is coupled directly to A(s), (*) becomes, 


Gey 


U 


xo J (e* / s*)g’ ds 
7 


o(rg" + [g""})Jo (4) 


Here ... assuming it’s possible, the g"’ terms in parentheses are to be evaluated at 0, after first 
differentiating g"‘, which shows up in the second term. The variable r is just that — a variable. 
Since it is g""’ we are trying to solve for, it should be clear that (+) is not without its challenges. 


oe 


Notice, too, that (*) and (+) will agree at the origin [O] if g*’Y is well-behaved and [g"’]'|p = 0. An 
example of this type of behavior might be seen in the diagram below, where g" follows a bell- 
shaped pattern, as you move closer to O. 


In the case where g"’ is not well-behaved at O, one has a choice — use (*) as is, or include any poles 
associated with g"’ in the residue calculations tied to (+), so long as the physics makes sense. 


sesakook 


199 


Whether we will ever find a complete dark energy density function [A(s)] that fills our universe, 
say, is somewhat up for grabs, in my opinion. It may be worse than searching for the proverbial 
‘needle in a haystack’. But this should not deter us from developing approximate solutions to 
problems in cosmology and astronomy that seek to understand how dark energy factors into the 
bigger picture. The example above is just one simple illustration of how we might tackle dark 
energy in a local context, before fanning out to the universe and beyond ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


If we let A(s) ~ o/s, then the density function has a simple pole at the origin of the star, and (*) 
and (+) become, (for any r) respectively ... 


GY = og (8) 


Gey 


uv 


ogo) 


Notice that both equations are fully covariant because we are dealing with a simple pole here, and 
that (§) is actually Einstein’s original formulation of the field equations with a constant dark energy 
density permeating the whole of our universe, say. An interesting confluence, to say the least ! 


200 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part II 


In Part I, we offered an approach for solving the field equations of general relativity, where the 
dark energy singularity existed at the center of the star. But what happens when there is more than 
one such singularity ? In this note, we offer a proposal for solving the equations, in this case, by 
first examining things in two dimensions, and then moving up into higher spaces by inference. 


Let us begin, then, by looking at a perfect star, centered about the origin O, in a frame of reference 
S, and a density function for dark energy, which can be written as ... 


Mx, y) = o/ (K-Da+ DY- Diy + D) 


where o is some constant. Notice that A(x, y) is symmetric about O. 


The picture above shows part of this density, which, for the most part, hovers around 0 in the basin 
before rising up to 0 along the four edges. Needless to say, it is a hypothetical construct, but it will 
serve a purpose when calculating the Laplace inverse. 
To this end, we first note that the Laplace inverse can be written as 

eS Sre yer aay © 


%% 


where Yo denotes a contour path that envelops any singularities associated with A(x, y), first in the 
x-direction and then in the y-direction, and « is some constant. 


In the x-direction, excluding o for the moment, the residues sum to 


e" /{2(y-1yy+ D} - eT Ay- Dy + D} 


201 
and plugging this into (*), we get, where K is another constant ... 


coe — a) Pe ay—Dy+Didy 
Yo 


Finally, (+) computes to 
o(el! = etye2 _ eey/4 


and thus, for any point t = (ti, t2) in a-space, where g"’ is not coupled directly to A(s), the field 
equations of general relativity, in two dimensions, may be written as follows, where sinh means 
hyperbolic sine [it should be clear that both G"’ and g"’ are to be evaluated at t] ... 


G'Y &= o[sinh(ti)]Lsinh(t2)]g"* — (4) 


Here GY = CY’ — kT“, where C"Y and T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, and g"” is the foundational tensor, itself a measure of the gravitational field 
strength. Generalizations to higher dimensions are quickly apparent. 


Hopefully, this simple illustration is of some use to the reader who is interested in this type of 
material. If we believe the density of dark energy contains singularities, then necessarily we need a 
mechanism to trap them. By using the Bromwich integral to do this, it is possible to bridge the 
classical piece of general relativity, say, with a more quantumlike function for A(s). 


The key, here, is to see that we can move freely between two domains; the first being the fabric of 
space-time and the second being the realm of the density function itself ... and that this freedom of 
movement is accomplished via the Laplace transform and its inverse ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


In the case where g"’ is coupled directly to X(s), we have the following equation, where G"” is to be 
evaluated at t = (ti, t2) ... 


GUY = [o/4](e" * 2g"™(1,1) = etl + ony] 1) = ef 2g4V(1-1) + ett 2g4V1-1)) 


It is instructive to compare this to ({) at the origin [(0,0)], and more generally, it is worth pondering 
the difference between the two equations. What does it really mean to say that g"’ is or isn’t 
coupled directly to A(s), especially if the singularities associated with A(s) are everywhere ? Is ({) a 
smoothed out version of the more discrete representation above, or are there other interpretations 
that are worth considering ... 


202 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part III 


In Part II, we outlined an approach for solving the field equations of general relativity, in the case 
where the dark energy density function [A(s)] was multidimensional. Here, we wish to continue 
that discussion by modifying A(x, y) somewhat, and then, using an ‘in the limit’ argument, draw 
some interesting conclusions regarding g"’, when it is coupled directly to A(s). 

So let’s begin by defining our two-dimensional dark energy density function to be 


Mx, y) = o/ (Ke) + EVy — ey + €)) 


where ¢ is an arbitrarily small number which is greater than 0. Then in the case where g"” is not 
coupled directly to A(s), we have, for any point t = (ti, t2) in a-space ... 


G'” = (6/8”)[sinh(eti)][sinh(et2)]g"" — (*) 
Here GY = CY — kT“, where CY and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, and g"” is the foundational tensor, itself a measure of the gravitational field 


strength. 


In the case where g" is coupled directly to A(s), we have ... for any point t = (ti, t2), the following 
equation, which we’ll label (7) ... 


GUY ~ [o/4e2)(e"! + ER oUV(g 6) _ eet! + £12 oUV(_¢,8) _ eft = ER oUV(g -e) +: eet a £12 oUV(_¢ -e)) 


Now let ¢ ---» 0, so that (*) becomes (where G"’ and g"’ are to be evaluated at t, unless otherwise 
shown) ... 


G"Y = otitag"’ (§) 
Repeating the exercise for (+), we see that as ¢ ---» 0, 


Gey 


u 


otiteg"* (0,0) (4) 


Thus, for the case where (x, y) = o/(x"y’), the two expressions above [(§) and ({)] are the correct 
forms for the field equations, where g'’ isn’t and is coupled directly to A(s), respectively. But, you 
may ask, why do we care ? 


Well suppose we had to do the computations directly, according to the following expression, where 
A y) = o/(X°y’) «.. 


Gy = xe fac, ye! + yl2 dxdy 


%% 


203 


It would be a pretty simple thing to calculate (§), using the above formula, since here g"” is 
uncoupled from (s). But what happens when there is a coupling, as shown below ... 


GY = « f Sre, ye" + yl2 gy dxdy (#) 
%% 


In this case it is no longer a trivial exercise to compute the double contour integral, because it 
involves partial derivatives in x and y, when looking at the foundational tensor g"’. In fact, in 
order to get the contour integral above to agree with ({), these partial derivatives with respect to g"’ 
must vanish at the origin [O], in our chosen reference frame S !! 


For the reader who is interested ... it can be shown that ... for our limiting density [o/(x?y’)], 
computes to 


G’” = o[titag’” + tdg'’/x + tidg’”/dy + d’g"”/dxdy] 
where g"’ and its derivatives, on the right-hand side, are to be evaluated at (0,0). Smooth surfaces 


near the origin, where the partial derivatives above are all zero at O, might include things like bell- 
shaped patterns, parabolic sheets, and so on, when describing the geometry of g"’. 


Thus, just as in Part I of this series, for a well-behaved g"”, vanishing derivatives at O seem to be a 
fundamental requirement, and here we were able to demonstrate this by way of an ‘in the limit’ 
argument, as & ---> 0, in the case where g" is coupled directly to A(s). The key here is to see the 
connection between the well-behavedness of g"’ and the coupling itself ... which then begs the 
question ... does g" really have any singularities if it is joined at the hip with A(s) ? 


sesso 


204 


A picture of the limiting density [o/(x’y”)] is shown below, for a small portion of the x-y plane, and 
at the origin [O] in this picture, in particular, we should ponder the following question ... can g"’ 
really have a singularity here ... or is a well-behaved g"’ simply being funnelled through the 
singularity associated with the dark energy density function [A(s)], itself, when they are coupled 
together ? 


1o00§ 
500} 


oy 
1.0 


Even though we are ultimately searching for a dark energy density function that permeates the 
whole of our universe, say, nothing stops us, in the meantime, from doing various functional 
analyses on the field equations of general relativity, in both the coupled and uncoupled cases. 


To me, at the present time, the idea that the gravitational tensor g"Y may actually be coupled to A(s) 
is a very deep mystery, indeed, and more research needs to be done in this area, to say the least. 
But even if we don’t know whether the coupling exists or doesn’t exist, nothing stops us from 
deepening our knowledge of g" by assuming that it does. This addendum is but one example of 
how we might use the coupling to learn more about the foundational tensor itself. 


In the end, we may learn that g"’ is coupled to A(s), and that gravitational singularities really don’t 
exist after all ... only the singularities associated with (s), through which gravity is funnelled ... 


seskakeokok 


Finally, it should be pointed out that nothing new was recovered from this analysis in the case 
where g" is not coupled to X(s). As such, we can’t speak meaningfully about the well-behavedness 
of g"” in this regard. Maybe it’s there ... and maybe it’s not ... 


205 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part IV 


In Part III, we saw how to develop forms for the field equations of general relativity ... in two 
dimensions, using an ‘in the limit’ argument, which led to some interesting observations 
concerning vanishing derivatives for g"‘, in the case where it was coupled directly to the dark 
energy density function [A(s)]. Here we'd like to extend the last addendum to four dimensions. 

Let us begin, then, by recalling that for two dimensions, our limiting density 


x, y) = o/(x*y’) 


produced the following equations, for any point t = (ti, t2) ... ... in the uncoupled and coupled 
cases, respectively ... 


G™ = ourg® 


Gey 


u 


otitg"”(0,0)  (f) 
Here GY = C’Y — kT“, where C"Y and T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, and g"” is the foundational tensor, itself a measure of the gravitational field 


strength. 


How, then, do we take this limiting density in two dimensions, and scale up to four dimensions, 
without getting too bogged down in a bunch of algebra, as we calculate residues ? 


To answer the question, first note that in four dimensions, we may define the density function to be 
x, y, Z, W) = o/(x?y?z2w?) 


and realize immediately that in the uncoupled case, residue calculations in 2-space are essentially 
no different than in 4-space, and so the expression below 


GW = «ef Sf fac, YZ, wyeXt! + yt2 + zt3 + wt4 dxdydzdw 
Y% Yo % 


naturally extends (§) to 


G'Y = otitetstag'® 


206 


But what about the coupled case where the following expression applies ... 


GY = SSS fre, y,Z, W) ext + yt2 + zt3 + wt gy dxdydzdw 


YoY Yo Yo 


To say the least, this is an intolerable mess, but the good news is ... there is a way out of it. To see 


that this is so, recall from Part III in this series, that in nvo dimensions, the above expression led to 
the following result ... 


G’” = o[titeg’” + tdg’’/x + tidg’”/dy + A?g"/Axdy]  (*) 


where g"’ and its derivatives, on the right-hand side, were to be evaluated at (0,0). Rewriting (*) in 
operator format, it now becomes ... 


GY’ = o(ti + 0/dx)(t2 + d/dy)g’” (fF) 
Notice that in one dimension [say x], we recover from (+) the coupled expression in Part I of this 
series, for the density o/(x’), and so it is natural to suppose that (+) will extend to 4-space in the 
following way, where again g"” and its derivatives are to be evaluated at the origin [O] ... 


GY” = o(tr + 0/8x)(t + A/dy)(ts + 0/6z)(ts + d/aw)g” (#) 


Assuming our extrapolation is correct, this, then, becomes the correct form for the field equations 
of general relativity ... for the limiting density 


x, y, Z, W) = o/(x*y?z?w?) 


in the case where g"’ is coupled directly to A(s). If the derivatives in (#) all vanish at the origin 
[O], which we expect, then (#) becomes the following result, for any point t = (ti, ta, ts, t4) ... 


G'Y = otitatstag"(O, 0, 0, 0) 
Just as in Part III, smooth surfaces near the origin, where the partial derivatives in (#) are all zero at 


O, might include things like bell-shaped patterns, parabolic sheets, and so on, when describing the 
geometry of g"’. But now, of course, we are in 4-space ... 


207 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part V 


In this addendum, we'd like to explore a dark energy density function [A(s)] of type ols. So far 
we haven’t looked at these kinds of densities, mainly because the contour integration is more 
complex to compute, but here we are going to take the plunge, as they say, and see what we can 
learn, in this case. 


In order to work with square root densities, a contour of the following kind is required, because we 
are dealing with a branching point at the origin [O] of the star. 


The Laplace inverse is actually the line integral along AB, and since the contour integral itself 
vanishes along the large arcs BDE and LNA, as R ---> , all we are left with is the nvo arms EH 
and KL, as well as the small circle HJK, where in the latter case, the contour integral will again 
vanish as € ---» 0, provided g" is well-behaved near the origin [O] of our perfect star. The well- 
behavedness of g"’ applies within the context of a coupling to the density function X(s). 


In the case where g"’ is not coupled to A(s) = o/s, we have, for any radial distance r [see Part I in 
this series] ... 


Guy 


u 


kg" } eS X(s)ds 


(o /Var )g"'Y 


Here G®Y = CY’ — kT’, where C"'Y and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, « is some constant, and y denotes the line integral along AB in the picture 
above. We are, therefore, essentially calculating the Laplace inverse by computing its value along 
the arms EH and KL, and then letting R ---» 00. 


208 


Now for the harder, but more interesting part. Suppose g"” is indeed coupled to A(s) = o/Vs. Then 
the same approach applies, as above, but now we calculate according to the following expression, 
where r is the usual radial distance from the origin [O], in our chosen frame of reference S ... 


uv 


«fem Xs)g"" ds 


Y 


fen 


(6/1) S [e“*g'"¥(-s)/Vs ]ds  (*) 
0 


The above integral is indeed a peculiar one, because it implies the existence of a gravitational field 
at a negative radial distance [s] from the origin of the star. There is no getting around this, if we are 
to follow the rules for computing the Laplace inverse where it involves a branching point, as it does 
here. The gravitational tensor must exist for negative s, which means the gravitational field itself is 
being funnelled into and out of our reality, via the singularity associated with A(s), as shown below 


Thus, you could say that we are, perhaps, getting our first glimpse of the funnelling effect via (*), 
which up until now, is not something we could have seen, in any previous addenda in this series. 


And since we have to consider 4(s) = o/Vs to be a legitimate density of sorts, the notion or even the 
existence of a gravitational field in the negative radial direction should not be dismissed lightly, in 
the case where g"‘ is coupled directly to A(s). It could very well exist, and indeed ... if (*) has 
anything to say about it ... it really does exist ... 


209 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part VI 


In Part V, we looked at the density A(s) = o/Vs, which had a branching point at the center of the 
star [O], and discovered some interesting things concerning the gravitational tensor g"’, in the case 
where it was coupled directly to the dark energy density function [A(s)]. Here we'd like to continue 
that exercise by examining the function (s) = 6/sV/s, which has both a simple pole and a branching 
point at O, and see what we can learn about the field equations of general relativity, in this case. 


Let us begin, then, with the picture below, which depicts the contour we shall use, for an offsetting 
density defined to be A(s) = o/(s — a)Vs, where a is an arbitrarily small radial distance from the 
center of the star [O]. Later on, we will let a ---» 0 to achieve the desired result. 


Just as in Part V, the Laplace inverse is the line integral along AB, and since things vanish along 
the large arcs BDE and LNA, as well as the small circle HJK, as R ---» 00 and ¢ ---» 0, all we are left 
with is the arms EH and KL, plus the residue at a. And again, we assume that in the case where 
g'’ is coupled directly to A(s), it is well-behaved in a neighborhood of O. Indeed, we expect the 
derivatives of g"Y to vanish here !! 


In the case where g"’ is not coupled to A(s), the field equations of general relativity may be written 
(for any radial distance r) as follows ... 


GY = gh’ ex(s)ds (*) 
Y 


Here G"Y = C"Y — kT", where C"Y and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, K is some constant, and y denotes the line integral along AB in the picture 
above. 


210 


Realizing the entire contour envelops a simple pole at a ... we find that (*) computes to ... 
oo 
Gh = og {e" Wa — (Im) f teM(s+av5)Ids)_ 
() 


Since the integral on the right-hand side is actually ... 


(nt /Va )e“erfe(Var ) 


where erfc() is the complement to the error function erf(), (+) reduces to ... 


GY = og’ {e™ /Va Jerf(Var ) 


And in the limit, as a ---» 0, the expression above becomes the following, for the field equations of 
general relativity, in the case where g" is not coupled to (s) = o/sV ... 


GY = 2677s" 


Undaunted, we’ll now repeat the exercise, in the case where g"’ is coupled to A(s), by starting with 
the offsetting density \(s) = o/(s — a)Vs. In this scenario (+) becomes ... 
oo 
GY = ofe™g"*(a)/Va -— (1/n) S [e"e"“(-s)/((s + a)Vs)]ds} (4) 
Co) 
Rewriting ({) as follows, 


GY = ofeTg@Na - Cm) f fees) + e™@ —2"%@)M((5 + DVS Jd} 
° 


and, after combining terms as we did above in the uncoupled case, and first letting a ---» 0 outside 
the integral sign, one has ... 


GY = of 2/7Frg’O) — (1/m) J [ee*Cs) - g*(@)M((s + a)V5 lds} 
Oo 


211 


Now repeat, but this time let a ---» 0 under the integral sign, and we finally arrive at our destination 
for the field equations of general relativity, in the case where g"’ is coupled directly to the density 
function A(s) = o/sVs ... 


GY = of2Vr7ne"%0) — (1/m) f fees) —2"OSV5) Ids} (8) 
oO 


Just as in Part V, we see again that a gravitational field exists at a negative radial distance [s] from 
the origin of the star [O], which speaks to the funnelling effect through the singularity associated 
with (s) at O. 


The gravitational tensor g" is being funnelled 
into and out of our reality via the singularity at 
the origin of the star associated with A(s) ... 


And finally, when looking at the integral in [§] above, one can make the case for convergence near 
the origin, because we expect both g"’ and its derivatives to be well-behaved here. For example, if 
g'’ behaved in parabolic fashion near O (because of vanishing derivatives at O), then a Taylor 
series expansion gives us, for smalls ... 


ges) — g!%(O) = -g!(0)'s + Yag'"(O)'"'s? +... 


uv 


Vogh(0)"" s2 


Here a tick mark means differentiate once and then evaluate at O; two tick marks mean differentiate 
twice and then evaluate at O, and so on ... 


212 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part VII 


In previous addenda in this series, we really haven’t dealt with a finite number of singularities 
associated with the dark energy density function [A(s)], other than the one at the center of our 
perfect star, in a chosen frame of reference S. So here we are going to do just that, and we’ll begin, 
then, by referring to the diagram below ... 


y gt tat = 52 
A ey 
x= scos@ 
(x,y) 
y 
fi 
< ; a 
v 


The perfect star is to be of radius 1, centered at the origin [O] in a frame S ... where the density 
function [A(s)] has physical singularities at O ... and at the points (1, 0) and (-1, 0). Furthermore, 
we will assume an ‘inverse square’ relationship for A(s), and that the overall dark energy density 
function is obtained through addition. 


At the origin, 4(s) = o/s’, where o is some constant, and at the other two points, we have the 
following distance constructions, for any point (x, y) in the two-dimensional plane, where we use 
and 1, as labels ... 

&s) = (x—1P + y? = 8? — 2scos(@) +1... from (x,y) to (+1, 0) 

n(s) = (x+ 1)? + y? = s? + 2scos(@) + 1... from (x, y) to (-1, 0) 
Thus, our overall density function is the following sum ... 

Ms) = o[l/s? + 1/E(s) + 1/n(s)] 

Now the simple zeroes of E(s) are e'® and e, and for 1(s), are -e! and -e!®. We can, therefore, 


for any given 0, compute the Laplace inverse, according to the following expression, in the case 
where A(s) is not coupled to g"’ (see Part I in this series) ... 


GY = xe} eXs)ds (*) 
7 


Als} 


Here G®Y = CY’ — kT’, where CY and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 

tensors, respectively, K is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration that 

envelops any singularities tied to X(s). 

Excluding the leading og" term for the moment ... for &(s) and n(s), (*) computes to 
ef°S@)cin(rsin(®))/sin(@) and e*°S®sin(rsin(®))/sin() 

respectively, and of course, 1/: s? inverts to r. Combining all three, we have, for any radial distance 

r, given an angle @ between 0 and 27, say, our two-dimensional solution for the plane, where g"” is 


not coupled directly to X(s) ... 


GY & ofr + eS@sin(rsin(®))/sin(®) + e7°S(8)sin(rsin(@))/sin(®)] 


o[r + 2sin(rsin(9))cosh(rcos(8))/sin(@)]g"* (+) 


sesefesoieok 


214 


The plots above are of the bracketed expression in (+), for the case where r= 1, 3, 5, and 7. They 
are actually our conscious or subconscious perception of dark energy as a whole, at different radial 
distances from the origin [O], along different polar angles, relative to the x-axis. This is because 
the bracketed expression is the Laplace inverse of the dark energy density function [A(s)] ... which 
brings us back into the domain of dark energy itself. That is to say, G'Y = C'Y—kT"’ . 
remainder after subtracting out tangible matter from the space-time fabric. It is the singulariti 
associated with A(s) that power this substance we call dark energy. 


Notice that as r increases, the dark energy, for the most part, hovers around 0 for most values of 0, 
and then periodically spikes over a short range. It is these spikes in the dark energy that the 
astronomers cannot see with their instruments, at the present time, and it is doubtful they will ever 
be able to detect singularities associated with A(s), since these anomalies are guantumlike in nature. 


With only one singularity associated with A(s) = o/s”, and centered at the origin [O] of the star, it is 
not possible to see the real behavior of dark energy, because it behaves uniformly in all directions, 
at least relative to O. With three singularities tied together in additive fashion, the picture now 
becomes clearer ... 


A picture of A(s), with three singularities 
following an inverse square relationship, 
that was used in this analysis. 


In the case where g" is coupled to A(s), we need to better understand how the foundational tensor 
is analytically continued to the entire unit circle in the complex plane C. I’m currently working on 
some ideas here, and plan to release an addendum on the subject in the near future. Stay tuned, as 
they say ... 


ses 


215 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


If we include the points (0, 1) and (0, -1) in the analysis, so that, in total, we have five singularities 
associated with the dark energy density function [A(s)], then (+) becomes ... 


G'Y = ofr + 2sin(rsin(8))cosh(rcos(@))/sin(@) + 2sin(rcos(8))cosh(rsin(8))/cos(@)]g"*  (§) 


A picture of the density function for A(s) in the 
case where there are five singularities .. .. that 
are all inverse square, and interacting together 


A plot of the bracketed expression in (§) above ... reflecting our perception of dark energy, for a 
radius r = 15 and varying polar angles, relative to the x-axis ... 


r=15,0=x 


216 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part VIII 


In this addendum, we’d like to continue the discussion laid out in Part VII, and find a description 
for the field equations of general relativity ... in the case where g"’ is coupled directly to the dark 
energy density function [A(s)]. Here, we will assume A(s) has five singularities, and I will refer the 
reader to the details in the last addendum for more information. 


Recall that the poles of X(s) fall on the unit circle [@] in the complex plane C, and also at the center 


[O] of this unit circle, in our chosen frame of reference S. In the case of a coupling, we need to 
evaluate the following expression ... 


GY 2 «fer As)gh’ds  (*) 


Y 


Here G"Y = CY — kT“, where CY and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, K is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration that 
envelops any singularities tied to X(s). 

Since there are poles on @ and they could be anywhere here, it is not possible to evaluate g"’ in (*), 


unless, for example, we first average g'’ over the entire unit circle. To do this, let us start with a 
function g(s), which is well-behaved in C, and note from residue theory that 


(0) = (ioniy f (e(s)/s)ds 


where y is the contour @. Now let s = e’9, so that ds = ie!®d@. Then the integral above becomes .. .. 


2n 


(0) = (/2niy f (e(s)/s) ds = (2m) f g(e!®)ao 
” ° 


Let 0 = 00 < 01 < 02 <... < 0, = 22, be a set of angles, so that the radial line & runs from the 

origin [O] to @, at an incline of 6; to the x-axis, say. Then the integral just above, on the right-hand 

side, is the limiting case (n ---» 0) of the following expression, where Aj = 6) — 6)-1 ... 
(1/2m)[g(e®")Ar + g(el®2)Az +... + g(ei®™)An] 


Now make ail of the Ai equal so that Ai = 2x/n. Then in the limit, as n ---» 0, we have ... 


gave = [g(el") + g(e!%) + .. + g(ei)J/n = g(0) 


217 


Thus, g(0) really is the average of g(s) over the unit circle @ in the complex plane, and so we have 
the following theorem, concerning g"’, in the case where it is coupled directly to A(s), and thus 
well-behaved ... 


If g"’ is the gravitational tensor extended to the complex plane C, 
then the average value of g"’ over C is g"‘(0), where C is the unit 
circle in C, centered at O. 


We can use this powerful result to rewrite (*) as follows ... 


Git = «e""(0) fe AGs)ds (*) 
Y 


By doing so ... the field equations of general relativity ... in the case of five singularities, now 
become, for the coupled scenario ... 

G' = ofr + 2sin(rsin(0))cosh(rcos(@))/sin(@) + 2sin(rcos(0))cosh(rsin(0))/cos(@)]g"*(0) 
Note that here we have dropped the term [g"’Y]'|o ... which is the derivative of g"’, evaluated at the 
origin. Previous studies in this series indicate that vanishing derivatives at O ... seem to be a 


fundamental requirement, when examining the well-behavedness of g"’, and so, we’ll give it the 
boot, as they say [this remark applies in the case of a coupling]. 


More generally, if the singularities associated with A(s) are symmetrically distributed, relative to O, 
then the ideas put forth in this note should apply, as we scale up in count. In other words, aside 
from a little more algebra, it shouldn’t matter whether the number of singularities is just a few or 
perhaps a dozen. 


And by using averaging techniques, like the one shown here, we can simplify greatly the residue 
calculations, and thus, the forms for the field equations, themselves. I suppose there is no end to 
what’s possible, when you think about it ... 


218 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part IX 


In this note, we’re going to take our lessons learned in the last few addenda and scale up to three 
dimensions. In our quest to write down a more complete form for the field equations of general 
relativity, it only makes sense to do this, so we'll outline the approach, and keep the details to a 
minimum. Let us begin, then, with the diagram below, which shows a typical layout for spherical 
coordinates ... 


xtyteras? 


x = ssin(p)cos(0) ; y = ssin()sin(®) ; z = scos() 
Our perfect star shall be a unit sphere, centered at the origin [O] in a frame of reference S, and we’ ll 
scale up to seven physical singularities this time ... where each follows an inverse square 
relationship. These singularities will be located at the origin, and at the points 

(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1) 
The distance construction for any of these points is routine, and so we'll only show one here; viz ... 
&s) = (x-1) + y? + 2 = s? — 2ssin(p)cos(0) + 1... from (x,y,z) to (1,0, 0) 
Now define the angle a so that 
cos(a) = sin(p)cos(0) 

Then we can recast the distance above as 


&(s) = s? — 2scos(a) + 1 


and here we know from Part VII ... that the zeroes of &(s) are going to be located at e! and e!%, 
respectively. 


219 


Thus, we can take the Laplace inverse of the following expression ... 
Gl x cog fe &(s))ds(*) 

Y 
and so begins our journey into the three-dimensional world of general relativity and dark energy, in 
the case where g" is not coupled directly to the dark energy density function [o/&(s)], itself. 
Here GY = CY’ — kT’, where C“Y and TY’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, « and o are constants, and y denotes some form of contour integration that 
envelops any singularities or poles tied to o/&(s). 


The exercise can now be repeated for each point where there is a physical singularity, and when it’s 
all said and done, we have the following expressions, which we’ll label (+) ... 


G"’ = ofr + 2sin(rsin(a))cosh(rcos(a))/sin(a) + 2sin(rcos(B))cosh(rsin(B))/cos(B) + w(>)] 2" 


cos(a) 


sin(p)cos(9) ; sin(B) = sin(p)sin(@) 


w(p) = 2sin(rsin())cosh(rcos($))/sin(>) 


Notice that the /ast term, in the bracketed expression above, is actually the contribution from the 
singularities at the north and south points of the star, and that at @ = 2/2, a and B become 0. We are 
in the equatorial plane here, but now have an additional term \(), which computes to 2sin(r). This 
term would not appear, if our analysis was restricted to two dimensions initially, just as it was in 
Part VII, where there were five physical singularities. 


In the case where g"” is coupled directly to the overall dark energy density function [A(s)], the only 
change to the equation above is g"’ mapping over to g"*(0). Please see Part VIII for more details 
on how this comes about ... 

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
Here we'd like to do a few plot comparisons to see how theory lines up, by comparing results in the 


equatorial plane ( = 7/2), with those at an angle @ = 7/4, to the z-axis. 


Right Cone 


r- Radius 


220 


In the diagram above, the cone contains a blue circle at an angle >, and at a radius r, from the origin 
[O]. We want to know, for certain values of r, what the bracketed expression in (+) looks like, as 
we traverse the circle itself, and then compare to the corresponding circle in the equatorial plane, 
where » = 7/2. Our perspective is always going to be relative to O, so essentially, we are 
comparing our perception of dark energy in the two-dimensional setup of Part VII, with the three- 
dimensional setup in this addendum. Here are the plots ... 


WAU 


r=11,0=x,o=72/2,2D star 


r=13,0=x,o=n/2, 2Dstar r=13,0=x,o=2/4, 3D star 


The first thing to note about these pictures is that, while they are similar, there are some notable 
differences. For a 2D star in the equatorial plane, not much changes for r = 11 versus r = 13. But 
with a 3D star the patterns do look different, and no doubt, this is due to two things: first, we are 
dealing with seven physical dark energy singularities now, instead of five in the 2D model, and 
secondly, our perspective for the 3D star is relative to the origin [O] of our coordinate system. We 
are, in the 3D case, looking up at an angle of 45 degrees, toward the north pole, and traversing the 
blue circle in the cone, as we make measurements of the dark energy, itself. 


And there are other strange, and yet fascinating outcomes, at different radii and zeniths [], which, 
perhaps, we’ll explore in future addenda ... 


221 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part X 


In this note, mainly out of curiosity, we are going to explore densities of type A(s) = o/s again, but 
this time we’ll include two physical singularities at the points (-1, 0) and (1, 0), for a perfect star in 
two dimensions, centered at the origin [O], in our chosen frame of reference S. As in previous 
addenda, the star shall be a unit circle, and at the origin there shall be a third physical singularity as 
well. In all, three physical singularities following a simple inverse relationship, as shown in the 
diagram below ... 


At the origin, A(s) = o/s, where o is some constant, and at the other two points, we have the 
following distance constructions, for any point (x, y) in the two-dimensional plane, where we use 
and 1 as labels (see Part VII for more details on the general setup for polar coordinates) ... 


&s) = J@-D?+y? 


Js? — 2scos(@) + 1... from (x, y) to (+1, 0) 


nls) = Je +1)? + y? Js? + 2scos(@) + 1 ... from (x,y) to (-1,0) 


Thus, our overall density function is the following sum ... 
Ms) = o[l/s + Ves) + I/n(s)] 
Now the zeroes of E(s) are e'® and e“®, and for n(s), are -e' and -e". We can, therefore, for any 


given 8, compute the Laplace inverse, according to the following expression, in the case where A(s) 
is not coupled to g" (see Part I in this series) ... 


GY = xg] eT X(s)ds  (*) 
7 


222 


Here GY = CY’ — kT’, where CY and T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, K is some constant, and y denotes some form of contour integration that 
envelops any singularities tied to X(s). 


Let us now introduce the following Bessel contour, which we will use to calculate the Laplace 
inverse for A(s), which, itself, is actually the line integral along AB in the diagram below ... 


£ Cc 
B 
E D 
ising 
F 
\ -isine 
A 
G La 


By first translating s ---» s — cos(9), we can deal with the inverse of 1/€(s), realizing now that the 
zeroes of &(s) fall along the imaginary axis at isin(®) and -isin(@), respectively. All we need to do is 
evaluate the integration along the arms CD and LE, noting that isin(9) is a branching point, and 
then, of course, do the same thing for the two arms associated with -isin(8). By letting the large arc 
BCEFGA tend to © and the small circles ---» 0, we will achieve the desired result. To wit ... 


oo eo 
20°08) fel" [yz —sinzB dy 2078) Ferd / 7 —SnFO ay 


sin(0) sin(@) 
isin(®) arms -isin(6) arms 


Combining the two, and factoring in the constants « and o, yields, for our Laplace inverse ... 


co 
Cornero) f sin(yr) //y? — sin? 6 dy 


sin(0) 


223 


The same approach can be used for n(s), but now we translate according to s ---» s + cos(@). The 
result is ... 


oo 
Cornet [ sin(yr) //y? — sin? 6 dy 


sin(@) 


Adding the two pieces together and noting that the Laplace inverse of 1/s is | ... we have the 
following expression for the field equations of general relativity [for any r, and any angle 6 between 
0 and a, say], in the case where g"" is not coupled directly to A(s) ... 


oo 
GY = ofl + (A/nycosh(reos(0)) J sin(yr) Ly? — sin? 6 dy|g"” 
sin(@) 


There are a couple of things worth noting here. First, when @ = 0 or , we are looking to the east or 
to the west, relative to the origin [O] of the star. This is where we should expect to see dark energy 
at its strongest, for any radial distance r, due to the location of the physical singularities associated 
with the density function (s). And indeed, the bracketed expression above computes to 


1 + 2cosh(r) 
here. 


At @ = 7/2, we are looking at the north pole of the star, relative to O, and the bracketed expression 
now computes to 


1 + 2Jo(r) 


where Jo(r) is a Bessel function of the first kind. In between 0 and 2/2, say, it looks like you are 
going to get a mix of exponential harmonics and Bessel-like behavior, at differing radii [r]. Thus, 
Bessel functions seem to play a critical role in the behavior of dark energy and general relativity, 
when the underlying dark energy density function [A(s)] follows a simple inverse relationship. This 
could be a significant finding in terms of understanding how dark energy is woven into the space- 
time fabric, but at the same time, we cannot disregard the patterns we discovered when studying 
inverse square densities in the last few addenda. Perhaps a combination of the two results lies 
closest to the truth ... ?? 


224 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XI 


In the last addendum, we saw that for a two-dimensional star, centered about the origin O, in a 
chosen frame of reference S [with physical singularities at (-1, 0) and (1, 0), respectively], the field 
equations of general relativity, for simple inverse densities, could be written as [for any r, and any 
angle 0 between 0 and a, say] ... 


co 
GY = ofl + (A/nycosh(reos(0)) J sin(yr) | [y? — sin? 6 dy]g"” 
sin(@) 


Further to this, we observed that at 8 = 0 or z, the bracketed expression above [which we’ll label 
(+)], reduced to 

1 + 2cosh(r) 
and at 0 = 2/2, became 


1 + 2Jo(r) 


where Jo(r) is a Bessel function of the first kind (derived from the Mehler-Sonine formula). Now 
from a physical standpoint, we must have agreement in (+) at r = 0, no matter the angle @. Clearly, 
in the two cases above, both agree at the origin [O], and compute to 3, but this must be so for any @ 
between 0 and a, and thus we have the following intriguing result, which may be of some interest to 
number theorists ... 


lim (Arnycosh(reos(0))_f sin(yr) /\/y? — sin? 6 dy = 2 


r--->0 sin(0) 


The expression can be simplified, just a bit, by noting that the cosh() term tends to | as r ---» 0, and 
so we have, for all0 < 0 <7... 


oo 
lim S sin(yr) /,/y? — sin? 6 dy = 1/2 


r--->0 sin(@) 


Whether there is any number-theoretic significance to this result, I’m not sure, but it is interesting 
to, at least, see how we might derive a result of the kind above, arguing from physical principles. 
Indeed, if we had to show it was true, just using mathematics, could we ... ?? 


225 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XII 


In the last addendum, we commented on limiting expressions for our two-dimensional solution in 
the plane, with three physical singularities, where the density function was of type A(s) = o/s. The 
solution is reproduced below ... 


co 
GY = ofl + (A/nycosh(reos(0)) J sin(yr) Ly? — sin? 6 dy]g"” 
sin(@) 


After consulting various handbooks on Laplace transforms and their inverses, it turns out that we 
can simplify the above equation even more, and rewrite it as ... 


G'’ = o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(8))Jo(rsin(6))]g"” 


where Jo() is Bessel function of the first kind. Thus, as r ---» 0, the bracketed expression does 
indeed compute to 3, for any 0 < @ < a, say, just as we conjectured in Part XI. 


And, if we decide to scale up to five physical singularities ... by adding the north and south points 
(0, 1) and (0, -1), all we need to do is let sin(@) and cos(@) trade places, giving us the following ... 


G*’ = o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(@)) + 2cosh(rsin(9))Jo(reos(8))]g"" 


Moving into the three-dimensional world of general relativity, with seven physical singularities 
located at the origin [O], in our chosen frame of reference S, as well as at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1) 


yields the following expressions [see Part [IX for more information on the general setup regarding 
spherical coordinates] ... 


G'Y = o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)) + 2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)) + u()]g"* (+) 
cos(a) = sin()cos(@) ; sin(B) = sin()sin(0) 
Hp) = 2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin($)) 
Notice that the /ast term, in the bracketed expression above, is actually the contribution from the 
singularities at the north and south points of the star, and that at @ = 71/2, a and B become 0. We are 
in the equatorial plane here, but now have an additional term 1(p), which computes to 2Jo(r). This 
term would not appear, if our analysis was restricted to two dimensions initially, where there are 


five physical singularities, say. 


Now we’d like to do a few plot comparisons to see how theory lines up, by comparing results in the 
equatorial plane ( = 7/2), with those at an angle = 7/4, to the z-axis. 


In the diagram above, the cone contains a blue circle at an angle , and at a radius r, from the origin 
[O]. We want to know, for certain values of r, what the bracketed expression in (+) looks like, as 
we traverse the circle itself, and then compare to the corresponding circle in the equatorial plane, 
where » = n/2. Our perspective is always going to be relative to O, so essentially, we are 
comparing our perception of dark energy in the two-dimensional setup ... with five physical 
singularities, versus the three-dimensional setup with seven. Here are the plots, to mull over ... 


r=11,0=x,o=2/2, 2D star r=11,0=x,o=7/4, 3D star 


227 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XIII 


In this short note we offer a quick proof that 


Jo(rsin(®)) = mS sin(yr) //y? — sin? 6 dy 


sin(@) 
where Jo() is a Bessel function of the first kind. This identity forms the backbone of our compact 


forms for the field equations in general relativity, for densities of type (s) = o/s, and ultimately 
allows us to plot impressions of dark energy, itself. Please see Part XII for more of the details here. 


When 6 = 7/2, the right-hand side of the expression above becomes Jo(r), according to the Mehler- 
Sonine formula, and so we may write, replacing the variable r with rsin(@) ... 


co 


Jo(rsin(®)) = mf sin(yrsin(®)) (/y2—1dy (+) 
1 


Now let u = ysin(@). Then the right-hand side of (+) becomes, for @ between 0 and g, say ... 


00 
ams sin(ur) /Vu2 — sin? 6 du 
sin(@) 


which is what we wanted to show. 


It’s not a terribly rigorous proof, but it seems to get the job done, and in my opinion, is better than 
looking things up in a handbook, which is the approach that was taken in the last addendum. And 
with this, we’ve come full circle in our study of dark energy density functions, that are both inverse 
square, and inverse simple. Hopefully the reader has benefited from these discussions, and may 
feel inspired to research the ideas further ... 


SRSA 


At the same time, stay tuned. I’m always working on something, and who knows what’s coming 
down the pike next. Something interesting ... I hope ... 


228 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XIV 


In this note, we are going to discuss densities of type A(s) = o/s again, just as we have in the last 
few addenda, but now address the case where the gravitational tensor g"Y is coupled directly to the 
dark energy density function [A(s)]. So far, we’ve avoided the issue, largely because it’s a complex 
one, but alas, the time has come to deal with it ... 


Let us begin, then, by recalling the Bessel contour that was used to produce a solution in the first 
place [see Part X], and shown below for convenience ... 


E||\(e = 
B 
L|||p 
asin8 
F 
fa) 


In evaluating the contour for &(s) [again, see Part X for the general setup], we are really evaluating 
the following expression, after first translating s ---» s — cos(@), in the case of a coupling ... 


oePost9) fF e*g"""(s) /,[(@— isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds 
Y 


Here, « and o are constants and y denotes the contour above. But now imagine isin(@) drifting 
down to the origin [O], as 6 ---» 0 in the picture above, and —isin(@) drifting up to O. Then the 
expression above becomes ... 


coe" f eT e"(s)/J)(s) ds (+) 


Y 


where y is now the large contour BCEFGAB. In other words, the arms CD and LE no longer exist, 
and nor do their counterparts in the lower half-plane, and so (+) computes to 


ce’g"(0) 


229 
since we are dealing with a simple pole here at O. The exercise can now be repeated for 1(s), after 
first translating s ---» s + cos(0), and in the limit as 0 ---» 0, we obtain 
oe'g"*(0) 
This takes care of the physical singularities at the points (1, 0) and (-1, 0) ... and since there was a 
third physical singularity at O to begin with, defined by A(s) = o/s, we take its Laplace inverse 


[which is og"’Y(0)], and so recover the field equations of general relativity in the case of a coupling, 
when 0 is small ... 


G"Y = ofl + 2cosh(r)]g"*(0) (8) 


Comparing to the general solution in the uncoupled case, where g'’ is always a function of r, given 
any angle 9, viz... 


G"" = ofl + 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(®))]g"" — (*) 
we see that as 0 ---» 0, (*) becomes 
G"Y = o[1 + 2cosh(r)]g"” 
and so (§) and (*) agree symbolically, when 8 is small. This is very good news, because it allows to 
make a choice philosophically, and that choice is this: do we take this partial result and live with it 


for all0 < ® < a, in the case of a coupling, or do we struggle to find another expression for (§) as 
8 drifts northward to 7/2, say. 


I say we take what we can get in this game, and live with what we’ve got. If we do that, then in the 
case where g"’ is coupled directly to X(s), the field equations of general relativity may be written as 


G"Y = ofl + 2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(®))]g"”(0) 


no matter the angle @ ... a result which is consistent with inverse square densities, discussed in 
previous addenda, and other densities too, throughout this series. And with that, we’ll now say 
with some confidence, that inverse simple densities have been dealt with, to the best of our ability 


230 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XV 


In this addendum, we are going to revisit densities of type A(s) = olsVs again, and derive a result in 
number theory, from physical principles. It isn’t always the case that we need to be working with 
general relativity per se, or any other foundational duality, for that matter, so here we'll use what 
we’ve learned in previous addenda, and show that 


m = 2V21(3/4)T(5/4) (8) 


where I'() is the gamma function. Note that since z is transcendental, at least one of I'(3/4) and 
T(5/4) must be as well. Most likely they both are, but we’ll take what we can get in this case ... 


Now because we are dealing with more complex densities here, we'll defer to handbooks on 
Laplace transforms and their inverses, at least initially, and so begin by noting the following ... 


T(v + %)u2’~1 ---» Laplace Inverse ---» V1 (2a) r’Jv(ar), u = Vs? + a2, Re(v) > -1/2 
Here I'() denotes the gamma function, as we said, and Jv() is a Bessel function of order v. Now 
when v = 1/4 we are essentially dealing with X(s) = o/sys ... and so ... for a two dimensional star, 
with a physical singularity at the origin [O], we may write the field equations of general relativity 
as follows, in the case where g" is not coupled to A(s) ... 

GY = ofr /TG/4)(20)")r!*Tia(arig’® — *) 
See Part VI for more on the Laplace inverse of o/s\s itself, and also see some of the more recent 
addenda on how Bessel contours were used in the case of simple inverse densities. In this setup, we 


define @ to be an arbitrarily small number, and eventually we’ll let a ---» 0. 


Now as z ---» 0, it can be shown that (see, for example, the online handbook titled Digital Library 
of Mathematical Functions) 


J(z) ---» (2/2)” / Tv + 1) 
and so (*) becomes, for fixed r, and a ---» 0... 
GY = ol(vm /(PG/A)T/4W2))vrie"* 4H) 


Comparing to our result in Part VI, and reproduced here, for the uncoupled case ... 


GY = 2677s" 


we see that the bracketed expression in (+) must agree with 2,/r/T as a ---» 0, and thus we have no 
choice but to conclude (§) is indeed true ... 


231 


We can now deal with the case where 4(s) = o/sVs has three physical singularities, where one is at 
the origin O of our frame of reference S, and the other two are at (1, 0) and (-1, 0), respectively. 
Here we are dealing with a two dimensional star, which is a unit circle, centered at O. 


In this scenario, where g" is not coupled to A(s), (*) becomes, after first translating s ---» s — cos(®) 
and then to s ---» s + cos(8) ... 


GY = 2oL/r/m + Wr /TG/4)2a)!)r!* cosh(rp)Jva(ra)] g"" 
with a = sin(®) and B = cos(8). And now letting  ---» 0, the above equation reduces to ... 
GY = 2o/r/m [1 + 2cosh(n]g"’  (#) 


In the case where g"’ is coupled to A(s), we repeat the exercise in Part XIV, where the roots isin(®) 
and —isin(@) merge at the origin of our Bessel contour. As 6 ---» 0, from Part VI, the integral 


Koel) f° e*g"(s) [((s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)))>4 ds 
Y 


evaluates to 2ce",/r/m g"'(0) for large r, after first translating s ---» s — cos(®). Repeating, in the 
case where s ---» s + cos(®) ... and combining with the physical singularity that was already at O to 
begin with, gives us the following, for the coupled scenario ... 


G'Y = 20/r/m[1 + 2cosh(r)]g""(0) (4) 


Thus, (#) and ({) agree symbolically for small ® and large r, when X(s) = o/svs. If we’re content 
with this agreement, under these constraints, then more generally, we may write 


GY = 2olfr/m + Wit /T(3/4)(2a)")r'*cosh(rB)Jiva(rat)] g"*(0) 


when g"” is coupled directly to A(s) ... 


232 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XVI 


In this piece, we are going to formulate a general theorem for the types of densities we have been 
studying, based on our previous research. Let us begin then, with the following statement, which 
was first introduced in the last addendum, and which we’lI label (+) ... 


T(v + %)u*’~! ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Vt (2a) ’rYv(ar), u = Vs? + a, Re(v) > -1/2 


Here I'() denotes the gamma function and Jy() is a Bessel function of order v. Now suppose our 
dark energy density function is defined, in principle, to be of type 


Xs) = o/st 


where = 2v + 1. Then any formulation of the field equations of general relativity, that 
incorporates dark energy via A(s), will always include Bessel functions. That is to say, 


GY = He") 


where ‘P(.) denotes the Laplace inverse of A(s), obtained from (+). Here G"Y = C"Y— kT", where 
Cc" and T" are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively, and g" is the 
gravitational tensor. 


For example, if v = 1/2, we would be looking at inverse square densities, discussed early on, and if 
v = 0, we'd be looking at inverse simple densities, and so forth. No matter our choice, so long as 
we have pL > 0, so that A(s) ---» 0 with increasing s, Bessel functions will always be an inherent part 
of the solution, as per (*). 


It is important, I feel, to stop and think about this for a minute ... because Bessel functions, 
themselves ... appear everywhere in nature, from electromagnetic waves, to heat conduction and 
acoustics, fluid flow and even Schrodinger’s equation ... there you’ll find them. So, we could ask, 
why wouldn't they appear in general relativity or any other foundational duality [such as energy- 
mass or wave-particle], where we are interested in the overall connection to dark energy ? 


In the case where g"’ is coupled directly to A(s), it is not that easy to produce an equivalent to (*), 
because g"’ becomes part of the residue calculation. However, we have enough evidence now to 
offer up the following conjecture, viz ... 


Gh = BO)g"(0) (8) 


where here, g"’ is well-behaved at the origin [O] of our frame of reference S, and [g"’’]'|o = 0. 
The tick mark means differentiate once, and evaluate at O ... 


233 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XVII 


We're getting to the end in this series, so in this note a few closing and clarification remarks are in 
order. First, we'd like to go back and talk, for a moment, about the translated integral that was used 
in Part XIV, to establish a coupling in the case of small 0 ... for inverse simple densities. It is 
reproduced here ... 


Koel) f° eg" (s) / (s — isin(8))(s + isin(®)) ds (*) 
Y 


By translating s ---» s — cos(0), what we are really doing is setting u = s — cos(@), say, and rewriting 
the original integral as above, where the original integral is (see Part X for the details) ... 


xo f eg") //s? — 2s cos(@) + 1ds 
Y 


The operation is completed by mapping u back to s in (*). But doesn’t this mean g'” is really a 
function of s + cos(@) in the translated integral [(*)] ? The answer is actually yes, but here we are 
using an implicit averaging technique to simplify the outcome, by noting that the average value of u 
is really s, as @ ranges between 0 and z, say. And so, (*) takes on the form that it does, accordingly. 


Now let’s return to Part VIL, where we first studied inverse square densities, for a two dimensional 
star, with physical singularities at the origin [O] of the star, and at (1, 0) and (-1, 0). The solution is 
reproduced below, in the uncoupled case ... 

G' = ofr + 2sin(rsin(8))cosh(rcos(8))/sin(®)]g"* — (§) 


From the last addendum [Part XVI] ... we know this problem involves Bessel functions of order V2, 
according to the following expression, which we’ll label (7) ... 


T(v + %)u*’~! ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Vt (2a) ’r’v(ar), u = Vs? + a, Re(v) > -1/2 
And so, at the origin [O], as a ---» 0, the Laplace inverse becomes, for v = ¥ ... 
(Vr) / 21 (3/2) 
according to our limiting formula 
Jz) ---> (z/2)” / Tv + 1) asz--— 0 


where I'() is the gamma function. Comparing to the first term in the bracketed expression for (§), 
this means we must have (3/2) = Vm / 2. 


234 
SRSA 


When a = sin(8) and B = cos(@), we are dealing with the two physical singularities situated at (1, 0) 
and (-1, 0), respectively. Here, (+) resolves as ... 


2vT / (20)"”)r!? cosh(rB)Ji2(rex) 


after first translating s ---» s — cos(@) and then to s ---» s + cos(@). Since this must agree with the 
second term in the bracketed expression for (§), it means, among other things, that 


Jin) = /2/nr sin(r) 


and indeed, this turns out to be the case, when consulting the various handbooks. 


sedate 


235 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XVIII 


How accurate is our implicit averaging technique, discussed in the last addendum ? Recall, the 
integral under discussion is 


coe!) f° eg"'(s) | [(s— isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (**) 
EY 


where y is the Bessel contour, as shown below (but not drawn to scale), and the argument to g"’, 
which is really s + cos(@), has been replaced by s. 


F (1,0) 4.0) 


Notice in the diagram above, that the Laplace inverse ... defined as the line integral along AB, 
really amounts to calculating things along the arms associated with the branching points at isin(®) 
and —isin(@), respectively. These arms, in the upper half-plane, are labelled CD and LE. 


Thus, as 8 ranges between 0 and a, say, s + cos(®) ranges between s — 1 and s + 1, and so, when we 
are integrating along the arms, in the limit, as the large are ---» 00, and the small circles associated 
with the branching points tend to 0, we are, in effect, integrating along the imaginary axis, which 
we can define as s=iy. And thus, our question of accuracy amounts to studying s + cos(®) in the 
(infinitely long) complex strip S, defined by -1 < Re(z) < +1, where z itself, is complex. 


236 


Let us now build an infinitely long set of red circles, as shown above, which is really a set of unit 
disks, where the origin of each disk lies on the imaginary axis iy. The unit disk centered at O is 
thatched in purple, where O is the origin of the complex plane C. 


Now choose two circles, the first being the red one centered at O, and the second one [not shown], 
also centered at O, but say of radius = 2. We’ll call these @; and @:, respectively, and we’ll start by 
distributing n points evenly on both circles, so that in all, the total number of points is 2n. Next, let 
us evaluate g"’ on @; and @p, at these points, and define our overall average to be ... 


Bog = (Lg + Legh )/2n 
npts@; — npts @ 


=%(Zeg"/n+ Vg"*/n) 


npts @ npts @) 


Since we know from residue theory, and our research in Part VIII, that the average value of g"’ 
over a circle centered at O is always g"’(0), it follows that gayg approaches g"(0), as n ---» 00. And, 
since the disk [D], bounded by the red circle at O is really just a union of circles, of differing radii, 
but all centered at O, we can extend the argument, rather naturally ... and conclude that gave over D 
is actually g"(0). 


By extension, this will also be true for any disk [D’] bounded by a red circle in the diagram. Thus, 
the average value of g"’ over that disk will be g""(§), where § is the center of D', and lying on the 
imaginary axis s=iy. This, according to our union of circles argument ... 


To determine accuracy, all we need to do is ask ourselves how often u = s + cos(®) passes through a 
disk, as 6 ranges between 0 and z, when s =iy, for any y. When u does, we can replace g"(u) with 
g'(§), because g"*(u) is now part of the averaging process, and so, a more accurate portrayal of 
things emerges. In all other cases, we let u = s, and, either way, carry out the integration along iy. 


Now since the area of any disk is 7, and the area of the square containing that disk is 4, the answer 
in regards to the question of accuracy, is 1/4, or about 80% of the time. This means that in terms of 
using the integral defined by (*), in the case of a coupling, we should be satisfied that it will do 
what we want it to do, most of the time. And, in fact, as @ ---» 0, we can actually rewrite (*) as 


Koel) f° eg") | — isin(®)y(s + isin(®) ds (+) 
Y 


since now the roots isin(®) and —isin(@) have merged at O, putting us inside the disk [9], centered at 
O. And here we know the average value of g"’ over D is, in fact, g"*(0) [we are inside D because 
we are now dealing with a simple pole at O, and thus, without loss of generality, can treat y as Ci, 
or, for that matter, as any circle within 9, centered at O]. 


237 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XIX 


In this note, we are going to veer off course a bit, and look at ‘Yukawa-style’ densities, named after 
the Japanese physicist Hideki Yukawa. These potentials (or densities) arise when studying scalar 
fields associated with particles like the boson, and so here we want to adapt the Yukawa potential 
as a candidate for the dark energy density function, thusly ... 


Ms) = oe H8/s  (*) 
Here, o and y are positive constants, and we see that A(s) falls off very quickly as s increases, 
especially if 1 is large. Notice, too, that if 1 = 0, we are back to inverse simple densities, discussed 
earlier in this series. 
So let’s begin by noting that for r > p the following holds, where Jo is a Bessel function of order 0 .. 


e'Y/y ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Jo(wa), v = Vs? + a7, @ = Jr?— yp? (#) 


When r < pt, we'll simply interpolate, by noting that Io(x) = Jo(ix), where Io is a modified Bessel 
function of order 0, andi is Y—1. Thus, w = Ju? — r? ifr < p, and we are dealing with Io. 


In the plots above, the red lines represent Jo and Io, respectively, and we see that both agree at 0. 
However, when r < pt in (+), Jo(@a) is a function of some imaginary number, and so we defer to Io. 


As an example, suppose for the time being, we let a = 1 and 1 = 10. Then when r > 10, we use 
Jo(@) in our Laplace inverse, and when r < 10, we use Io(@). At r= 10, both Jo and Io compute to 1, 
since @ is now 0. Thus, with Io, we ‘work our way back’ to m = 0 from w = 10, as r goes from 0 to 
10, and then we let Jo take over, for r > 10. 


You can see that Ip falls pretty quickly with increasing r, and this makes sense, since the Yukawa 
density itself, falls off very quickly. The dividing point is 1 ... in so far as Laplace transforms and 


238 


their inverses are concerned, and here we can track this descent by splitting things up, using Io to 
the eft of 1, and Jo to the right of p. 


For a two dimensional star, with physical singularities at the origin [O] of the star, and at (1, 0) and 
(-1, 0), we can now formulate the field equations of general relativity as follows. As a ---> 0, for 
fixed r, Jo(wa) ---» 1, whether or not is real or imaginary. Thus, the Laplace inverse of our 
physical singularity at O is always going to be 1, using interpolation. 


For the two physical singularities at (1, 0) and (-1, 0), with a = sin(®) and B = cos(®), the Laplace 
inverse computes to [labelling as (§)] ... 


2cosh(rB)Jo(oa), r>p, @ = fr2— p? 
2cosh(rB)lo(@a), r<p, @ = fy? — r? 


after first translating s ---» s — cos(®) and then to s ---» s + cos(@). Thus, 
GY = ofl + we") 
where tp(r) is one of the two expressions above. 


This, then, is our solution for the formulation of the field equations of general relativity, in the case 
of a Yukawa density [A(s)], which is not coupled directly to g". Here G"Y = CY — kT"’, where 
C"" and T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively, and g" is the 
gravitational tensor. In the case of a coupling, simply replace g"” with g"*(0). 


Even though the Yukawa potential [density] originally finds its roots in quantum mechanics, this 
addendum shows us how we might adapt it to general relativity and dark energy. This is good 
news, because it tells us these two disciplines may have deeper connections than perhaps we first 
thought possible. Certainly the results here seem encouraging ... 


Some sanity checks are in order. When w = 0, both expressions in (§) above yield the same thing, 
so this is reassuring. However, when r ---» 0, the second equation in (§) applies, giving us 2]o(ua). 
If a was strictly 0, because we were dealing with the physical singularity at O, all would be well. 
But there are also the physical singularities at (1, 0) and (-1, 0), and here a = sin(®). Thus, 2 Io(1) 
varies with @ as @ ranges between 0 and a, say. Not exactly the most desirable of outcomes, but 
we’ve arrived at this point because we decided to interpolate when r < yp, by flipping to Io. 


Had we not done this ... there would really be no way to understand, at all, what was going on 
when r < yp, using Laplace. So I guess something is better than nothing, and for now, we’ll simply 
be content to ponder the meaning of ({), for all possible values ofr ... 


239 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


The following plots compare various densities and Laplace inverses in the range [0, 1]. Notice that 
the Yukawa density, with p: and o = 1, falls off somewhat faster than 1/s. Thus, when looking for a 
Laplace inverse for Yukawa, we need to find something that is ‘stronger’ than the inverse of 1/s 
[which is 1], but ‘not as strong’ as the Laplace inverse of 1//s , which also varies as 1 /Vr. 


00 02 o4 06 08 0 
Dark energy densities [A(s)]. The Yukawa Laplace inverse of Yukawa and 1//x, 
density is shown in blue ... just below 1/x where Yukawa is interpolated using Io 


Observe in the rightmost diagram, that the modified Bessel function Io(/? — r? ) ranges between | 
and about 1.3, as x (which is really r) moves from 1 to 0. Thus Ip 2 1 here. Also, Io is always below 
1 AVF in this range, and so, is ‘weaker’ than the latter. Hence, if we are simply trying to fit the 
Yukawa density somewhere in between | and 1/yT, in terms of Laplace inverses, then the modified 
Bessel function Ip is actually a good choice ... and is also the natural choice when the argument to 
Jo is imaginary. 


240 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XX 


Now that we’re more comfortable with the dark energy density function [A(s)], and how it bolts into 
general relativity, we are going to revisit Einstein’s famous equation, 


E = me 


and see how this instance of the energy-mass duality can be embedded within dark energy, itself. 
[The reader is encouraged to revisit the series titled The Case For Negative Mass In a-Space (Parts 
Tand II, pp 175-177) before proceeding]. 


We will assume a two dimensional star centered at the origin [O], in our chosen frame of reference 
S, with physical singularities at O, and at (1, 0) and (-1, 0), respectively. And further to this, we 
shall assume that A(s) = o/s, so that it is an inverse simple density function. 


Now recall, from Part XII in this series, that the field equations of general relativity are, in the case 
where g"’ is not coupled directly to A(s) ... 


GY = o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(8))Jo(rsin(®))]g"* — (*) 


and that our perception of dark energy is, in fact, the bracketed expression above. A plot of the 
ark energy is shown below, when the radius r = 11, and @ traverses the circle @ at this radius, 
relative to O ... 


y 


y 


| | wu | 


ee 
|| 


rely 4h 


r=11,0=x,o=72/2, 2D star (5 sing) r=11,0=x,=7/2, 2D star (3 sing) 


Now imagine a photon travelling along @. As it does ... it’s going to encounter dark energy [&] in 
varying amounts, depending on the angle 8. Every now and then, you get a spike, followed by 
retracement, and thus, according to previous research, the frequency [v] of the photon should 
change as it moves along @. This change could be very small indeed, since we expect o to be a very 
small constant ... even imperceptibly so. 


From our earlier studies on negative mass [pp 175-77], we believe that 


E = hv = (m + mjc” (8) 


241 


which is the extended form of de Broglie’s law, that incorporates dark energy, where h is Planck’s 
constant, nm is the ‘mass’ of the photon, v its frequency and for any (r, 9) ... 


[me]ce? = o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(®))] (+) 


Here, me can be thought of as a varying ‘special mass’ associated with dark energy ... be it positive 
or negative. And, of course, if o happened to be 0, we would be back to classical de Broglie. 


In the case where g"’ is coupled directly to X(s), (*) can be estimated as ... 
G'’ = o[l + 2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(8))]g"(O) 


and so, the bracketed expression remains the same, and (7) applies. 


sess ook 


No doubt, the reader will say that the energy E in (§) could grow without bound, or, on the other 
hand, turn negative ... and the reader would be correct. However, there are some mitigating factors 
here, the first of which is that o is likely to be very small. Secondly, we don’t know physically, 
what the spikes mean. Are they real or more on the imaginary side. And thirdly, there is nothing 
wrong with the idea of negative mass or energy. What the photon does, in such a case, is somewhat 
up for grabs, in my opinion, when looking at (§) [perhaps it is suppressed, whatever that finally 
means, if E < 0]. 


But these are the issues that need to be worked out, if we are going to merge the laws of physics 
with dark energy, where there is an underlying density function [A(s)], permeating the whole of our 
universe, say. 


SAAR 


Although there is no way, at the present time, anyway, to verify this approach, we can, at least, 
outline a method that we might use, when incorporating dark energy into other foundational 
dualities, such as energy-mass or wave-particle. Indeed, Schrodinger’s equation might be a good 
candidate here. 


In my opinion, if physics is to advance along these lines, this kind of pure research is worthwhile, 
and in the end, could well prove to be rather fruitful. Time will tell, I suppose, if this is the right 
road to go down ... 


242 


Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral, Part XXI 


In this note, we are going to explore, a little more deeply, the connection between the gravitational 
tensor g"’, and its influence on our perception of dark energy. There are two cases to consider: 
first, the scenario in which g"’ is not coupled directly to the dark energy density function [A(s)], and 
then, of course, the case where there is a coupling. 


So let’s start by rolling back to Part I in this series, and look at the density function A(s) = o/s, for a 
single physical singularity at the center [O] of our perfect star. Now recall the formulations for the 
field equations of general relativity are, in the uncoupled and coupled cases ... 


GY’ = og’ (§) uncoupled 


Guy 


uv 


og"o — (f)_ coupled 


Here G®Y = C’Y — kT“, where C"’ and T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively, and g"” is the foundational tensor, itself a measure of the gravitational field 
strength. 


Notice that since there is only one such physical singularity, located at O, our perception of dark 


energy is, in fact, o ... regardless of which direction we are looking in, and for any radius r. This is 
true for both equations above [we believe], because here there is a clear separation between o and 


et, 
Now let’s move on to a more complex density; namely A(s) = o/sVs, which has a branching point 
at the center of the star. Again, we'll assume only one physical singularity at O. In this case (see 
Part VI for the details), the formulations for the field equations are [uncoupled and coupled, 
respectively] ... 


GY’ = 20/r/ne™” 0 
GY = o{2/r/mg'\O) — Cin J fees) g"*(0)/(sV5) Ids) (H) 
fo} 


For large r, we expect the integral in (+) to fade away, and so symbolically, (*) and (+) agree in this 
case, and our perception of dark energy, coupled or uncoupled, is, in fact ... 


2o/r/m (&) 


in any direction, and for any large radius r. 


243 


But what happens when the radius is not so large ? In the uncoupled case (*) ... our perception of 
dark energy, at any point, does not change. It is still (&). But what about the coupled case [(+)] ? 
What part of the expression inside the curly braces in (+) can now be attributed to dark energy .... ? 


If we say ail of it, then we have no choice but to conclude that the gravitational tensor itself [g""], 
does, in fact, have an influence on our perception of dark energy, where the latter is obtained from 
the Laplace inverse of the density function i(s), when there is a coupling between the two ... 


GUY = «fer Ms)gYds  (**) 


Y 


Not only that, but the influence in the radial direction [g''], could well be perceived differently 
than the influence in the timelike direction [g*"], if (+) has anything to say about it. 


Throughout this series, we have endeavoured to align (symbolically) the formulations of the field 
equations, in the uncoupled and coupled cases. We did this in the last addendum, when considering 
the energy-mass duality and de Broglie’s law, and in many of the previous addenda as well. 


One of the reasons for doing this was simplification, so that we would, indeed, have a consistent 
view of dark energy on the one hand, and a better chance at solving the field equations, on the 
other, particularly in the case of a coupling. However, it is more than likely that g"’ does, indeed, 
affect our perception of dark energy, when it is coupled directly to (s), so that (**) holds in this 
case. 


Only in the simplest of cases, like, for example, a single physical singularity at O, with A(s) = o/s, 
might we argue in favor of no influence [g"’ against dark energy], where there is a coupling, and 
that is because things separate out quite nicely, at least mathematically speaking. They also separate 
out quite nicely in (+) for /arge r ... so that we achieve the kind of symbolic confluence we are 
looking for, in the uncoupled and coupled scenarios. 


But these are special cases, and so long as we are willing to live with what the estimations give us, 
as we have all along in this series, we should feel content in knowing that we are one step closer to 
understanding the mysterious connections between general relativity, the foundational tensor g"’, 
dark energy as a whole ... and, of course, the underlying density function [A(s)] ... that powers this 
peculiar substance we call dark energy ... 


244 


On The Nature of Autonomous and Ordinary Souls 


For a long while now, I have wondered if 'God the Father' and 'God the Son’ actually have souls, 
and if so, what happens to them at purification. In this note we'll make the assumption that they do, 
and refer to these essences as autonomous souls [S] versus the ordinary soul [T] that exists in a- 
space. 


Let us begin, then, by noting that in any perfectly random space B, the distance between points is 
always infinite 


A(p,q) = © forallp,q ¢ B 


and thus, for an observer here, it isn't possible to measure the energy of any particle because it's too 
far away. Ergo, we have the following theorem, which we've seen before ... 


If B is any perfectly random space of points, then 
for a local observer the energy Ep is always 0 


Since S is autonomous, it [or any member] can move back and forth between o and B seamlessly, 
and so the energy [Es] must be 0, relative to B, in either domain. But the real question is ... what 
happens to S at purification ? 


Esa = A°Es,p 
Clearly S is uniquely equivalent to the Cross, and therefore the action [A], and so if ~F holds in y, 
then S must vanish. Such an outcome doesn't contradict any conservation theorems because Es = 0. 


On the other hand, ordinary souls are also equivalent to A, but preserved in y, and hence the 
following equivalency chain implies S ought to be preserved as well ... 


S <=> A <=> T 


Accordingly, if S finds itself in B then it vanishes under recombination, but if S finds itself in o then 
its existence in y is guaranteed. 


8,3] «=> 7 


Thus we have a contradiction, making it impossible to decide the fate of an autonomous soul in 2, 
and so the following theorem (+) applies ... 


If S is any autonomous soul in &, then the fate 
of S in transitioning from X to y cannot be 
determined 


245 


I had always thought it was more of a slam dunk -- since the symmetries in the Godhead would 
vanish in y, so would the 'Father and Son’ ... but now I'm not so sure. If, indeed, they have given 
themselves souls of the autonomous kind, maybe they will be with us in the unified mosaic ... and 
maybe they won't .... we'll just have to wait and see, as the saying goes ... 


ERRATUM 
In Part IV on the Covariance series I stated that souls probably didn't migrate from B to a initially, 
for if they had, it would actually violate conservation theorems, at least from the B-perspective. 


This is not a true statement, in light of what we now know. 


Ordinary souls could have migrated, by design, but once in a, would remain there, otherwise there 
is no material difference between them and the autonomous soul, whose fate in y is undecidable. 


Alternatively, ordinary souls could have been situated in a initially, in which case there is no way 
to know just what happened originally. It will always be an open question, as they say ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


It is possible the autonomous soul [S] could take the path a ---» B ---» y when considering the to y 
transition [versus 0. ---» y], however in so doing, 


T° Esp = @° Esa 


where x and @ are the unified transforms referenced in previous writings. Thus, the energy of S, 
relative to an observer in either a or B, would always be 0 and so we have the following theorem ... 


If S has non-zero measurable energy in a-space, then 
S cannot migrate from B to y when considering the X 
to y transition. 


The theorem is quite interesting in that it implies S must necessarily vanish under recombination in 
B, provided it has non-zero measurable energy in a, assuming the longer route. Alternatively, if the 
energy of S happened to be zero, relative to an observer in a, then S could conceivably migrate 
from B to y, assuming the longer path, provided it didn’t vanish under recombination here. 


In all likelihood, the autonomous soul does indeed have non-zero measurable energy in a-space, 
based on the NDE research, which means its fate in y is undecidable, as per (+). But if, for some 
reason, this isn’t true, and Es is zero, relative to a, in either domain, then the fate of S in y is still 
undecidable because we will never know if it did or didn’t vanish under recombination in B ... 


246 


Incompleteness and The Simultaneous Now 


Although a lot of what we're going to talk about has already been discussed in previous research, I 
thought it would be instructive to write a brief note on our limitations when trying to understand the 
simultaneous now [S]. Let us start, then, with the following thought experiment ... 

Suppose an observer in B-space [S] perceives a-space to be purified, at the outset, with 


A=6=0 


Accordingly, @ is now in an untenable state, and so the transition to y-space occurs relative to the 
following chain ... 


~A,A <=> ~F <=> y=a+8 
Thus a and B no longer exist, under this scenario, which implies, for the observer in B, that 
B=>~B 


In other words, if Os.a denotes the perception of S from the perspective of an observer in a-space, 
then (*) implies 


[-B,B] <=> Osa 


and so Os. is undecidable up to B, making it an attribute of &. Hence, by equivalency, we have the 
following theorem (7) ... 


For any observer in a-space, the simultaneous 
now S is both an incomplete and inconsistent 
construct 


Thus, we can never say with full assurance just how an observer in B actually perceives S, and so 
our studies and conclusions on this topic will always be hampered by (+). 


Although, for example, we'd like to believe ({) is true, there is, in the final analysis, no way to 
know just what exactly Oss really means. As such, about all we can do is make an educated guess 
as to how things work ... and hope our logic is correct ... 


[~Osa,Osa] <=> =z (8) 
Finally, (§) implies Os = ~Osa and so if we are on the right track here, any observer in B does 


indeed have a fully consistent and complete view of Creation ... by way of S ... and that has to be 
reassuring ... 


247 


On The Twin Prime Conjecture and Godel's Theorem, Part | 


In a previous note concerning Godel's Theorem and The Green Tao Theorem, Part II, we showed 
that for any random system R 


~[Godel] =  ~[Green Tao, R], 


meaning R is only an attribute of the Godhead if it is perfectly random. In this note we are going to 
take a closer look at the Twin Prime Conjecture, which asks if there are infinitely many twin primes 
separated by a distance of 2. Apparently the problem has never been solved ... 


Let us start by defining S to be the set {p, p + k, p + 2*k, p + 3*k, ...}, an arbitrarily long arithmetic 
sequence of primes guaranteed by Green Tao, and define q = p + 2, say. Define as well the set T to 
be the sequence {q, q + k, q + 2*k, q + 3*k, ...}, and assume for the moment the conjecture 
is not true. In this case, then, T can only contain a finite number of primes, which means there is an 
odd number q, somewhere on the number line, and an even number k, for which {q + €*k} in T is 
never prime again, where € >= n and q is larger than 2. 


| --------------- subset of ~P, the odd numbers 
| excluding primes 


q qt¢tn*k q+ (n+1)*k q+ (n+2)*k 


no no no 


Hence, we may conclude ~[Twin Prime] ==> [Green Tao, ~P], and equivalently, ~[Green Tao, ~P] 
==> [Twin Prime]. 


In other words, if the Twin Prime Conjecture is false, ~P is not perfectly random, and if ~P is 
perfectly random, then the Twin Prime Conjecture is true. Both statements are identical, actually, 
but neither is very helpful, since it is almost a certainty that ~P is not perfectly random anyway [in 
fact, since the average distance between primes becomes arbitrarily large as you move toward 
infinity, there ought to be infinitely many arithmetic sequences of arbitrary length with period 2 in 
~P, thus settling the issue once and for all ...] 


However, if by some independent means one were able to show ~P was indeed perfectly random, it 
would be tantamount to proving the Twin Prime Conjecture, and if nothing else, give us some feel 
for just how unlikely such a finding might be. In all probability, then, perfectly random systems 
beyond the membrane are a figment of the imagination, for if we were to find such a thing it would 
be akin to finding God ... 


248 


On The Twin Prime Conjecture and Godel's Theorem, Part II 


In the first note on this subject, we discussed, in general terms, The Twin Prime Conjecture and 
some of the consequences of it being true or false. Here we are going to offer a few more ideas on 
the conjecture, and so we'll begin by noting for any random system R, 


~[Godel] = ~[GreenTao,R]  (*) 


Thus, on the number line, any random system R will always have predictable regions of arbitrary 
size, whether these regions can be enumerated by arithmetic sequences, quadratic sequences, cubic 
sequences, ..., or whatever the formula might happen to be. 


Recent work in this area tells us there is a large, even spacing N for which [Twin Prime, N] is true, 
and so we'll start by assuming [Twin Prime, u] to be false if u < N. Now let's generalize things a 
bit by assuming for some N' > 2N the conjecture is true, but otherwise not, and for some N" > 2N' 
true again, but otherwise not, and so on. In other words, for the sequence {v} = {0, N, N’, N", ...} 
we have [Twin Prime, v] true, else false, subject to the string of intermediate inequalities. 


Let us now define S to be {q, r,s, ...} and T to be {q+ N,r+N,s +N, ...}, where the elements of S 
and T form the infinite collection of prime pairs with proper spacing. Since S is random, (*) tells 
us there are predictable regions of arbitrary size here, and so without loss of generality, we may say 
there is an arbitrarily long arithmetic sequence {p + €*k} in S, where k is arbitrarily large and even, 
and €>=0. 


T~~> p+N... pt+n*k+N p+(nt+l)*k+N pt (n+2)*k +N 
| | | 
S$ ~~> po... p+n*k p+ (n+1)*k p+ (n+2)*k 
| | | | 


w(0) w(n) w(n+1) w(n+2) 


As we advance along the intervals in S above, from left to right, it should be clear there are only a 
finite number of these blocks for which w(l) + 2 is actually prime, otherwise ... ... our original 
assumption would no longer be true. So let's dispense with these intervals and focus on the 
remaining ones. Repeating the exercise, we see again there are only a finite number of intervals in 
S where w(l) + 4 is actually prime, and after dispensing with these, we can examine the remaining 
blocks for each of u = 6, 8, 10, ..., N- 2. 


Finally, after exhausting all possible values of u < N, we arrive at a point where for all values of / 
>= some n, say, no interval [w(1), w(1 + 1)] in S contains any primes in the range 


w(1) + 2, w(l) + 4, ..., wl) +N-2 
which, for / = n, is the same as saying 


ptn*k+2,ptn*k+4,...,p+n*k+N-2 


249 


In other words, comparing S and T now, the interior interval [ p + n*k, p + n*k + N ] contains 
absolutely no primes whatsoever, and this is somewhat interesting because N is not cast in stone, 
according to our assumptions. 


Repeating the entire exercise for the next N' > 2N for which [Twin Prime, N'] is true, we can come 
up with another interior interval [p’ + n*k' + N, p' + n*k' + N'] containing no primes, by 
examining all numbers u in the range N + 2, N + 4, ..., N’- 2, and discarding all irrelevant blocks. 
And so it goes, with each successive interval growing in length by more than N, 2N, 4N ... as we 
move from N to N' to N"to N"”..., etc. 


Finally, then, we are going to reach a point where the interval becomes arbitrarily large but contains 
no prime numbers, and this most certainly will lead to a contradiction, given our current 
assumptions. 


To see this more clearly, note that [Green Tao, R] actually tells us there are infinitely many 
arithmetic sequences, of arbitrary length, running through S, and so there is an infinite set I of non- 
overlapping intervals of length N containing no primes, save for the endpoints. Similarly, there is 
an infinite set I' of non-overlapping intervals of length > N containing no primes, save for the 
endpoints ..... and an infinite set I" of non-overlapping intervals of length > 2N containing no 
primes, save for the endpoints, and so on ... 


PU EU Ee 


Clearly the sets { I', I", I... } need to be ‘woven into' the spaces between elements of I, without 
overlap, and thus there must be an infinite subset I* C I with 


lim inf dist(a, B) = © for anya, B € I* 


In other words, there exists in I an infinite subset of elements I* ... where the spacing between 
neighboring intervals, in particular, is also infinite ... which is impossible. 


Therefore, either [Twin Prime, u] is never true if u > N, true for only finitely many u > N, or true 
more often than our current inequality string would allow for. Most likely, the last of these three 
outcomes is correct ... 


So let's choose a constant 1 < c < 2 for which N' > cN, N" > cN’, ... and go through the entire 
exercise again, top to bottom. In this case the intervals containing no primes grow by more than 


(c- DN, c(e- DN, c2(c- DN,...  (F) 
as we move from N to N' to N" to N'"... and eventually we reach a point again where the interval 


becomes arbitrarily large, leading to a contradiction. Thus we are forced into believing c= 1, 
meaning the sequence 0 < N < N' < N"... must grow arithmetically if it is, in fact, infinite. Indeed, 


250 


because the conjecture is already true for the first two values 0 and N, one could argue by 
symmetry the sequence really is {0 + k*N } for k = 1, 2, 3, ... 


Although this is not a proof of the Twin Prime Conjecture, we can at least say that if there is an 
infinite set of even numbers {v} for which [Twin Prime, v] is true, it follows some kind of 
arithmetic progression. Taken to the limit, this remark would lead us to believe the conjecture is 
true for all even numbers ... something to think about for the future ... 


CONNECTIONS TO NOETHER’S THEOREM 


Noether’s Theorem tells us symmetries imply laws and vice-versa by way of a least action which 
encodes both. If here the law [©] is 'Twin Prime Conjecture true for any element of {v}', then 
Noether states that some symmetry [‘¥] in {v} must exist which implies © and conversely. 


W <=> A <=> 0 


The simplest and most compact symmetry is indeed the arithmetic sequence {0 + k*N }, and in 
fact, by choosing this arrangement, the length of any interval in any of the sets { I', I", I"... } is 
always N. Thus, weaving these sets into the spaces between elements of I, is equivalent to saying 
there are infinitely many, non-overlapping intervals of length N containing no primes, save for the 
endpoints, or said another way, the weaving process [UJ] essentially returns us to I. This is the best 
outcome we could ever hope for, as a matter of fact. 


Wed«f,I',I"...) -- I 


As well, the value of any element in the sequence depicted by (+) is always zero if c = 1, meaning, 
in all likelihood, the lengths of the intervals containing no primes do not grow as we move through 
the various elements of {v}. In turn, this can only bolster our view that Y is indeed arithmetic with 
period N. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


You don’t actually need to run arithmetic sequences through S = {q, r, s, ...} in order to generate 
the intervals in { I, I', I, I"... } at each iteration. In fact, at each stage one need only discard the 
appropriate elements of S, as we did initially, to arrive at the same conclusion. 


If © finds its origins in B-space, according to the following duality, then previous theorems tell us 
the covariant derivative of both S and R in a-space is 0. In particular, V ° R = 0, implying d{v}/dx 
is also 0, since R is ostensibly a representation of {v}. Thus {v} is moving along with constant 
velocity, meaning it is arithmetic, and indeed, we surmised as much originally by appealing to 
Noether and /east action principles, after showing that {v} could not grow without bound [V° S = 0 
is most easily interpreted by realizing that S is an infinite strand of prime pairs whose differences 
are always the same value, and so is equivalent to an arithmetic sequence]. 


For any strand S there exists a root R such that R induces S, and conversely. 
Properties of S are inherited by R, and vice versa, because of duality. 


251 


On The Twin Prime Conjecture and Godel's Theorem, Part Ill 


In Part II we saw that if {v} is an infinite set of even numbers > 0 for which [Twin Prime, u] is 
true, where u is any element in {v}, then {v} must be an arithmetic sequence. Here we offer a 
‘proof ~ of the generalized Twin Prime Conjecture, by assuming a weaker version of Maillet's 
conjecture; namely, that every even number is the difference of two primes. 

In 2013, an unorthodox mathematician by the name of Zhang discovered the existence of an even 
number N, below 70 million, for which [Twin Prime, N] holds. No one knows what this number 
is; only that it exists. If anything, then, numbers Jarger than N should also exist where the 
conjecture is true, because the primes become sparser as you move toward infinity, with a limiting 
density. So we'll run with this very reasonable assumption as well, for the time being, and worry 
about the details later. 


If {v} = {0, N, NN", ...}, then by Part Il, {v} is actually {0, N, 2N, 3N, ...}, where N is Zhang's 
number. Let us define {w} to be the set 


{w} = {u.N+u,2N+u, 3N+u,...} 
with 0 < u < N, and even. 


Define now the set R = {p, q, 1, s, ... } to be the collection of all unique primes for which A(p,q) € 
{w}, and assume for the moment R is infinite. Because R is random, and 


~[Godel] = ~[Green Tao, R], 
there are, without loss of generality, infinitely many ... arbitrarily long arithmetic sequences of type 
S={ptnk|n=0, 1, 2, 3,...} 
running through R with k € {w}. And so, there is a corresponding 0 < u < N associated with k for 


which II(u,k), the number of elements in S, is arbitrary. In fact, u = k mod N, the remainder after 
dividing k by N, relocated to a specific interval, as shown below. 


If ©(u) is now defined to be the frequency with which u appears, as sets of type S are created, then 
for at least one such u, we must have ... ... where Q is the number of arithmetic sets S, properly 
constructed, 


252 


lim O(u) ---» © as Q ---» «© 
Thus O(u) = ©, for some relocatable u = k mod N with k € {w}, which we'll assume to be unique. 


To see this more clearly, suppose in parallel we 'throw down’, onto the number line, the infinite 
number of arithmetic sequences S, to begin with. Clearly the spacing k can land anywhere in {w} 
for each S, but in terms of the expression u = k mod N, there are only finitely many choices. Thus, 
either O(u) is finite or infinite -- there is no middle ground here -- and since we've assumed O(u) is 
infinite for only one choice of relocatable u, it must, perforce, be bounded everywhere else. 


Either O(u) = 00 is true over a finite or infinite number of intervals, relative to {v}. In the first 
scenario this would imply ©(u) is infinite over at least one specific interval in {v}, in which case 
[Twin Prime, u] follows. In the second case, there must always be an infinite set of distinct 
intervals, given any arbitrary M, for which 


M < Tuk) < Mk’) < wk") < 2. (FH) 


Why might this be ? Well, if (uk) < M in every interval of {v}, this would contradict the fact 
that there are infinitely many arithmetic sequences S, of arbitrary length here ... ... for the case 
O(u) =. Hence, some S exists for which I(u,k) > M, and if this was the only such S, we could 
simply repeat the argument where M is now defined to be H(u,k). 


Thus, [Twin Prime, uw] is true for yN, where y = 0, 1, 2, ... and [Twin Prime, u] is almost true 
whenever u = k, k’, k" .... mod N, but otherwise not. By ‘almost true' we mean the conjecture holds 
for any arbitrary number of prime pairs determined by arithmetic sequences, and by ‘otherwise not’ 
we mean not true, which one can assume, without loss of generality. 


As a result, we can use the techniques employed in Part II to infer the series in the diagram above 
must form an arithmetic sequence with period u, and since it is arithmetic, we have no choice but to 
conclude the Twin Prime Conjecture is true for every element in {v} = {0, u, 2u, 3u, ... }. 


To see this more clearly, let{9} be the series in the diagram above and pro tempore, define © to be 
the law 'Twin Prime Conjecture true for any arbitrary number of prime pairs over the set {9}'. 
Because of (+) there are always infinitely many u in {9} for which © holds, and so by Part II in this 
series, a symmetry Y in {9} must exist which implies ©, and conversely, according to Noether and 
least action principles. That symmetry is, in fact, the arithmetic sequence 


{9} = {0, u, 2u, 3u, ... }, 


253 


for any arbitrary M, since © is always true for yN, where y = 0, 1, 2, ... (essentially, N morphs into 
u, which is possible because of its fluid nature). 


Now let M ---» © and observe that {9} remains arithmetic with period u, implying that in the limit, 
(at infinity), © now becomes the law 'Twin Prime Conjecture true for any element of {9}', or said 
another way, the Twin Prime Conjecture is true for every element in {v} = {0, u, 2u, 3u, ... }. 


Tf, on the other hand, R is finite, there will come a point beyond which no element in {w} can be 
resolved as the difference of two primes, contradicting our original assumption regarding a weaker 
version of Maillet's Conjecture. In fact, almost all even numbers can be resolved as the difference 
of two primes, according to the literature, and since {w} has positive density in N, the set of 
integers, it is almost a given that R cannot be finite. 


The entire process can now be repeated, top to bottom, dividing up {v} ever more finely until we 
reach a point where, at last, at last . .. the Twin Prime Conjecture is true for a// even numbers 
inN... aresult, which, when you think about it, makes a lot of sense ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


The construction of R is actually a precursor to the Green Tao Theorem. Essentially, we walk 
along the primes {P}, and whenever we find a neighboring pair (p, q) whose difference lies in {w}, 
the pair is automatically moved into R and crossed off our list. 


If there never was a Zhang’s number to begin with (N ---» ©), then {v} becomes {0,0} and 
{w} becomes the entire set of even numbers N = {2, 4, 6, 8, ...}. The set R, in turn, becomes P, 
and of course, there are infinitely many arithmetic sequences of arbitrary length running through P, 
with period k in N, according to Green Tao. 


As an alternative to constructing R one can simply use the set of primes {P}, and realize there are 
infinitely many arithmetic sequences of arbitrary length running through P, where now the period k 
belongs to {w} = {u, N+ u, 2N + u, 3N + u, ...}, with O <u < N, and even. If this were not so, k 
would always belong to the set {v} = {0, N, 2N, 3N, ...} if the arithmetic sequence was sufficiently 
large, thereby placing an artificial constraint on Green Tao that otherwise would not exist, if 
Zhang’s number itself didn’t exist. 


254 


The Mosaic of Creation 


This is a simple, hand-drawn version of the mosaic of creation, using ruler and compass. The dark 
circle is the action, which divides the inner symmetries from the outer /aws, and lives in one 
dimension below the two. Essentially, Noether’s Principle, upon which The Fundamental Theorem 
of Creation is based ... 


255 


An Original Proof of Pythagoras’ Theorem 


This is an original proof of the Pythagorean Theorem I did some years back. It is included to 
demonstrate the idea of conceptual thinking, where we embed smaller ideas inside larger ones so 
that the bigger picture emerges. Much of the research relies on this train of thought ... 


256 


A Modest Eulogy 


I have decided it is time to write my own, albeit modest, eulogy. For a long time now I have been 
fascinated with numbers, and in the last few years of my life, how they might relate to me from a 
spiritual perspective. 


In the essay I learned that my life was connected to the Fibonacci sequence 
1, 1, 2, 3,5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, ... 


and seen as pairs (11, 23, 58 ...), the first element corresponds to the level of spiritual understanding 
I have reached, the second to the number of incarnations I have had, and just recently, the third to 
my age, or so it would seem ... 


And wouldn't you know it -- I go to a quaint little coffee shop in downtown Penticton by the name 
of Fibonacci, almost daily, and it was there the other day I saw a shiny nickel on the cushion of my 
favorite chair. Almost as though it had been placed in that spot, especially for me. 


The number 5 in Cayce's world speaks of a change which led me to guess that the third pairing can't 
be anything other than my age. I suspect 58 years is the end of the road for me in this world, and 
indeed, a welcome relief if it is true. 


Seen as the hour, minute and second of a digital clock, say, these pairs form a time on the clock 
(11:23:58) at which things grind to a halt. Just by a hair, the clock stops ticking ‘two seconds’ 
before 11:24, meaning a 24th incarnation will never come to pass. The spiritual lessons, it would 
appear, have been learned in this incarnation in the allotted span of time. 


It should be mentioned I was born in Penticton and recall a vision or a dream I had long ago where 
I saw Skaha Beach as it really looks on the other side, in a droplet of water running down a window 
pane. People were very happy there -- the beach seemed like a hub of sorts for many athletic 
competitions and across the road I saw what looked to be a rather ornate beach house draped in 
vines, which literally wrapped around the house and ran inside through the open front door. 


Standing in the doorway was a beautiful young brunette, very shapely, and dressed in a short skirt 
and top. I was struck by both her beauty and her countenance, for she gazed at me rather intently 
with a sadness in her face. No doubt it was my soul mate looking back at me through whatever 
portal joined us together for a brief moment in time. 


Ever since then I have been waiting for the day when I would walk through that portal and be back 
home once again. No doubt Skaha Beach, on the other side, is where I was before deciding to do 


257 


another incarnation, perhaps to right the wrongs in a previous descent, or maybe for other reasons 
that remain a mystery. Whatever the case, the time has come to move on, as they say. 


By the way, and rather unexpectedly, I moved back to Penticton just a few short weeks ago. It was 
never part of the plan originally, but looking back now, maybe it was ... 


And just tonight, after writing this piece, on my way to the car I saw a dime on the pavement, again 
placed in that spot as though it was especially for me. The number 10 in Cayce's world means a 
return to Unity or God, if you will ... 


258 


Supplementary Material 


This research note is dedicated to a deeper understanding of the Riemann zeta function [C(s)], using 
some of the material in the original essay. Specifically, we will develop harmonic integrable 
representations for variants of C(s), both in the critical strip S, where 0 < Re(z) < 1 and z is 
complex, and to the right of S as well. The technical details will be kept to a minimum, and along 
the way, we shall also verify our work, so that theory and experiment line up, as they should. The 
hope is that this note will lead to a better understanding of the Riemann Hypothesis [p 181], within 
the context of harmonic representations. 


Let us begin, then, with the following contour integral, which was used in the original essay when 
discussing couplings between the gravitational tensor g"’ and the underlying density function [A(s)] 
associated with dark energy. It is reproduced here [pp 228-9] ... 


coe!) f° ete" (s) / (s —isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (*) 


Y 


according to the following Bessel contour y, which denotes the Laplace inverse (line integral) along 
AB. And here we are 


rcos( 


going to modify (*) to suit our purposes, by deleting the oe™°°S®) term, and replacing g""“(s) with 
the function g(s) = ((a—s), where a is any real number > 1. The constant « remains and is equal to 


1/2mi, where é is imaginary and equal to V—1. 


«f e* 9(s) //(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (+) 


a 


259 


We choose g(s) in the way that we do, because C(s) is ‘well enough behaved’ to the right of any 
vertical line in the complex plane C, and so, along the large are BCEFGA, we are assured of 
convergence to 0 under Laplace inversion, as the radius of this arc tends to «©. Similarly with the 
small circles associated with the branching points isin(®) and -isin(@), as their radii shrink to 0. 


All we need to do now, is evaluate the integration in (+) along the arms CD and LE, noting that 
isin(®) is a branching point, and then, of course, do the same thing for the two arms associated with 
-isin(8). By letting the large are BCEFGA tend to « and the small circles ---» 0, we will achieve 
the desired result; namely, Laplace inversion along AB. 

Now since a > | and C(s) has a simple pole at s = 1, (a —s) has a simple pole at s = a— 1 > 0, and 


so we exclude it by choosing 0 < Re(AB) < a— 1. In doing so, (+) evaluates to 0 as we traverse y. 
Thus, 


WH = cf + «f + cf = 0 


AB isin(8) arms -isin(®) arms 


where it is understood, that we are carrying the integrand in (+) in all terms above [see pp 221-3 for 
more on this construction]. 


Now let @ ---» 0, so that (+) becomes the Laplace inverse in this limiting case, and we may write .... 


lim cf ec e(s) (= isiMO)G + INC) ds + cf + «f =. "0 


0» 0 (along AB) isin(®) arms -isin(@) arms 


where now ... the integration along the arms extends from 0 to 0 along the imaginary axis in both 
the upper and lower-half planes ... according to the following description below ... 


2fe"xiy Noo  2fe*sciy OO dy 
oO 0 
isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 


In the limit, as 6 ---> 0, (+) becomes 


fe“ OSds 8) 


Y 


where y is now the large contour BCEFGAB, because we are dealing with a simple pole here. The 
residue is C(a), and so from our work above ... 


260 


(a) = af + af 


isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 


Now the right-hand side of the expression above may be written as ... 


axfeMeiy Nord - xf esciyy WOO ay 
fe) co) 
= xf {egiy) - eM gciyjay/y 
oO 


And since g(iy) = C(a—iy), whilst g(-iy) = C(a + iy), we see that we are dealing with conjugates 
here in the argument list, and so may define (a — iy) to be A — iB, and C(a + iy) to be A+ iB. We 
can do this because C(s*) = C(s)*, where * means ‘take the conjugate of’. 


If we substitute these definitions into the expression above, we finally arrive at our destination, 
after collecting terms ... 


00 


S {Asin(yr) — Bcos(yr)}dy/y = (n/2)Q(a) (4) 


() 
This result is true for all r > 0 and for all real a > 1. Here 


A 


{Ca + iy) + Ca—iy)}/2 


B 


{a+ iy) — Ca —iy)}/ 27 


Now we'd like to see how theory lines up, by choosing different values for a and r, and compare 
the results in ({) with integrations carried out on the WolframAlpha website. We’ll choose a to be 
3/2 and 5/2, and we’ll let r= 1, 3, 5. Here are the snapshots from Wolfram ... 


261 


~300(é cos(t)(-¢(2 -at)+e(2 +2t))  sincty(c(2 -at)+c(2 +et 

eg (Pe CRP Ca) 
Jo 2t 2t 

. cos(t)(-¢(3 -it)+c(2 +t)  sintty(e(2 -it)+c(2 +it 

"| st se)eals +4) Ge Pi iis a Mor = asoms 
Jo 2t 2t 

43 (3 A (3 (3 

pee tit) sino; ~it)+<(5 +#t)) ae 
Jo 2t 2t 

. (5 t)(-c(2 -at)+e(2 +et)) sin ty(c(2 -ét)+e(2 +et 

eer | (; i )+ (; +i ci («3 i )+ (3+ )) Pan eean 
Jo 2t 2t 


The theoretical values, out to a few significant digits are ... 
(n/2)C(3/2) = 4.1035 
(n/2)C(S/2) = 2.1072 


The agreement is stunning, in my opinion. Our theory lines up exactly with experiment, and gives 
us the confidence we need to go forward with more complex harmonic representations for C(s), and 
that is something we will do in future notes in this section. 


To wit, we will examine similar results in the critical strip, where 0 < a < 1, and ... we will also 
examine functions of type g(s) that incorporate roots of C(s). Stay tuned, as they say, but in the 
meantime, it is well worth pondering the results above, and the approach used to obtain them, as 
this methodology forms the basis for all future work in this area ... 


sedi 


262 


Now we’d like to move into the critical strip where 0 < a < 1. Our function g(s) = C(a — s) remains 
the same, but since C(a — s) has a simple pole at s = a — 1 < 0, we can no longer exclude it when 
traversing the Bessel contour y, as shown on page 258. The vertical line AB in this contour must be 
to the right of the imaginary axis so that we trap the branching points isin(8) and -isin(®), and thus, 
by default, the pole associated with C(a — s) is automatically included. Here, 0 < Re(AB) < a. 


Traversing y, we find that since the residue of C(a —s) is | ats =a—1 ... then with B = a — 1, one 
has 


Marf + «cf + «ef = &¥/ (Gq sin@HG+ snp 


AB isin(9) arms -isin(@) arms 


where (+) is defined on page 258, and reproduced here ... 
«f e* 9(s) //(s — isin(®))(s + isin(6)) ds (+) 
% 


Now let @ ---» 0, so that (+) becomes the Laplace inverse in this limiting case, and we may write .... 


lim xf ees) (Gas + SING) ds + «f + Sf = e//@ BR) w& 


0 --» 0 (along AB) isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 


where now ... the integration along the arms extends from 0 to along the imaginary axis in both 
the upper and lower-half planes ... according to the following description below ... 


2fe"xiy Noo  2fe*sciy Oo 
0) 0 
isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 


In the limit, as 6 ---» 0, (+) becomes 


cf ea) (OO ds &) 


Y 


where y is now the large contour BCEFGAB, because we are dealing with two simple poles here. 
These are at the points 0 and B. The residue at 0 is (a), and the residue at is, up to sign, just as it 
was before ... 


e*/ (B® ©) 


263 


However, in order that theory and experiment agree, the residue in (#) must be negative and its 
counterpart in (~) positive. We can do this because we have a choice when taking square roots 
here. 


Since B = a— 1 < 0, this means 


Ca) — 2eP/p = af + af 


isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 
Now we can finish off the exercise, just as we did when we were to the right of the critical strip 
with a > 1, and we find that 


ca 


S {asingy) ~ Beos(yr) }dy/y = (w/2)C(a) + neT™- (1 — a) 
ie) 


This result is true for all r > 0 and for all realO <a < 1. Here 


A = {((a+iy) + (a—iy)}/2 


B = {Ga+iy) ~ &a-iy)}/2i 


It is interesting to me, at least, that this result contains a decaying exponential term on the right- 
hand side; something we do not see when we are outside the critical strip with a > 1. Only as r 
tends to 0, do we see that the two equations agree [cf. ({), p. 260]. In turn, this means the Riemann 
zeta function behaves in a peculiarly different manner inside the strip, than it does outside the strip 
with a> 1. 


But perhaps more importantly, we are getting our first glimpse of Fourier theory at work here, in so 
much as the harmonic integration above can be thought of as a sum over all frequencies in the 
frequency [y] domain, leading to a corresponding signal in the time [r] domain. But to see this 
effect, we have to be in the critical strip itself, oddly enough ... 


Now it’s time for some verification of our work, so we’ll do a few integrations on the Wolfram site, 
and see how things play out. Here are the snapshots for a = 1/4, 1/2, and 3/4, with r= 1. Note that 
we always try to integrate from 0 to 300 on this website, but on occasion, due to limitations in 
execution time, it isn’t possible to go quite that far. Nevertheless, the results are encouraging, to 
say the least ... 


264 


icos(t)(-<(+ ~it)+<(5 +it)) sin(t)((+ ~it)+<(5 +it) 


t 


Je = 0.701633 


2t 2t 
~ icos(t)(-¢(1 -it)+c() +it sin(t)(¢(+ -ét +c(i sit 
( i) (; ) ((; (; "at = sis 
Jo 
cos(t)(-¢(2 -t)+c(2 +it)) sincty(e(? -it)+e(2 +et 
rn: ( ra )+ (5+: ) (el; th (5+! ) aback aaah 
Jo 


Our formula, from the last page is ... 
(n/2)Qa) + me -O/(—a) 
With a = 1/4, and r= 1, (**) computes to ~ 0.7012, to a few significant digits ... 


With a = 1/2, and r = 1, (**) computes to ~ 1.5170, to a few significant digits ... 
With a = 3/4, and r= 1, (**) computes to ~ 4.3811, to a few significant digits ... 


Just as in the previous case, with a > 1 outside the critical strip, the results here inside the critical 
strip are not only encouraging, but stunning as well. The agreement between theory and 
experiment is close enough, that we feel confident enough to pursue the next level of abstraction, 
where we will incorporate roots of the zeta function [C(s)] into g(s). Not only that, but we will also 
develop necessary and sufficient conditions for a + é€ to be a root of C(s), using harmonic integrable 
representations. Finally, we'll look at invariants tied to these representations, and apply Noether’s 
Theorem to gain insight into the symmetries behind these conserved quantities .... 


265 


In this section, we are going to continue the previous discussion, by introducing a new function g(s) 
and another function h(s). To wit... 


g(s)=C(a—s+is) + C(a—s—ie) 
h(s) =C(a—s+ése) — C(a-—s-—ie) 


where ¢ > 0 is any real number. Again, we are in the critical strip where 0 < a < 1. We now 
calculate residues, just as before, noting from above that the simple poles are at s = a — 1 + ée for 
both g(s) and h(s). 


Again, care needs to be taken when working with the sign of the residues ... but apart from this 
nuance, things work exactly the same way here as they did in the last section. When the dust settles 
on the algebra, we have the following, which we’ ll label (1) and (2), respectively ... 


oa) 


S {(A+C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
0 


(n/2)g(0) + neT"~ {21 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {(1 — a)? + €2} 
ioe} 


S {(D-—B)sin(yr) + (C— A)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
° 


= (nil2)h(0) + ne! ~ © {2(1 — a)sin(er) + 2ecos(er)} / {(1 — a)? + &?} 


The result is valid for all r > 0, for all ¢ > 0, and for all real 0 <a < 1. Here 


Gatiy—is) + Ca—iy +is)}/2 
Ga+tiy—is) — (a—iy +is)}/2é 
Catiy +ie) + Ca—iy—ie)}/2 
Gatiy +ie) — Qa-—iy—ie)}/ 2i 


Gam PY 
"ou 


{ 
{ 
{ 
{ 


Notice that as ¢ ---» 0 ... we recover the expression in the last section [p. 263] from (1), since now 
A=C and B =D, and g(0) becomes 2¢(a). On the other hand, (2) computes to 0 on both sides of 
the equals sign, so more good news. 


Now suppose ¢ > 0 is a root of C(s) for some 0 <a < 1, so that ((a + ie) = 0. Then both g(0) = 0 and 
h(0) = 0 are true, and (1) and (2) reduce to ... 


266 


ioe) 
S {(A + C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr) }dy/y = 
oO 
ne™ {91 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {U1 —a? +22}... (3) 
ioe) 
S {(D-—B)sin(yr) + (C— A)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
ie) 


ne*!-®{9(1 — q)sin(er) + 2ecos(er)} / {(1-a)? +22}... (4) 


On the other hand, because (1) and (2) are exact expressions, the truth of (3) and (4) necessarily 
implies that both g(0) and h(0) are identically 0, which means ((a + ée) = 0. Thus, together (3) and 
(4) are a necessary and sufficient condition for a + ée to be a root of C(s). And so we have the 
following theorem ... 


C(a + ie) = 0 if and only if (3) and (4) are true forallr>O (§§) 


Notice too ... that (3) and (4) can be thought of as inverse Fourier transforms [left side], in the 
frequency domain [y], leading to signals [right side], in the time domain [r]. The frequency 
coefficients that are paired with the sin(yr) and cos(yr) terms can include the denominator in the 
integrand, without loss of generality. 


In order for (§§) to be a minimal energy theorem, we now have to ask ourselves what form the 
theorem takes if it is to expend the /east amount of energy possible, and what the accompanying 
symmetries might be. From Riemann’s functional equation, we know that if a + ie is a root of C(s), 
then so is | — a + ée, in the critical strip. In such a case, (3) and (4) must be true for a, and also true 
when we replace a with | — a, leading to four equations in (§§), ifa# %. 


Only when a. = ¥2 does (§§) reduce to two equations, and this is the best we can do. The symmetry 
associated with this minimal configuration is reflection across the x-axis in the complex plane, 
along the critical line a = %. And since our theorem is grounded in physical principles from 
Fourier theory, it is more than likely that (§§) holds, only in this case, and no other. 


Now it’s time for some verification of our work. We'd like to validate (1) when a = %, ¢ = 14.135, 
and r = 1. In this case, € is approximately the first root of C(s) on the critical line. Then we’ll 
validate (2) when a = %, ¢=5, andr=1. Here are the raw snapshots from Wolfram ... 


267 


001 /1 1 
yas =(5 iced cma a 
t\2 2 


k(; 
sl: (5 +it+14. 1354}+<(5 ~it-14. 135 #}}} sine) at = = 0.570246 


cos(t) 
300 2i 2i 
{ —_—_—n—XkmgrxKkxKrQ]]]== dita 


0 
-0.838763 +0 


qhsic-14.1si)-(b-icsta.aasi) —¢(bsiesa4.135i}-<{ bie “| 
pital icc Meg dab a Tt 


1 1 A > A 1 
3tt-Si jtesi GHtssi 3at-si 
as Ha }_ 4a Fla sine) 


300 
E -_—.?s-?_—_ at = 0.387297 
vo t 


300 (; («(5 +it- 5i)+¢(; -it+5i))- 5 (c(5 +8t +5) +c(5 -at- 5:}}) costt) 
if ~-2 dt 


0 t 
0.479759 


In these snapshots the first two are for the integration in (1), broken into two pieces. The first 
snapshot is the (A + C) term, and the second is the (B + D) term. Similarly for the last two 
snapshots. They represent the (D — B) and (C — A) terms, respectively, in (2). 


268 


For (1), the numbers in the first two shots above sum to —0.268517. The first term on the right- 
hand side of (1) is  -0.00011 (technically, it should be 0 for a root, so pretty close here) and the 
rest of the formula on the right-hand side of (1) computes to —0.269252. To four significant digits, 
the integration above is ~ —0.2685 and the theoretical formula yields ~ —0.2693. The two agree to 8 
parts in 10,000 ! A stunning result, in my opinion, since we are only integrating out to 300 here. 


For (2), the numbers in the last two shots above sum to 0.867056. The first term on the right-hand 
side of (2) is ~ 0.725827, and the rest of the formula on the right-hand side of (2) computes to 
0.141699. To four significant digits, the integration above is ~ 0.8670 and the theoretical formula 
yields ~ 0.8675. The two agree to 5 parts in 10,000 ! Another stunning result, in my opinion, since 
again, we are only integrating out to 300 here. 


SRA 


Now we’d like to take the derivative, with respect to r, of the signal [right-hand side] in (3) and (4). 
They compute to 


-r(1 


2ne™" —Veos(er) ..... for (3) 


-2ne™"-Vsin(er) ..... for (4) 


Notice that the ratio of these derivatives, say the second to the first, is tan(er), an invariant, in so 
much as it does not depend on a. Now from our theorem, recall we have the following duality ...... 


C(a + ie) = 0 if and only if (3) and (4) are true for allr>O —(§§) 
| | 
£ R 


Ca+ie)=0 tan(er) conserved currents 


Thus, if T is the set of a in the interval (0, 1) ... for which (§§) holds, then some ¢ > 0 will always 
exist, such that C(a + is) = 0, relative to T. In this sense, the left side [£] of (§§) is also an 
invariant. It is the ‘thing which is fixed and equal to 0’, for any ae T. As to the right side [R], we 
can treat tan(er) as the invariant, relative to T. It is the ‘thing which is not changing’ for any a € T, 
in so much as it does not depend on a. 


Now we can invoke Noether, which states that, for the duality under consideration ... 


symmetries associated with conserved currents in £ imply 
conservation laws in &, and conversely .. symmetries tied 
to conserved currents in & .. imply conservation laws in £ 


The simplest symmetry which allows for this duality is again, reflection across the x-axis, where we 
have a = %. Thus, under Noether, T only has one element; that is to say, T = {%}, if we opt for the 
simplest symmetry ... 


269 


We can also develop another invariant ... by noting that the swm of the squares of the derivatives 
computes to 

u(r, a) = 4n2e2r-®) 
Thus, if U is the set of ¢ > 0 for which (§§) holds, then some a € (0, 1) will always exist, such that 
C(a + ie) = 0, relative to U. In this sense, the left side [£] of (§§) is also an invariant. It is the 
‘thing which is fixed and equal to 0’, for any ¢ € U. As to the right side [R], we can treat p(r, a) as 
the invariant, relative to U. It is the ‘thing which is not changing’ for any ¢ € U, in so much as it 
does not depend on &. 


C(a + ie) = 0 if and only if (3) and (4) are true forallr>O —(§§) 


| | 
L R 


C(a+ie)=0 w(t, a) conserved currents 
Once again, we can invoke Noether, which states that, for the duality under consideration ... 
symmetries associated with conserved currents in £ imply 
conservation laws in &, and conversely .. symmetries tied 
to conserved currents in & .. imply conservation laws in £ 
The simplest symmetry which allows for this duality is again, reflection across the x-axis, where we 
have a = %. And, since our theorem is grounded in physical principles, via Fourier, we have to 


respect the fact that Nature will always choose the simplest path where it can. And here, that means 
the zeroes of €(s) are, in all likelihood, to be found on the critical line (a = %), and nowhere else 


ESI: 


Some interesting plots follow on the next two pages ... 


270 


Now for some fun stuff. We’ll show a few pictures here of the signal, when ¢ = 14.135, the 
approximate first root of C(s) on the critical line, when a = %, Y2, and %, respectively. The intent is 
to give the reader a feel for just how different these signals are, and thus how differently behaved 
€s) is along these vertical lines. Remember, the signal is an encapsulation of the frequency 
coefficients in (3) and (4) via Fourier. The plots show a = Y%, 2, and %, in that order, for eq’n (3). 


271 


Now for some more stuff. We'll show a few pictures here of the signal, when ¢ = 14.135, the 
approximate first root of C(s) on the critical line, when a = %, Y2, and %, respectively. The intent is 
to give the reader a feel for just how different these signals are, and thus how differently behaved 
€s) is along these vertical lines. Remember, the signal is an encapsulation of the frequency 
coefficients in (3) and (4) via Fourier. The plots show a = Y%, 2, and %, in that order, for eq’n (4). 


272 


For a 3D star [pp 225-6], using a simple inverse density function [A(s) = o/s] ... with physical 
singularities at the origin [O] and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1.0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1), 


we can trace the evolution of our quantumlike dark energy scalar field, by starting with the plane at 
@ = 45° to the x-axis, as shown above, and then rotating this plane to 60°, 72°, 84°, and finally 90°, 
where we reach the y-axis. Because of the location of the singularities above, we expect the scalar 
field to be strongest in the x-z and y-z planes (and indeed, equal in these planes ... because of 
symmetry), and somewhere in between this for our given choices of 8. Here are the plots ... 


y y 
60000 


aa / | | si | | 
| 20000 | 20009 
yao La paye Hr ‘a ie 


20000 20000 


r=11,0=45°, 6=x, 3D star r= 11,0=60°, d=x, 3D star 


ripples beginning to form between spikes ripples becoming more pronounced 


273 


r=11,0=72°, =x, 3D star r=11,0=84°, d=x, 3D star 


depression now forms between spikes new spikes emerge from depression 


r=11,0=90°, 6=x, 3D star 


spikes fully formed as we reach y-axis 


274 


In the essay, we discussed several density functions of type A(s) = o/s", where pt > 0, that might be 
suitable candidates for the quantumlike dark energy scalar field. And as part of that exercise, we 
developed various Laplace inversion techniques that allowed us to recover the scalar field from the 
density function, itself. Here, we’re going to give a proof of the following general statement ... 


T(v + %)u*’~! ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Vt (2a) ’rYv(ar), u = Vs? + a2, Re(v) > -1/2 (*) 


where I'() is the gamma function, Jy() is a Bessel function of the first kind, of order v, and we have 
p= 2v+1. This statement was first introduced to us on page 230. 


Indeed, we showed (*) to be true when v = 0 [pp 221-3] ... so we'll use that knowledge here to 
develop the general result above. 


Although (*) may seem to be a rather formidable expression, it really isn’t that hard to derive, so 
let’s begin with the following Bessel contour, which we will use to calculate the Laplace inverse for 
A(s), which itself, is actually the line integral along AB in the diagram below ... 


Both isin(®) and -isin(®) are branching points, so we need to set up our phases along the arms 
associated with these points, and here we can choose the phase for CD to be e!, and the phase for 
LE to be e™. Similarly for GH and IJ, where they are e!™ and e"!™, respectively. 


In doing so, we can calculate the correct value for V—1, as we move from one branch to the other, 


when traversing the contour y, and indeed, the expression (—1) * % as well. 


275 


; 
2)v # a where 


Referring back to pp 221-3 ... we can now calculate the inverse of A(s) = 1/(s? + @ 
here a = sin(@), and the translation s ---» s — cos(0) has already been effected for &(s). 


Thus, we are computing the contour integral 


«few Ms)ds (+) 


4 


where « is equal to 1/2zi, and é is imaginary and equal to V—1. Since the Laplace inverse is 
actually the line integral along AB, we only need calculate along the arms CD and LE in the upper 
half-plane, and then their counterparts in the lower half-plane. By letting the large arc BCEFGJA 
tend to 0, and the radii of the small circles ---» 0, we will achieve the desired result; namely, 
Laplace inversion along AB. 


Along CD, we integrate (+) from s = io to s = isin(®). Setting s = iy, this means (+) becomes, along 
this arm, [and remembering our phase (with the constant « omitted for the time being)] ... 


co 
-cim ff et / (y?— 02)" * Ve dy 
sin(@) 


Then we repeat, along LE, doing exactly the same thing. Remembering our phase here, we have ... 


00 


_eitv S et (y?—02)¥* Ve dy 
sin(0) 


Combining the two gives us, for the upper arms ... 
co 
~2cos(av) Sees (y2—2)"*% ay 
sin(@) 
Now repeat again, but this time on the Jower arms GH and IJ to obtain ... 


oo 
+2cos(nv) S ed /(y?-a)* ay 2) 
sin(@) 


276 


Finally, since we are traversing a contour that has no poles, the integration must sum to 0, so that ... 


WH = of + «f + cf = 0 


AB isin(8) arms -isin(®) arms 


where it is understood, that we are carrying the integrand in (7) in all terms above. Thus, the 
Laplace inverse along AB is precisely the negative of (1) and (2) above, multiplied by «. The result 
is... 


00 


(2/n)cos(v) S sin(yr) / (y?—a2)¥* % dy) 
sin(0) 


Notice that when v = 0, we recover Jo(rsin(@)) [p 227], since again, a = sin(®) has been chosen, 
rather arbitrarily. The result is valid for —”% < v < ¥%, since here we expect the integral in (3) to 


converge. 


On the other hand, v = % is more difficult to determine in (3) ... yet as we shall see, this same value 
of v has meaning in (*), which we are now going to derive. 


afeoeakaeok 


To do this derivation, we need two pieces of information; first the reflection formula for the gamma 
function ... 


Til -z) = a/sin(az) 
or, upon mapping z to z + %, 
T(z+%l(“-z) = 1/cos(nz) 


Next, we need the Mehler-Sonine formula, one of the most elegant expressions in all of Bessel 
Theory, in my opinion ... 


co 
IM) = 2/2 VE rA-w} S sing /G2-D"** ay) 
1 
Now let 6 = 2/2, for the time being, so that a = 1 and (3) becomes ... 


00 


(2/n)cos(v) S sin(yr) /(y?-1)¥* ay (4) 
1 


277 


Using the reflection formula for the gamma function, and (§), (4) now becomes ... 


Wit / {T+} G12" LO) (5) 


and this agrees with (*), in this special case. To derive the more general formula, we let r map to 
rsin(@) in (4), yielding ... 


0 


(2/n)cos(nv) S sin(yrsin(®)) / (y2— 1)” * Vay ©) 
1 


Then because (4) and (5) are equivalent, (5) now becomes ... 


(Vr/ {P02 + v)}) (rsin(0)/2)” Jv(rsin(®)) (7) 


So at this point, (6) and (7) are equivalent expressions. Now let u = ysin(@). Then (6) becomes our 
Laplace inverse, 
oo 


(2/n)cos(xv) S sin(ur) / (u2— 02)Y * ” du (8) 
sin(@) 


where o = sin(@). And finally, after rearranging terms, (7) becomes ... 


(Vit / {A+ v)}) 2a)” Iy(ra) , 
which is what we wanted to show. 


Even though values of v, such as v = %, don’t return anything meaningful in (3), they actually do in 
(*), and indeed, the example on pp 233-4 bears this out. And again, that is because at v = ¥%, say, 
we are not dealing with branching points. Nonetheless, (*) is general enough, it seems, even in 
these corner cases, and in this sense, becomes a rather remarkable formula. 


Finally, there was nothing particularly special about our choice of a. It could have been anything 
really, so (*) still holds for more general choices of this variable ... 


278 


On pp 237-9, we discussed ‘Yukawa-style’ density functions of type 

Ms) = oe H/s  (*) 
where t is a positive constant, and s is a measure of distance. For a two dimensional star, with 
physical singularities at the origin [O] of the star, and at (1, 0) and (-1, 0), we saw that the field 
equations of general relativity could be written as 


G™ = ofl + ¥@le"” 


where \p(r) is one of the two expressions below, with a = sin(0) and B = cos() ... 
2cosh(rB)Jo(@a), r>p, @ = Vr?2- pw... (1) 


2cosh(rB)lo(@a), r<p, @ = fu?— 72... (2) 


Further to this, we noted that the Laplace inverse of A(s) is only valid if r >  ... and so we used 
interpolation methods to extend the result, when r < pt. Here, we'd like to show pictures of the 
quantumlike dark energy scalar field [€], which is the bracketed expression in ({), for all r > 0. 


In doing so, it will give us a feel or sense as to how & behaves ‘behind the scenes’, when r < p1, and 
also, a comparative view of what € is doing, in the more familiar setting, when r > pL. 


Let’s start, then, with a few 3D pictures of the density function [A(s)] itself, where o = 1, and we let 
p= 1,5, 9 for a 2D star, with physical singularities at the origin O of the star ... and also at (1, 0) 
and (-1, 0). The images, it should be said, have been rotated for better viewing. 


279 


The important thing to notice here, is that as 1 increases, the density function falls off much more 
rapidly, and this, in turn, has a distinct effect on the guantumlike dark energy scalar field [&], 
derived from i(s), by taking the Laplace inverse. 


Now we'd like to show some pictures of how € behaves, for r between 0 and 13, in integer steps, 
when pt = 11, and @ [x-axis] ranges between 0 and 2x. And again, we are dealing with three 
physical singularities here -- one at the origin O of the star ... and the other two at (1, 0) and (-1, 0), 
respectively. Here, then, are the plots, which we’ll discuss afterwards ... 


15000 | 14000 


10000 


280 


Pf ii 


10000 


iiiie: 


: § § & 


w 
we 
+ 
o 
o 
ns 
w 
ie 
w 
o 


15000 40000 


r= 10 r = 11 [barrier] 


500000 
400000 
300000 
200000 


100000 


282 


Some discussion of the pictures is in order. First, it is important to understand that what we are 
seeing here is, in all likelihood, the qguantumlike standing wave patterns for the dark energy scalar 
field [&], along circles at different radii r, from the origin O of the star, itself. They are fluctuations, 
in so much as they flash on and off, perhaps billions of times per second, or even billions x billions 
of times in a second; seemingly bubbling up out of nothing and then receding into nothing, over 
and over again. An endless, frenetic dance, you might say, that is driving the expansion of the 
universe, among other things ... 


And, if we were to solve the field equations of general relativity [{], for the gravitational tensor 
[g"'’], in this case [or in any other case we have studied previously], we would probably find that 
g'’ itself, is also quantumlike in nature. 


The case of the Yukawa density [*] is most interesting, because of the barrier at r = tt, The dark 
energy needs to find a way to punch through this barrier ... before going into a kind of spiky 
oscillation, which we see at r = 12, and r = 13, in the pictures. At this point [r > p] , € is both 
negative and positive, but not before. The positive and negative pieces of € should balance out to 
zero, as r tends to 0, and we can think of them as the accelerator and the brake, when considering 
the expansion of the universe. 


In the pictures above, where r runs from 0 to 11, we are ... in my opinion, witnessing a kind of 
quantum tunnelling effect — one in which the dark energy, which is always positive here, is 
performing its own sort of dance, in advance of breaking through the barrier at r = pt. And the 
reason we can see this effect is because we chose 1 to be something greater than 0, in this case. 


Had we set 1 = 0, we would not have seen the effect, because the Yukawa density is now simple 
inverse [A(s) = o/s], and only expression (1) applies, when considering (r) in ({). However, it’s 
not that the tunnelling effect no longer exists; it probably does, but just outside our reality where 
now r < 0. Thus, dark energy seems to be tunnelling its way into our reality, giving us, perhaps, 
some evidence for the existence of a particle associated with € A wave-particle duality, if you 
would like to characterize it as such ... 


400000 \ \ / 


ind [| | 


dark energy tunnelling into our reality our perception of dark energy, obtained 
via the singularities associated with A(s) from X(s), via the Laplace inverse transform 


283 


There is one thing that I find rather mystifying in the pictures, and that is when r = 0. Even here, 
with respect to , the angle of approach matters as r tends to 0; something that is not true if p= 0. 
If I’m standing at the origin O of the star, for example, and I turn through 360 degrees, the dark 
energy at this point [O], is in fact, variable, if 1. > 0. Why is that ? 


afesakeaeok 


Finally, some thoughts on covariance, with respect to ({), where G'Y = C"’ — kT", and C*Y, TY’ 
are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively ... 


GY = ofl + ¥@e"” 


Here, recall that W(r) is one of the two expressions below, with a = sin(®) and B = cos(9) ... 
2cosh(rBJo(@a), r>p, @ =Vr2—- pe... (1) 
2cosh(rB)lo(@a), r<p, @ = ~u2— 72... (2) 


Note that the left side of ({) is fully covariant, and so is the first term in the bracketed expression 
for ({), even when multiplied by g"‘, since the foundational tensor [g"’] is also fully covariant. 
This leaves us with an interpretation of w(r), and here we have to recognize that W(r) is actually a 
mathematical depiction, in our reality, of the quantum fluctuations that bubble up from the dark 
energy streaming into our universe, via the singularities associated with the underlying dark energy 
density function [A(s)]. These fluctuations emerge and then recede, almost continuously, and are 
derived by taking the Laplace inverse of A(s) [see pp 168-9 for more on this subject]. 


Thus, if we are to assign a measure of covariance to (r), it would have to be done at the quantum 
level, and indeed, this makes sense, since our perception of dark energy is the bracketed expression 
in ({). It is both classical and quantumlike. and indeed, joins together the classical piece of general 
relativity with its quantumlike counterpart ... 


afeaake seo 


Perhaps it might be fitting to close with a comment from the French mathematician ... Jacques 
Hadamard, who once said ... 


‘The shortest path between two truths in the real domain passes through the complex domain’ 
GUY = «fer Ms)g’ds CH) 
Y 


Could it also be true, when looking for a solution to the quantum gravity problem, according to (**) 
above ? 


284 


This follow-on research note [II] is also dedicated to a deeper understanding of the Riemann zeta 
function [C(s)], using some of the material in the original essay. Specifically, as in the first note [pp 
258-71, which we’ll label I], we will develop harmonic integrable representations for variants of 
Cs), both in the critical strip S, where 0 < Re(z) < 1 and z is complex, and to the right of S as well, 
using a Yukawa density. The technical details will be kept to a minimum, and along the way, we 
shall also verify our work, so that theory and experiment line up, as they should. The hope is that 
this note, too, will lead to a better understanding of the Riemann Hypothesis [p 181], within the 
context of harmonic representations. 


The Yukawa density is defined as [pp 237-9], for 1 > 0, 
Ms) = o& M/s 
and its Laplace inverse is, for r > 1, where Jo is a Bessel function of order 0 ... 
e!Y/y ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Jo(oa), v = Vs? + 07, o = Vr— pw (yD) 
Now by traversing the contour y shown on page 258, and noting that the Laplace inverse is actually 


the line integral along AB, we can derive (+) just as we did for a certain class of density functions 
[pp 274-77] in this supplementary material, according to the following Yukawa integral ... 


of e* exp(—n,/(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ) //(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (*) 


y 


The result is, 


mf sin(yr)cos(w/y? — sin? @) //'y? — sin? 6 dy 


sin(®) 


and this is actually Jo(@a), where a = sin(@) [see page 86, #33, Bateman Manuscript Project, Tables 
of Integral Transforms, Volume I, for example]. 


Now we'll couple the function g(s) = C(a — s) to the Yukawa density in (*), where @ is any real 
number > 1. The constant « remains and is equal to 1/27i, where é is imaginary and equal to V—1, 
and so we have, for our contour integral ... 


«f e* 9(s) exp(—ny/(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ) /\/(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (§) 


y 


As 0 ---» 0, the integration along the arms extends from 0 to along the imaginary axis, in both the 
upper and lower-half planes ... according to the following description below, in the case of 
Yukawa [refer back to pp 258-61 for the general methodology in I]. And the residue in (§) 


285 


computes to C(a), as @ ---» 0, because we are dealing with a simple pole here, at the origin [recall, in 
this case, that 0 < Re(AB) < a— 1)... 


af el g(iyycos(u (ONO) ) OVO) dy of e"giy)cos(u OO) ) (YONG) dy 
oO oO 


isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 


And so, with this, we now have all the information we need to write down our first harmonic 
expression, when a is any real number > 1, in the case of a Yukawa coupling ... 


S {Asingn) - Beos(yn) Joos(uy)dy/y = @2G@) Ch) 
ie) 


The result is true for all > 0, for all r > 1, and for all real a > 1. Here 


A 


{C(a+ iy) + Ca—iy)}/2 


B 


{a+ iy) — Ca —iy)}/ 27 


and it should be said that when 1 = 0, we recover the expression on page 260. Notice too, that the 
right-hand side of ({) does not depend on y, nor does it depend on r. 


Now it’s time for some verification of our work. We’ll choose r= 1, a = 3/2, and p = 1/2 and 3/2. 
We should see agreement in ({) when p = 1/2, but not when pt = 3/2. Here are the snapshots from 
Wolfram (the range of integration will vary, depending on how much execution time we have) ... 


+ 


400 ty (écos(t)(-c(3 -it)+¢(2+at)) since) (¢(3 - at) +¢(2 + it) 
{ cos{ -) 2 = = = dt= 
Jo 2 2t 2t 


4.1029 


2 
+ 


2t 2t 


“350 /3t 
[coe(2!) 
0 2 


dt = 2.53464 


icos(t)(-¢(3 - it) +¢(3 +ét)) ad 


To a few significant digits, 


(n/2)C(3/2) = 4.1035 


286 


and we see that, given our integration range, theory and experiment agree to 6 parts in 10,000 ! 
However, just as expected, when r = | and pt = 3/2, there is no agreement at all ... 


afeskoke seo 


Now we’d like to move into the critical strip where 0 < a < 1. Our function g(s) = C(a — s) remains 
the same, but since C(a — s) has a simple pole at s = a — 1 < 0, we can no longer exclude it when 
traversing the Bessel contour y, as shown on page 258. The vertical line AB in this contour must be 
to the right of the imaginary axis so that we trap the branching points isin(®) and -isin(®), and thus, 
by default, the pole associated with C(a — s) is automatically included. Here, 0 < Re(AB) < a. 


Now since the Yukawa integral, reproduced below, 


«f e* 9(s) exp(—uy/(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ) //(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (§) 


y 


has square roots in both the numerator and the denominator of the integrand, both must be taken 
into account when considering the sign of the residues, just as we did in I [pp 262-64]. In so doing, 
we have the following, where B=a—1<0... 


qa) — eT TB/ RB - eT MB/ QB = af + af 


isin(®@) arms —_-isin(®) arms 


Now we can finish off the exercise, just as we did when we were to the right of the critical strip 
with a > 1, and we find that 


co 


S {Asin(yr) — Beos(yr) }cos(uy)dy /y = (a/2)G(a) + re™~! -® cosh(u(l — a))/ (1 — a) 
oO 


This result is true for all . > 0, for all r > pw, and for all real 0 < a < 1. Here 


A 


{a+ iy) + Ca—iy)}/2 


B = {Ga+iy) ~ &@-iy)}/2i 


Notice, too, that when 1 = 0 in the expression above, we recover the original formula on page 263 
in section I. 


Now it’s time for some verification of our work, so we’ll choose r = 1, a = 1/2, and = 1/2. Here 
is the snapshot from Wolfram ... 


287 


+ dt= 


2t 2t 


260 t\(tcos(t)(—¢(+-st)+e(2 +ét)) since) (¢(2 - it) +¢(2 +t) 
| cos( >) =z = = = 
Jo 2 


1.63754 
Our formula from the last page, for r= 1, a = 1/2, and = 1/2, evaluates approximately to ... 
(n/2)(a) + ne! ~® cosh(u(l — a) /(1—a) © 1.63674 
and we see here that theory and experiment agree, for our range of integration, to 8 parts in 10,000 ! 
Just as in the previous case, with a > 1 outside the critical strip, the results here inside the critical 
strip are not only encouraging, but stunning as well. The agreement between theory and 


experiment is close enough, that we feel confident enough to pursue the next level of abstraction, 
which we will do in the next section, for Yukawa densities ... 


afeakoke aco 


In this section, we are going to continue the previous discussion, by introducing a new function g(s) 
and another function h(s) [I pp 265-271]. To wit ... 


g(s)=C(a—s+és) + (a—s-—ie) 

h(s) =C(a—s+és) — Ca-—s-—ie) 
where ¢ > 0 is any real number. Again, we are in the critical strip where 0 <a <1. We now 
calculate residues, just as before, noting from above that the simple poles are at s = a — 1 + ée for 
both g(s) and h(s), but because we are dealing with a Yukawa density, we again have to respect the 
sign of the residues, just as we did in the last section. 


Now define the functions ... 
way = e*"—9 (91 ~ a)cos(ex) — 2esin(ex)} / {(1— 0)? +e} 


Q@) = e* 4-9 (9 — @)sin(ex) + 2ecos(ex)} / {(1— a)? + 2} 


Then it is not too hard to show that 


288 


« 


S {(A +C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr) }cos(uy)dy /y = 
° 


(w/2)g0) + @W/2D{VE+w + ¥O-wW} 
ioe) 


J (O—Bysingyr) + (C—A)costyn) Joos(uy)dy /y = 
fe 


—(ni/2)h(0) + (n/2){ Q¢ +p) + QG-w} ... 2 


The result is valid for all 1 > 0, for all r > pt, for all ¢ > 0, and for all real 0 < a < 1. Here 


Catiy—is) + Ca—iy +is)}/2 
Gatiy—is) — (a—iy +is)}/2é 
Catiy +ie) + Qa—iy—ie)}/2 
Gatiy+ie) — Qa-—iy—ie)}/2i 


{ 
{ 
{ 
{ 


Gam} 
fT 


Notice that at 1 = 0, both (1) and (2) assume their original forms in I [p 265], and that as ¢ ---» 0, 
we recover the expression in the last section [p. 286] from (1), since now A = C and B = D, and 
g(0) becomes 2¢(a). On the other hand, (2) computes to 0 on both sides of the equals sign, so more 
good news. 


Setting g(0) and h(0) to zero gives us ... 


ioe) 
S {(A + C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr) }cos(uy)dy /y = 
oO 
G@2{Wr+w + ¥O-w}  ..@) 
ioe) 
J (O~Bysingyr) + (C—A)costyn) }eos(uy)dy /y = 
fe 


@/2){Q¢+y) + O-W}  ..@ 


And lastly, the original theorem [I p. 266] in its new form still holds, where @ + ig is a root of C(s) 
in the critical strip ... 


C(a + te) = 0 if and only if (3) and (4) are true for all 1 > 0, forallr>p (§§) 


289 


Now it’s time for some verification of our work. We’d like to validate (1) when a = %, ¢ = 14.135, 
r=1,and = %. In this case, ¢ is approximately the first root of C(s) on the critical line. Then 
we'll validate (2) when a = %, €=5,r=1, and p= %. Here are the raw snapshots from Wolfram 


Definite integral: 
C= (G it~ 14.1354) c( t+14.1951)} 
oral) (ea —+5f— be tj}+ —e=§ a t + 
Jo ¢ 2 24 2 
5 [é(5 + ét + 141954) +¢(; -é-14.1354)}) 


t 
sin(t) cox{ 5) at = 1.43166 


Definite integral: 


+ 
2i 


g(} + it + 14.135;) ~ ¢(5 ~ it~ 14.1354) 


hes | are 
ob tl as... 


2i 


t 
(cosce) cos{ 5)ae = - 1.62877 + 0i 


n cos(14.135 = 1.5) — 28.27 sin(14.135 » 1.5) 
= exp(-0.75) 

2 0.25 + 14.1357 

Result: 

—0,0769986... 

" cos(14.135 = 0.5) — 28.27 sin(14.135 » 0.5) 
= exp(—0.25) 

2 0.25 + 14.135? 

Result 

-0.117781... 


In these pictures, we are dealing with the first case (1), where a = %, ¢ = 14.135, r=1,andp=%. 
The first two pictures show the integral for (1), broken into two pieces, reflecting the (A + C) and 
(B + D) terms, respectively. The last two snapshots show the last two terms on the right-hand side 
of (1) and the first term on the right-hand side of (1) is ~ -0.0001076 ... nearly zero since we are 


290 


dealing with an approximate root of C(s). And it should be said that al/ calculations for sin() and 
cos() are to be done in radians. 


Adding together the integral contributions yields ~ —0.19711. Adding together all three terms on 
the right-hand side of (1) yields ~ -0.19489. The two agree to about 2 parts in 1000, and this could 
be improved significantly if the integration range was increased ... something that requires more 
execution time on the Wolfram site !__ Now on to the second validation ... 


1 1 1 1 
o(z+ie-Si)-c[5 aes) e S+ies5i}-e(>-ie-5i]) 
2 12 _ 42 2 £ 
cai ( i i (sin(t) cos{ *)) 
f - a ea a dt = 0.578853 
lo 


(5 (c(5 +#e-se)+e(5 -He+58))- 5 (c(5 rie +5i)+e(5 -ie-si)}} 


t 
(cose) cos 3)) dt = —0.0830889 + 0: 


Exact result: 


~5ix(e(5+51)-c(5 -si)} 


Decimal approximation: 


0.72582730986250184542300663! 


x sin(S « 1.5) + 10 cos(5 » 1.5) 
= exp(-0.75) « ————__——— 
2 0.57 + 25 

Result 

0.129425... 

x sin(S « 0.5) + 10 cos(5 0.5) 
= exp(—0.25) x ———— 
2 0.57 + 25 

Result 


-0.359151... 


291 


In these five pictures just above, we are dealing with the second case (2), where a = %, e=5, r=1, 
and 1 = ¥%. The first two pictures show the integral for (2), broken into two pieces, reflecting the 
(D —B) and (C — A) terms, respectively. The last three snapshots show the three terms on the right- 
hand side of (2), where again sin() and cos() are calculated in radians. 


Adding together the integral contributions yields ~ 0.49576. Adding together all three terms on the 
right-hand side of (2) yields ~ 0.49610. The agreement is stunning; they agree to about 3 parts in 
10,000 ! 


CONNECTIONS TO NOETHER’S THEOREM 


Just as in I [pp 268-9], we can develop invariants here that satisfy Noether’s Theorem, relative to 
(§§) on page 288. From our definitions of Y(x) and Q(x) [p 287], we see that the following 
derivatives, with respect to r, hold true for the functions in the rightmost column ... 


Inet + WL Dcos(e(r tu) we for mP(r +p) 
2ne "MO -Veos(e(r— pw)... for m (rp) 
2dneF tM -VineGt py) on. for mQ(r +p) 
2ne®-YO-Dein(er—w) —..... for tA(r—p) 


Taking the ratio of the third to the first term, and then the ratio of the fourth to the second term, for 
example, and adding them together, yields the following invariant, which does not depend on @ ... 


tan(e(r + p)) + tan(e(r— p)) 


And, if 4. = 0, the expression above now reduces to our original invariant, tan(er) [I p 268], after 
dividing by 2. 


We can also develop another invariant, for example, by taking a sum of squares over all four 
derivatives [combining the first and third terms, and then the second and fourth terms]. This yields 
the following, which does not depend on ¢ ... 


gr2e 7 — Deosh(2u(1 — a)) 


And, if 1. = 0, the expression above reduces to our original invariant, 4? ead a) [I p 269], after 
dividing by 2. 


Thus, we can apply Noether’s Theorem, just as we did in I [pp 268-9], and conclude here, just as 
we did there, that the zeroes of C(s) are, in all likelihood, to be found on the critical line (a = %), 
and nowhere else ... 


292 


ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL TESTING 


For the first case (1), where a = %, ¢ = 14.135, r= 1, and p= ¥%, the range of integration was, at 
last, successfully increased to 399. Here are the snapshots from Wolfram ... 


3991 (1 ¢ 71 1 yi 
f - (; (<(5 +it- 14.1351) + ¢(= -it+ 14.135 é})+ = 
202 2 2 
t 
(«5 +it+ 14.1351) + (5 ~it= 14.1354)))sin(e) cos( >) at = 1.4216 


ai 1 [f: + it — 14.135 i) -¢(2 -it + 14.135%) 
= = + 
t 


2i 
g(5 +it+ 14.135 i) ~ (5 — it - a 


2: 


t 
(coste) cos{ =}} ae = -1.61661 + 0i 


These pictures show the integral for (1), broken into two pieces, reflecting the (A + C) and (B + D) 
terms, respectively. Adding them together yields -0.19501. And from page 290, we know the 
three terms on the right-hand side of (1) sum to -0.19489. The agreement is stunning; the two 
agree to about | part in 10,000 ... 


SETI? 


293 


On pages 274-77, we discussed Laplace inversion techniques for a certain class of density 
functions, and saw that for a = sin(@), the expression 


00 


(2/n)cos(v) S sin(yr) / (y?—a2)¥* “ay CY 
sin(0) 


formed our Laplace inverse for densities of type 


Ms) = 1s? + 02)” * % 
provided +4 < v < ¥% And at v = ¥%, we also saw that a Laplace inverse could still be inferred from 
(*), according to the expression below, as per the example on pages 233-34 ... 


Tv + Yau?" 1 ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Vit (20) Yr’Jv(ar), u = Vs?-+ a , Re(v) > -1/2 (8) 


Thus, by analytic continuation, which is what we see here in (§), it is possible to deduce what the 
dark energy [&] in creation must look like, when the underlying dark energy density function [A(s)] 
is inverse square [recall that € is derived from A(s) by taking its Laplace inverse]. 


Such an operation raises an interesting philosophical question, which can be posed as follows ... ... 


* does analytic continuation [@] drive the physical 
laws of creation [£] or is it the reverse ” 


Clearly if there are no physical laws, there is nothing, and so the existence of @ necessarily implies 
the existence of £. But what about the reverse ? Does £ imply @ ? It almost has to, for dark 
energy [€] is, itself, an inherent part of the physical laws [£] , derived via (§), which, in turn, is a 
representation of @. Thus, the laws necessarily depend on analytic continuation, which means that 
£implies @. And so we have the interesting result that £ and @ are equivalent notions. 


afeokoke aco 


In the essay, all foundational laws are treated as dualities, grounded in Noetherian principles, so 
that symmetries imply the laws, and conversely, by way of some action. Since we now know that 
£ and @ are equivalent notions, it stands to reason that certain dualities arrived at, via some 
application of @, could also be grounded in Noetherian principles. 


Such an example is our work on harmonic integrals for the analytic continuation of the Riemann 
zeta function [C(s)], in this supplementary material, and most notably ... the physical theorem (§§) 
concerning the zeroes of ¢(s) in the critical strip [see pp 266 and 288]. 


If the theorem (§§) is fundamentally Noetherian here (and, in fact, we have made it so via the 
invariants), then most surely the zeroes of C(s) in the critical strip will only be found on the critical 
line a = %, and nowhere else. Indeed, the equivalency of £ and @ allows us to put forward a 


294 


physical argument, as opposed to a mathematical one, and so we can, with confidence, argue in 
favor of the simplest [and hence, strongest] symmetry, when enquiring about these zeroes. Perhaps 
a quote from Einstein might be fitting at this point, when he was talking about the physical laws of 
creation. Simply put, he said 


“ ... God does not like weak symmetries ... ’ 
oo 2 2 ae 
And finally, since ‘the beast’ [C(s)] is bigger than the thing that built it [the human mind], we may 


have no choice but to take a physical approach when tackling the Riemann Hypothesis. Indeed, a 
mathematical approach may never give us an answer, one way or the other ... 


feof 


We would now like to turn our attention to the Riemann Hypothesis, which asserts that the non- 
trivial zeroes of the Riemann zeta function [C(s)] lie only on the critical line (a = ¥2) in the critical 
strip, and nowhere else. We’ll demonstrate here, through our work below, that it is not possible to 
tell which a-line a zero is coming from, if it lies off the critical line, in the critical strip. 


Now recall, from page 266, our theorem regarding the zeroes of ((s) in the critical strip, where we 
haveO<a<l,and ¢>0... 


C(a + ie) = 0 if and only if (3) and (4) are true forallr>O (§§) 


foe) 
S {(A+C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
ie) 
ne™ {91 —a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {1 —a +22}... (3) 
ioe} 
S {(D-—B)sin(yr) + (C— A)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
ie) 


ne"! -® {91 — q)sin(er) + 2ecos(er)} / {(1-a)? +22}... (4) 


Here, the following coefficients implicitly reference the a-line, 


Catiy—is) + Ca—iy +is)}/2 
Catiy—is) — (a—iy +is)}/2é 
Gatiy +ie) + Qa—iy—ie)}/2 
Catiy+ie) — Qa-iy—ie)}/2é, 


{ 
{ 
{ 
{ 


GaAwS 
fT 


295 


and it is to be noted that an integration, carried out (implicitly) on the a-line, in (3) and (4), yields a 
signal on the right-hand side containing terms in (1 — a). 


Now from the Bateman Manuscript Project, Tables of Integral Transforms [Volume 1, page 9], we 
see that the Fourier cosine transform of 


fy) = (e+y)/(B + (ety) + (e-y)/ (BP +(€-yY) 
is equal to 
ne" sin(er) , 


where B = | — a, and the Fourier cosine transform, itself, is 


« 


S f(y)cos(yr)dy . 
ie) 


Similarly, on page 65 of Volume 1, we see that the Fourier sine transform of 
g0) = & +y)/(B ++) — €-y)/ (B+ -yY) 

is equal to 

1B cos( 

me”? cos(er) . 

Thus, we can completely rebuild the exact signal [right-hand side] in (3), for example, by factoring 
in suitable constants for both the Fourier cosine and sine transforms of f(y) and g(y), respectively, 
and then adding them together. These constants are ... 


~2e/{(1—a)? + &?} ... for the Fourier cosine transform of f(y) 


+2(1—a)/{(.—a)? + 7} ... for the Fourier sine transform of g(y) 


Notice now, that the denominators in f(y) and g(y), can be written as 


(B+(e+yy?) = B+ (E+ yB-E+yi 


(B+ (e-yP) = B+ -yB-E-y)i), 

where é is imaginary and equal to V—1, so that our Fourier cosine and sine integrations occur 
(implicitly) along the vertical line B = 1 — a in the complex plane, yielding the same signal as we 
see in (3). 


296 


Thus, for the case where C(a + i) = 0 in the critical strip, we may now ask which line the signal 
came from, since we have two distinct integrations to choose from. If we say (3), then the signal 
was generated from the a-line; but if we choose the Fourier cosine and sine approach, then this 
same signal was generated from the B-line, where B = 1 — a, and it is not possible to distinguish 
between the two paths. 


In other words, it is not possible to distinguish the root on the a-line from the root on the B-line, 
using this methodology, unless, of course, a = ¥% [Riemann’s functional equation tells us both roots 
exist for C(s), if one of them does, but says nothing about the undecidable nature of these roots]. 


And finally, a similar argument can be applied to (4) using the Bateman Manuscript Tables, but we 
omit it here ... 


UNDECIDABILITY AND THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS 


Suppose now, ® = a. + éé is a root of ((s) in the critical strip, where 0 < a < 1. By what we have just 
said, there is no mathematical method M that can prove, without ambiguity, that a < ¥%. Similarly 
M cannot prove that a > %, without ambiguity, since there is no way to decide if the root came 
from the a-line or the B-line, according to our methodology above. 


About all we can say is that if @ exists, it came from the a-line or the B-line, but which ... we’ll 
never know. It simply cannot be decided, which suggests to me anyway, that the Riemann 
Hypothesis itself, is undecidable, if a # %. Indeed, there is no way to verify the existence of w. 


To further amplify on this conundrum, suppose we had two drawers of unpaired socks of the same 
shape and size, where the number of socks in each drawer was equal. And suppose further that 
one, and only one, of the drawers contained a red sock. If you were asked to say which drawer 
contained the red sock, but were colorblind, you couldn’t decide. And this is what we’re facing 
here with the root of C(s) in the critical strip. We can’t tell if it came from the a-line or the B- 
line, ifa# %. 


Now our methodology above states that we cannot tell if the signal [S] was generated from a. or B, 
so that relative to S, it is not possible to distinguish between the a-line and the B-line. But S exists 
if and only if is a root of Cs) in the critical strip, according to our theorem (§§) on page 294. 
Thus, when we say ‘relative to S’ it is equivalent to saying ‘relative to m’. And so we may 
conclude that relative to @ = a + és, in the critical strip, it is also not possible to distinguish between 
a and B. 


To see this a bit more clearly, suppose @ is a root. Then we have already shown that S exists, 
independent of the path [a or B]. Suppose now, we assume S exists, independent of the path. Then 
S can be generated from a or B. If we say a, then (§§) applies on page 294, and @ is a root. If we 
say B, then S exists as a proper signal, and since, by assumption, S exists independent of the path, it 
must also exist as a proper signal, according to (§§), implying again that w is a root. Thus, w and S 


297 


are equivalent to one another in this case, so that ‘relative to S’ means ‘relative to @’, as we said 
above. 


In some ways, it reminds me of the famous double-slit experiment in physics. Electrons travelling 
toward these slits can take either path, but because of the strangeness of quantum mechanics, there 
is no way to formulate a coherent picture in our minds ... of how this actually happens. Perhaps, in 
the end, we’ll find out that the Riemann zeta function may be quantumlike in nature as well, 
exhibiting both wavelike and particle-like properties at the same time ... 


double- 


slit screen 
Electrons 
lip... 
electron 
beam gun y 
interference 
pattern 


Electrons ‘passing through’ the slits produce a wave pattern on the screen, not unlike the diffraction 
pattern produced by a plane wave approaching these same slits (photo courtesy of Johannes 
Kalliauer, from the Wikipedia pages, and NekoJaNekoJa~commonswiki). Thus the electrons have 
both wavelike and particle-like properties, simultaneously. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


Suppose now, for a # %, a mathematical method M exists that can show | C(a + é) | > 0, for some 
choice of 0 < a < 1, and for all ¢ > 0, where | . | means ‘take the modulus of’. Then we are led to 
believe C(s) has no roots on this a-line, nor does it have any roots on the B-line, where B = 1 — a. Is 
this a ‘rock solid’ conclusion ? In other words, can we trust M ? 


Well, suppose for the sake of argument, a root w of €(s) really does exist on this a-line, so that we 
may write C() = 0. By assumption, M will report that | C(@) | > 0, but this must also be so from 
our work above, since we already know there is no mathematical method that can verify the 
existence of w, if a # %. In particular, M is not allowed to conclude that | €(@) | = 0, even if @ is a 
root (cont’d ...) 


298 


Thus, M cannot tell us if @ really is or isn’t a root on the a-line, under this scenario, for either way, 
it’s going to say | €(m)| > 0. In turn, this means one of two things: no such M exists, or if it does 
exist, M cannot distinguish between roots and non-roots of ((s) on any a-line, if a # %. To M, 
everything seems like a non-root, even though this may not actually be the case. 


The more reasonable conclusion, in my opinion, is that no such WM exists [at least not in the case, 
for all € > 0). Indeed, the existence or inexistence of a root @ on the a-line really isn’t the issue 
anyway; but rather, what M does with w. And perhaps it might be worth emphasizing, too, that our 
theorem (§§) on page 294 is really an existence theorem that doesn’t tell us anything about 
verification. These ideas, it goes without saying, are two entirely different notions; for it is one 
thing to say a root @ exists, but quite another to verify this statement, where ‘verify’ means ‘prove 
without ambiguity’. 


To me, at least, this makes the Riemann Hypothesis undecidable in the critical strip, if a # ¥2. Said 
another way, any root of C(s) that can be verified in the critical strip, necessarily lies on the critical 
line (a = %), and nowhere else. Beyond that, we are really in no man’s land ... 


SOME INTERESTING PICTURES 


Below are some interesting plots of the coefficient function (A + C) / y, referenced in equation (3) 
on page 294, and the coefficient function g(y), referenced on page 295. Both are used, in part, to 
create trigonometric Fourier transforms, that ultimately lead us back to the same signal [right-hand 
side] in (3). It is quite amazing, really, that two such disparate coefficients [the first being a variant 
of the Riemann zeta function, and the second essentially algebraic in nature], could actually do this. 
And it is curiously odd, too, that whilst A and C implicitly reference the a-line, the denominator in 
g(y) implicitly references the B-line, where B = 1 — a. Exactly where the roots of ¢(s) lie, according 
to Riemann’s functional equation ... 


(A+ O)/y, a= 1/2, € = 14.135 g(y), B = 1/2, © = 14.135 


299 


SOME ADDITIONAL REMARKS 


One might be tempted to see our theorem (§§), on page 294, as something more than a statement 
concerning the existence of zeroes of the Riemann zeta function [¢(s)], in the critical strip. For 
example, we could conclude that (§§) is true for a, and also true when we replace a with B = 1 — a, 
thereby convincing ourselves that the theorem is able to validate a root of C(s) on the a-line, and 
also separately, on the B-line. 


But while it is true that (§§) holds for both a and f, it does so only because of Riemann’s functional 
equation [RFE] and not in spite of it. And since RFE is commentary only on the existence of roots 
of Cs), but says nothing about the decidable or undecidable nature of these roots, we have to see 
(§§) in the same light. Our theorem, therefore, is an existence theorem, valid in the critical strip, 
just as we said earlier. It doesn’t tell us anything about the verification of non-trivial zeroes of C(s), 
but offers some hope in the case where a = 4; for here, there is no ambiguity concerning the a-line 
versus the f-line. 


Thus, our preceding logic is correct, in my opinion, where we concluded that any root of C(s) that 
lies in the critical strip, but off the critical line [a = %], can never be verified, where ‘verify’ means 
‘prove without ambiguity’. If this is so, then what does it say about the Riemann Hypothesis, in 
general ? 


If we think back to the ‘sock and drawer’ analogy on page 296, the colorblind observer will never 
be able to decide which drawer the red sock is in. So in what sense, then, does the red sock even 
exist, as far as this observer [©] is concerned ? To @, it exists because that is what he or she was 
told, but in reality, @ has no way of verifying this assertion. The existence or inexistence of the red 
sock, therefore, is of no consequence to @, since either way, © cannot decide which drawer it is in, 
all else being equal [perhaps, for example, the red sock was really blue, unbeknownst to @]. 


And so it is with the roots of C(s) in the critical strip, that lie off the critical line [a = 4%]. Maybe 
they are there, and maybe they are not; but regardless, there is no mathematical method M that can 
verify these roots on any a-line, if a # %. Similarly, M cannot ‘walk the entire a-line’ and 
conclude, without ambiguity, that there are no roots here either [a # 2], for what is it going to say 
if it encounters one ? 


walking the a-line and saying there are no roots, is equivalent 
to walking the a-line and saying there are roots that cannot be 
verified. For logically, there is no difference between the two 
statements concerning C(s), in the critical strip, ifa#% ... 


Finally, are we any better off traversing the entire critical strip horizontally, as opposed to 
vertically, so that a is free to roam, where 0 < a < 1, and € > 0. I don’t believe we are, for again, 
there is no mathematical method M that can verify any roots of C(s) that lie off the critical line, no 
matter the direction of traversal. Thus, just as before, M cannot ‘walk the entire ¢-line 
horizontally’ [meaning for all a, such that 0 < a < 1, a # %], and conclude, without ambiguity, that 
there are no roots here either; for yet again, what is M going to say if it encounters one ... for some 
€ > 0, however large ? 


300 


a-path 


B-path 


SUMMING IT UP 


In the diagram above, @ is a root of {(s) in the critical strip, and S is the signal, which can be 
generated via the a-line or the B-line, as per our discussions on pages 294 and 295. If we accept 
this methodology, then we have no choice, but to conclude, that roots of ((s) which lie in the 
critical strip, but off the critical line, can never be verified ... 


Finally, if & is the set of all zeroes of C(s) in the critical strip, does it make sense to speak about the 
cardinality of R, knowing that roots off the critical line can never be verified ? Is it N (the integers), 
or perhaps ¢ (the reals), or can it even be decided any longer ? And to what extent should we trust 
traditional methods in mathematics, that are normally used to identify the zeroes of a function, 
when in the case of C(s), they can’t even be verified away from the critical line ? Time will tell, I 
suppose, if these questions really have any answers ... 


THE SPECIAL CASE WHEN & = 0 


In the special case when ¢ = 0, in the critical strip, where 0 < a < 1, we can still make a comment 
on roots of C(a), if they exist. Recalling our theorem on page 263, which is valid for all r > 0 and 
for all real0 <a < 1, 


ca 


S {Asing) — Beos(yr)}dy/y = (w/2)&(a) + meT!~® /(1 — a) 
ie) 


we see that if C(a) = 0, this reduces to 
oo 


S {Asingn) ~ Beos(yr)}dy/y = meT!-®/(1-@) (H) 
oO 


301 


Here, 


A = {(a+iy) + Ca—iy)}/2 


B = {Ga+iy) — &@-iy)}/2i 


Now let  ---» 0 in g(y) on page 295, so that the Fourier sine transform of g(y) becomes ne™, where 
Bp =1-—a. Factoring in the constant 1/8 reproduces (+) above, and now the same argument put 
forth on pages 295-6 applies, if a # %. Thus, any roots of (a) that lie in the critical interval (0,1), 
but off the critical line [a = %], can never be verified ... 


UNDECIDABILITY AND THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS WHEN Ll > 0 


In this case, when pp > 0, the general theorem on page 288 applies, which is reproduced below, for 
the critical strip ... 


C(a + te) = 0 if and only if (3) and (4) are true for all p> 0, forallr>p — (§§) 


ioe) 
S {(A +C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr) }cos(ty)dy /y = 
° 
(n/2){ Barth) + ¥O-w}  ... 8) 
ioe) 
J (D—Bysingyn) + (C—A)eos(yn) Jeostuy)ay /y = 
° 
(n/2){ e+ p) + QG-wW} ... 4) 
Here, 


{C(a+iy —is) + C(a—iy +ée)}/2 
{Gia +iy—ée) — (a—iy +ée)}/ 2é 
{C(a+iy +ie) + Ca—iy—ie)}/2 
{C(a+iy +e) — Qa—iy —ie)}/ 26 


Gam YS 
"ou 


and it is to be noted that the expressions under the integral signs in (3) and (4), modulated by the 
cos(tly) term, produce a pair of translates on the right-hand side, where ‘¥ (x) and Q(x) are defined 
on page 287. This is a minor miracle, in and of itself, deduced from residue theory and the Laplace 
transform, but something that is not readily obvious in going from 1 = 0 to p > 0, just using Fourier 
theory. 


302 


Now define the functions 


1-a) cos(ex), 


ex) = e*"-% sin(ex) and n(x) = e*! 
so that the Fourier cosine transform of f(y), defined on page 295, is just 2&(r). Similarly, the 
Fourier sine transform of g(y), also defined on page 295, is mn(r). 


Using the Bateman Manuscript Project, Tables of Integral Transforms [Volume 1, pages 7 and 63], 
we see that the Fourier cosine transform of f(y)cos(uy) now becomes 


(w/2)(E(r + w) + Er W), 


and similarly, the Fourier sine transform of g(y)cos(y) becomes 
(w/2)(n + W) + Nr pW). 


Factoring in the constants —2¢ /{(1 — a)? + e?} for E(x), and +2(1 — a) /{(1 — a)? + e?} for n(x), and 
adding the two expressions just above together, reproduces the right-hand side of (3) on page 301. 


Thus, the arguments put forth on pages 294-6 apply, which means that for our theorem (§§) on 
page 301, any root w = o + ég in the critical strip determined by (§§) , but off the critical line (where 
a=), can never be verified. This statement is true, no matter our choice of p> 0... 


Finally, letting ¢ ---» 0 takes care of the case where we are in the critical interval (0,1), so that our 
result is now true for alle > 0... 


UNDECIDABILITY AND THE RIEMANN HYPOTHESIS WHEN (s) IS NON-ZERO 


In this particular case, we'd like to discuss undecidable states when C(s) evaluates to a non-zero 
value, but before doing so, a few comments are in order concerning the undecidable nature of the 
root in the critical strip, where = a + is. For a # ¥%, we said on page 296, that relative to the 
signal S, it was not possible to distinguish between the a-line and the B-line, where B = 1 — a, and 
C¢(a + ie) = 0. But notice now that if @ is a root, then necessarily (and obviously) the a-line exists. 
Conversely, if the a-line exists (and it does for all 0 < a < 1 in the critical strip), then necessarily it 
must contain the @-root, in order to reach a state of undecidability, provided a # %. 


Thus, the a-line and w imply each other, which means they are equivalent notions. And so, to say 
that “relative to S, it is not possible to distinguish between the a-line and the B-line*, is equivalent to 
saying that ‘relative to S, it is not possible to distinguish the a-root from the B-root’. This is the gist 
of our remarks at the top of page 296. 


Now we’d like to consider, briefly, the case when we can reach a state of undecidability, where C(s) 
is not zero. Let C(a + ég) = a + ib, where not both a and b are 0, so that by conjugation, we may 
write C(a —ie) =a—ib. Assume now, C(p + és) = a + ib, so that again C(p — ig) = a — ib. 


303 


Then in short form, C(a + ée) = (Bp + ig), so that we may enquire as to whether we can distinguish 
the points a + ie from the points B + és, where B = 1 — a, and a# %. Referring back to our general 
theorem on page 265 (see below), we note that the signals here [second term, right-hand side], in 
(1) and (2), are augmented by the offsets (1/2) g(0), and — (zi/2)h(0), respectively; and they can be 
moved over to the /eft-hand side in (1) and (2), functioning as offsets to the integrations now. 
These offsets, it should be said, compute to xa and mb, as seen on the right-hand side of (1) and (2), 
whether we calculate them from the a-line or the B-line. 


Thus, we can generate the signal, via the offset and the integration, from the a-line in (1) and (2), 
and we can also generate this same signal, via the integration from the B-line, using the methods 
outlined on pages 294-6. Since C(a + ée) = C(B + ée), we may now ask ‘which line the signal came 
from’. And the answer is, it is not possible to decide. And so, by our opening remarks in this 
section, it is also not possible to distinguish between the points a + ie on the a-line, and the 
corresponding points p + ée on the B-line. 


Theorem From Page 265 Reproduced Here 


ioe} 
S {(A+C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr) }dy/y = 
ie) 
(n/2)g(0) + ne! ~ (21 — a)cos(er) —2esin(er)} / {U1-a)? +22} (D) 
ioe} 
S {(D-—B)sin(yr) + (C— A)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
ie) 


— (ni/2)h(0) + net ~ (2(1 — a)sin(er) + 2ecos(er)} / {U—a +22} (2) 


The result is valid for all r > 0, for all ¢ > 0, and for all real 0 <a < 1. Here 


Catiy—is) + Ca—iy +is)}/2 
Ga+tiy—is) — (a—iy +is)}/2é 
Gatiy +ie) + Qa—iy—ie)}/2 
Gatiy +ie) — Qa-iy—ie)}/2i 


{ 
{ 
{ 
{ 


Gam Y> 
i 


g(s)=C(a—s+ése) + Ca—s—ie) 
h(s) =C(a—s+ée) — (a—s—iés) 


304 


COMPLETING THE CIRCUIT 


Suppose = a + ig is a root of ¢(s) in the critical strip, where 0 < a < 1, anda # %. Then we have 
already shown that relative to the signal [S], we can’t distinguish between the a-line and the B-line 
[p. 296], where B = 1 — a. Since w and S are equivalent to one another, it means that relative to , 
it is also not possible to distinguish between the a-line and the B-line [p. 296]. 


But this means that relative to @, it is not possible to distinguish between the a-root and the B-root. 
And thus, because and S are equivalent to one another, it must be the case that relative to S, it is 
also not possible to distinguish between the a-root and the B-root. And this is what we said in the 
last section on page 302, only here, we are strictly using the @ = S equivalency to make our case. 


And, in fact, these remarks apply when @ is a pseudo-root, where for any real a and 5, it is the case 
that 


C(a + ie) =C(Pptie)=a+ib 


Finally, the logic also works in reverse order, so that ultimately we may conclude ‘relative to S, it is 
not possible to distinguish between the a-line and the B-line’ ... is equivalent to saying ‘relative to 
S, it is not possible to distinguish between the a-root and the B-root’. There is no difference 
between the two statements here, even though S, itself, is an algebraic construct. 


And indeed, it is the signal’s frame of reference (or lens) through which we really perceive [or 
glean information about] the undecidable nature of the Riemann Hypothesis, in our reality. We 
shall refer to this as the external frame of reference, going forward; and when talking about the 
signal S, shall tacitly assume that we are talking about the pair of signals in (1) and (2) on page 
303, simultaneously, just as we have in the past. 


305 


Miscellaneous Topics 


On The Self-Consistent Nature of ¢(s) Within The Context of Our Theorem (§§) 


We have already put forward the notion that our duality (§§) on page 266 is an existence theorem, 
in the critical strip, and one could ask whether C(s) ‘evaluates itself’ properly within this context. 
After all, we believe from previous research that roots of C(s) that lie in the critical strip, but off the 
critical line, can never be verified, so what happens, then, if ¢(s) encounters such a root in the 
integrals below ? 


Supposing C(a + ie) = 0, we see from (§§) that (3) and (4) hold true, and in particular, as y ---» 0, the 
coefficients A, B, C, and D all ---> 0, inside the integrals, based on our supposition. That is to say, 
C(a + ée) is evaluating itself correctly under the integral signs, when y ---» 0. And since our choice 
of ¢ > O is arbitrary, it must be the case that C(s) always evaluates itself correctly, inside the 
integrals, whenever it encounters a root, for any choice of y > 0, for which this is so. 


Conversely, if (3) and (4) hold true, then our general theorem on page 265 [and reproduced on page 
303] implies both g(0) and h(0) are identically zero, which means C(a + ie) = 0. Thus, the 
coefficients A, B, C, and D are forced to 0 as y ---» 0 inside the integrals below; and again, the 
arbitrary nature of ¢ > 0 means C(s) always evaluates itself correctly, under the integral signs, 
whenever it encounters a root, for any choice of y > 0, for which this is so. 


foe) 
S {(A+C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr) }dy/y = 
ie) 
net! -® {91 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {(1-ay +22}... 3) 
ioe) 
S {(D-B)sin(yr) + (C— A)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
ie) 
ne™~® {91 —a)sin(er) + 2ecos(er)} / {(—a)? +82}... (4) 
C(a + ie) = 0 if and only if (3) and (4) are true forallr>O (§§) 
Here, 


{C(a+ iy —is) + C(a—iy +ée)}/2 
{C(a+iy—ée) — C(a—iy +ée)}/ 2é 
{C(a+iy +ée) + Ca—iy—ie)}/2 
{C(a+iy +ie) — Ca-—iy—ie)}/2é. 


Gam SY 
"ou 


306 


Thus, not only is (§§) an existence theorem, but it is also a theorem in which C(s) always evaluates 
itself correctly inside the integrals, whenever it encounters a root. Knowing that this is so, now 
allows us to put forward an undecidability argument for the Riemann Hypothesis, grounded in 
reasonable mathematics, which the reader will find in the last research note [pp 293-304]. 


On The Parallels Between The Riemann Hypothesis and The Double Slit Experiment 


The similarities between our approach to the Riemann Hypothesis and the Double Slit Experiment 
in physics are actually quite striking, and indeed, we alluded to this on page 297. In the Double Slit 
Experiment, electrons are fired at a pair of slits, one after the other, and those that ‘make it through’ 
create an interference pattern on the screen, as shown below ... 


double- 
slit screen 


Electrons 


electron 
beam gun 


interference 
pattern 


One would think the pattern would be an image of the two slits themselves, but instead, what you 
get is an image that is akin to the diffraction pattern produced by a plane wave passing through 
these same slits. Thus, the electron has both ‘wavelike’ and ‘particle-like’ properties, at the same 
time. 


In the diagram below, w is a root of €(s) in the critical strip, and S is the signal, which can be 
generated via the a-line or the B-line, as per our discussions on pages 294-6. In fact, each line 


contains a copy of the root, according to Riemann’s Functional Equation, so that we can think of @ 
as the electron e ‘passing through either slit’, and generating an interference pattern that parallels S. 


a-path 


B-path 


307 


In the same way, then, that we glean information about the electron, by studying the interference 
pattern [Pf] on the screen, we do, in a similar way, glean information about the undecidable nature 
of the root w, by studying the signal S. In both cases we are in the external frame of reference, and 
learning something about an object that carries its own internal frame of reference; namely e or @. 


And while it may be true that relative to @, it is not possible to distinguish between the a-line and 
the B-line (and indeed, we have established this via the @ = S equivalency); and while it may also 
be true that relative to e, it is not possible to distinguish between slit A and slit B, we must always 
keep in mind that these are internal frames of reference. In our reality, however, we learn about the 
ambiguous nature of the electron, or the undecidable nature of w through the external frame. 


Having said this, it is hard to miss the striking parallels between the two as outlined above. Indeed, 
the parallels are so close that it makes one wonder if a quantumlike ‘wave function’ of sorts might 
well exist for the roots of C(s). It is an interesting question, to say the least, and one which we shall 
address in future notes, in this section. 


On The Equivalency of Hidden Variables and Analytic Continuation 


On page 293 we established an equivalency between the physical laws of creation [£], and analytic 
continuation [@]. In physics today, there seems to be a fairly strong interest in the notion of 
‘hidden variables’ and what they might mean. Is there a connection here between the laws and 
these variables ? 


In this note, we are not going to try and interpret the meaning of hidden variables [#] per se, but 
rather, demonstrate how they might be incorporated into the field equations of general relativity, 
assuming they exist. 


Let us begin, then, by supposing that an equivalency between £ and # does, in fact, exist, so that 
the laws necessarily imply the existence of hidden variables, and conversely. Since we know from 
previous research that £ and @ are equivalent to one another [p 293], it now stands to reason that #€ 
and @ are also equivalent to each other. 


Thus, when searching for a candidate for #, within the context of general relativity [GR], we are 
probably searching for some mathematical object that exists in the complex plane. We have such a 
candidate already ... the Riemann zeta function [C(s)]. 

Now define the function 


u(a.s) = Xs)6(a-s), 


where A(s) is the underlying density function associated with dark energy. Then from previous 
research in this essay, the field equations of general relativity now become ... 


GY = xfer was)g’*ds  (*) 
Y 


308 


where y denotes the Laplace inverse, according to some contour, and G"Y = C“’ — kT“, where C"Y, 
T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively. And here, we will only 
deal with the case where the gravitational tensor g"Y is coupled to (a,s). 


Now let us assume only one dark energy singularity exists at the center of the star, whose density 
function is (s) = o/s, where o is some constant. We’ll take our contour to be the one shown on 
page 258, and reproduced here, but the branching points and their associated arms are to be omitted 
in the calculations. They no longer exist, as it were. Thus, we are traversing the large contour 
ABFA, to obtain the Laplace inverse along AB, itself. 


|e 
B 
L\|{D 
ising 
F 
fa) 
-isin9 
A 
e}|/| 


For a > 1, since C(s) has a simple pole at s = 1, (a —s) has a simple pole at s = a— 1 > 0, and so we 
exclude it by choosing 0 < Re(AB) < a — 1. That leaves us with a simple pole at the origin O, 
associated with X(s). The result is ... 


GY = og(0)- Ca) (#) 


For 0 < a < 1, and 0 < Re(AB) < a, there are two simple poles ... one at O and one at B=a-—1 <0. 
Calculating the residues here leads to ... 


G'Y = ofg"*(0)C(a) + eg"(B) / B} 


Now since B < 0 is relatively small, we can replace g"’(B) with g"’’ (0), and in the far-field view, 
with r > 0 large, the second term in the bracketed expression will essentially vanish. 


Gey 


u 


o{g"*(O)C(a) + ePg""(0) / B} 


og"(0){C(a) + e"/B} 


309 


This leaves us with the same expression as we see in (7) ... the only difference being the sign of 


(a). 


For a > 1, C(a) is strictly positive, and for 0 < a < 1, €(q) is strictly negative. I would submit to the 
reader that C(a) is acting as a hidden variable here ... behaving one way in the critical strip [the 
substrate level below our reality, where 0 < a < 1], and in another way in our reality, when a > 1. 


Thus, from (+) above, we might infer that the field equations of general relativity operate in two 
spaces simultaneously, where one is positive and the other negative, and that somehow these spaces 
are intimately connected to the Riemann zeta function [C(s)], itself. 


A Quantumlike Wave Function For The Roots of C(s) 


Previously, we talked about the parallels between the Riemann Hypothesis and the Double Slit 
Experiment, and surmised that there just might be a quantumlike wave function associated with the 
roots of C(s). After all, we learned in a previous research note [pp 293-304] that roots of C(s) that 
lie off the critical line, in the critical strip @, can never be verified. Thus, there is no mathematical 
method M that can verify these roots, where verify means ‘prove without ambiguity’. 


So what, then, will M do if it encounters such a root, away from the critical line in @ ? To answer 
this question, we have to better understand what the word ‘encounter’ really means within this 
context, and more specifically, from the perspective of a quantumlike wave function w, that might 
be associated with the roots of C(s) in @. 


In quantum mechanics, ‘particle in a box theories’ imagine a scenario where there is an infinite 
(repulsive) potential, running the length of two vertically parallel lines, separated by a distance of L 
units, say. 


Vix)=0 
(well) 


A particle, such as an electron e, bounces back and forth between these lines, and when solving 
Schrodinger’s equation for this particular setup, a wave function Y emerges, that tells us something 
about the particle’s whereabouts. 


310 


Specifically, a probability distribution can be calculated from , for infinitely many ‘position 

states’ that e might be in, at any given time. These probability states (n = 1, 2, 3, ...) are tied 

directly to the energy of the electron, itself, and if L is equal to 1 in the diagram above, compute to 
2sin?(nzx) , 


where 0 < x < 1. The energy of e, it should be said, is proportional to n’. 


/ \ 
10 / 


0.2 04 0.6 


0.8 10 


06 (OB 10 


For our root @ that lies in the critical strip, but off the critical line, we now have a mechanism by 
which we can can interpret an ‘encounter’ by the mathematical method M with our root o. A 
quantumlike wave function W, associated with the roots of ¢(s) in the critical strip, but away from 


the critical line, tells us that M can never speak precisely about the location of such a root in @; but 
rather, just the probability of finding a root at a certain location. 


And, roots with ‘more energy’ — perhaps meaning, further away from the x-axis in @, will of course, 
be associated with higher values of the integer n. 


SETI? 


311 


The Spinning Spheres 


Then I saw two perfectly shaped spheres, suspended in mid-air, as it were. Perhaps they were made 
from some type of glass, or maybe even light itself. But they were side-by-side, motionless and 
maybe six feet apart, as we might measure distance. 


Inside each sphere, and suspended in mid-air, as it were, I could see small metal bars, or maybe 
they were made from light as well. I don’t know. But they too were completely motionless. 


Then the spheres began to spin, and as this happened, the metal bars in the first sphere began to talk 
or communicate with the bars in the second. I was astonished by what I was seeing, and could not 
understand it, at first. 


Then the spheres stopped spinning, and when they did, the communication between the bars also 
ceased. 


I was in the autoscopic view at the time, and the person explaining this effect to me, did so with 
perfect clarity. But alas, when I woke up, I could only remember what I saw, and nothing more. 


Except for one small detail which I shall leave as a mystery for others to ponder ... it is intimately 
connected to the behavior of the Riemann zeta function ... 


312 


Can A Mathematical Method Show Roots of ¢(s) Lie Only On The Critical Line ? 


so that 
cal strip 


In my opinion, the short answer to this question is no. For suppose such a method JM exi 
M can state, unequivocally, that any and all roots of Cs) lie on the critical line, in the crit 
@, and nowhere else. 


Then by implication, M is stating, without ambiguity, that no roots of C(s) lie in @*, where @* is the 
critical strip minus the critical line. However, we already know there is no mathematical method 
M' that can verify roots in C* [pp 293-304], so that M' cannot say, without ambiguity, that no roots 
of C(s) exist in @* [see, for example, pp 297-99]. 


Thus, if we were to believe that M existed, we would, by implication, arrive at an impasse, in so 
much as JM is now contradicting M’. 


But now, if M doesn’t exist and M' is inherently ambiguous, it leaves us with no choice, but to 
conclude, that the Riemann Hypothesis has no answer ... it too, is inherently ambiguous, and 
therefore undecidable ... 


a-line at% a-line 


In scenario A, M' is a mathematical method that walks the entire a-line in @*, and concludes there 
are no roots. In scenario B, a root @ of C(s) exists somewhere on this a-line, but this time M'’ will 
also conclude there are no roots, since here they can’t be verified. To be sure, M' will encounter 
the root , but it will not report it as such, according to our methodology. 


So which of the two scenarios above should we believe, relative to M’? The answer is ... it is not 
possible to decide. Both A and B could be true, but we will never know which ... 


Close Encounters of The Kind — A Case Study in Clas 


ical Versus Quantumlike 


Let M' be a mathematical method that walks the entire a-line in C*, according to scenario B above. 
Then in the classical sense, M' will encounter the root @ = a + ig, for some & > 0, however large, 
and report it as a non-root. Most likely, as a discontinuity of sorts, as I think about it now. For 
example, the function f(x) =| x | has no meaningful derivative at the origin O, even though it is 
continuous over the real line. And this is, perhaps, the best way to think of what happens when MU’ 
encounters @ directly, as seen from a classical perspective. 


313 


From a quantumlike perspective, the roots of C(s) in @* are endowed with a wave function w [see 
pages 309-10], from which probability states (n = 1, 2, 3, ...) can be calculated, that tell us how the 
roots on any given €-line might be distributed. 


In this case study, we will assume the ‘energy level’ associated with is n = 2, and so, without loss 
of generality, using the probability distribution mentioned on page 310, this is, forO <a<1... 


P2(a) = 2sin?(27a) 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 10 


P2(a) for0 <a <1, whenn=2, 
that is associated with the ¢-line 


Thus, when J’ walks the entire a-line in @*, it will eventually encounter the ¢-line, and now, even 
though @ may very well exist on this a-line, ' can only ‘make contact’ with @ via the probability 
distribution P2(a). And here there are two probability zones, as shown in the diagram above, where 
the expected values are at a = %4 and a = %4. Notice too, that at a = %, P2(a) = 0. 


Thus, from the perspective of M', o lies somewhere on this ¢-line, according to P2(a), and that is 
the best we can do. There is no such thing as M' encountering @ directly anymore, as there was in 
the classical sense; rather, just probability distributions that M' must operate through. This, then, is 
the guantumlike perspective, but to be sure, whether we choose classical or quantumlike, roots in 
@* can never be verified, where verify means ‘prove without ambiguity’. 


ales ak ao 


It is important, I think, to summarize our findings at this point. In the classical sense, M’ walks the 
entire a-line in @*, according to scenario B, and reports the root @ = a + ig as a non-root. Here, w 
exists by supposition. 


In the guantumlike sense, the experiment is repeated, but this time ... M’ defers to the probability 
distribution P2(a), and concludes that the root exists somewhere on the €-line, but can say no more. 
Thus, M' cannot verify the existence of @ on the a-line, in particular, in C*. 


314 


But in this particular case [quantumlike], we have assumed the root @ = a + é€ exists as a static 
object on the a-line, and might ask the question ... could be dynamic ? That is to say, could @ be 
bouncing back and forth on the ¢-line, between a = 0 and a = 1, just like the electron e does in the 
‘particle in a box’ scenario, described on pages 309-10 ? 


The answer is, it doesn’t matter. For if @ is static and is assumed to exist at a + ie, M' will defer to 
P2(a), and if w is dynamic, M' will still defer to P2(a), and conclude either way, that it cannot verify 
the existence of @ on the a-line ... without ambiguity. The most M’ can say is that @ exists 
somewhere on the ¢-line, according to P2(a), but nothing more. 


But this is very good news for us, because it means we can adopt the ‘particle in a box’ model for 
the electron e, just as it is, and use it to describe the probabilistic layout of the roots of C(s) in @*, 
which, in turn, is inherited from the wave function y, itself. To be a little more specific, these 
probability states are derived from | w [. 


In my opinion, the guantumlike approach has several advantages over the classical approach, when 
considering the roots of C(s) in @*, assuming they exist. First, we don’t have to wrestle with the 
idea that WM’ will report a root as a non-root, should it encounter one. Second, the parallels between 
our approach to the Riemann Hypothesis and the Double Slit Experiment [pp 306-7] are so close, 
that we can’t ignore the likely prospect of a wave function w for roots of ¢(s) in @*. Third, a 
resolution to the Riemann Hypothesis has never been found, and perhaps the guantumlike approach 
described here best explains why. And finally, what about those spinning spheres [p 311], which 
almost surely, are depicting some kind of quantumlike behavior in their own right ... be it 
entanglement, action at a distance, consciousness, and so forth ... 


But to be sure, as we said before, whether we choose classical or quantumlike, roots of C(s) in C* 
can never be verified, according to our methodology [pp 293-304], where verify means ‘prove 
without ambiguity’. And this is really why the Riemann Hypothesis has no answer, in my opinion 


On The Nature of Static and Dynamic Roots For C(s) in @* 


In the static case, m = a + ig is a root of C(s) in @*, the critical strip minus the critical line, and in the 
classical sense, a mathematical method M' makes direct contact with @, as it walks the entire a- 
line. Thus, we are to think of @ as fixed in location here, and indeed, this is how roots of €(s) are 
perceived to this day — even in @*, supposing, as we may, that they exist in this region. 


Now we endow the roots of C(s) in @* with a wave function W, so that we are transitioning away 
from classical mode, and into quantumlike mode, where the roots are now governed by probability 
distributions [Pn(a) n =1, 2, 3, ...], inherited from w. How then, should we perceive «, in this case 
> 


Tf we still want to think of w as a static object on the a-line, so that @ = a + ig, we can do so, but it’s 
a bit like mixing parts of the classical and quantum worlds together. On the one hand, « is fixed in 
location [a classical notion], but on the other ... M’ perceives its location through Pa(a) [a 
quantumlike notion]. 


315 


As such, it is better to make a clean break from the classical world altogether, by perceiving as a 
dynamic object now, that bounces back and forth between a = 0 and a = 1, on any given ¢-line. 
This, in turn, brings us into complete alignment with the ‘particle in a box’ scenario [B] for the 
electron e, and here we know how y is to be calculated. 


And indeed, there is no harm or foul in perceiving @ as dynamic, since M' always defers to Pn(a) 
anyway, in the quantum world. The most WM’ can say is that @ exists somewhere on the e-line, 
according to P,(a), but nothing more. And so, whether or not @ is bouncing back and forth is 
somewhat immaterial to MM’, but its dynamic nature is material if we are going to maintain 
consistency with B. 


What, perhaps, is more difficult here, is for us to change the way we think about the Riemann 
Hypothesis, and the nature of the roots of C(s) in @*. To leave behind the classical world and 
embrace the quantum world, as we’ve described it here, is not an easy thing to do. But if we can 
make the leap, we might find there is much to be gained by doing so; and indeed, we will have 
succeeded in confirming what we knew already; namely, that roots of C(s) in C* can never be 
verified, where verify means ‘prove without ambiguity’. Alas, the quantum world does this for us, 
automatically ... 


A Physical Interpretation For The Roots and Pseudo-Roots of C(s) in C* 


Pseudo-roots were discussed on pages 302-4, but essentially, anything we’ve said so far in the 
Miscellaneous Topics section applies to pseudo-roots, as well. Recall that a pseudo-root is one for 
which 


Catie)=C(Btic)=a+tib (*) 


where a and b are real, and B = | — aq, in the critical strip. Now suppose, in the diagram below, that 
Pa and Px are two exotic particles, associated, say, with consciousness or even dark energy, that 
bounce back and forth between o = 0 and a = 1, as per the ‘particle in a box’ scenario [8], 
described on pages 309-10. 


| | 

| | 

|Pa--> «-- Pg | (line) 
| | 

| | 

| | 

a=0 a=1 


Pa and Px are identical in every respect, and possess attributes that are conserved, like, for example, 
the notion of spin. Pa begins to travel toward a = | at the same time that Pg begins to travel toward 
a=0. They'll meet in the middle at a = %, but pass through each other in ‘ghost-like’ fashion, and 
continue on their merry way. The particles remain entangled in this ‘bouncing back and forth’ 
scenario, in so much as any attributes associated with them are always conserved. And the ¢-line, 


316 


it should be said, corresponds to the energy of these particles ... in the quantum sense, as we 
mentioned in earlier research notes here. 


From a mathematical perspective, (*) is telling us that attributes exist and are invariant, but that 
they may be complex-valued (in this case the pseudo-root @ + ég is to be associated with Pa and the 
pseudo-root B + ie with Pg). In our reality, by looking at the real components a and 5, or even 
something like a? + b’, we infer at the quantum level [a physical notion], what these attributes 
might be. For example, an expression like a” + b” might denote spin, up to sign. 


Thus, when the mathematician enquires about roots or even pseudo-roots in @*, the critical strip 
minus the critical line, it might be better if the physicist enquires about attributes associated with 
these exotic particles, in a lab setting, similar to 8. For it seems to me, as our understanding of ¢(s) 
evolves, that we are really dealing with a mathematical function here, that depicts [or characterizes] 
areality at the quantum level, that we know very little about. 


The research note on ‘Hidden Variables’ [pages 307-9] is also another example of how C(s), ‘acting 
through dark energy’, may have an effect or subtle influence on the equations of General Relativity. 
I’m sure there is no end to what’s possible, if you think about it ... 


A Poem 


T once knew a man named Infinity, 

Who stood tall in the fields with you and me. 

I said, go away, you’re not welcome today, 

But he laughed, and he said, I’m the Remedy ... 


A Harmonic Representation For The Gravitational Tensor g"Y When X(s) ~ o/s 


In the same way that we developed harmonic representations for the Riemann zeta function [¢(s)], 
we can do something similar for the gravitational tensor g"’, using a simple inverse density 
function [A(s)] for dark energy [&]. In doing so, we can learn more about the constraints placed 
upon g’ in the complex plane C, and indeed, that is something we are going to do now, in this 
research note. 


Recall from previous research [pp 197-243], that the dark energy contour integral takes the exact 
form 


coe!) f° e*g"(s + cos(0)) //( — isin(@))(s + isin(®) ds (*) 
7, 


before any averaging or smoothing on g"’ [see, for example, pages 235-6]. Here, the physical 
singularities for X(s) are at (+1, 0), and in particular, (+1, 0) is associated with (*), whilst (—1, 0) is 
associated with its counterpart, where s + cos(®) maps to s — cos(@), and rcos(@) to —rcos(@), in the 
integral above. The contour y is the one shown below, and we shall focus on (*), for the time 
being. And here, « is equal to 1/27i, where é is imaginary and equal to V—1. 


317 


Since we are interested in a harmonic expression for g"’’, we can delete the cet©os(8) term, leaving 
us with 


«f e*g""(s + cos(0)) /\/(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (+) 


All we need to do now, is repeat the procedure outlined on pages 258-60, realizing too, that in the 
case where g'’’ is coupled directly to (s), it is well-behaved throughout the complex plane C [the 
series of notes titled ‘Schwarzschild, Perfect Stars and The Dark Energy Contour Integral’ (pages 
197-243), discusses this issue in several places, but in particular, see the summary on page 232]. 


Thus, when considering the integral (+) above, we don’t have to worry about encountering any 
poles associated with g"’’, like we did with C(s), when developing harmonic expressions; and so, 
the methods outlined on pages 258-60 will work just fine ... for any physical singularity (a, 0) 
associated with A(s), where « > 0. Indeed, we expect the same to be true, even as o ---» 0, but for 
the time being, we’ll deal with the case where a = 1. 


Following our methodology [pp 258-60], we see that the residue in (+) computes to g"’(a), where 


here a = 1, and @ ---» 0. At the same time, the arms associated with the branching points isin(®) and 
-isin(®) compute to ... 


2ferariylnody 2f e%e"a-iyy (Hovey 
fe) oO 


isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 


318 


And, since it is the case that 


g(a) = S + af 
isin(®) arms —-isin(®) arms 
we see, in turn, that 
co 
Uv =2 iyr uv . _ -iyr uve: dvi 
g(a) = 2nJ {eM g""(a + iy) ei gh(a—iy)}dy /y 


fo 


Collecting terms in the expression above leads to the following, which we’ll label (§) ... 


00 


u,v 


g(a) = Ax f {costyrifg"*(a+ iy) ~ g"(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g(a + iy) + g(a iy)]) dy/y 


fe 


And since g"’Y(a) is going to be real-valued, so must the integral above. One way to ensure this 
happens (since k is imaginary), is by insisting that 


g”*(a+iy) — g*’(a—iy) be purely imaginary for all y > 0 
g’’(a+iy) + g"’(a—iy) be purely real for all y > 0 


Such a constraint is true by default, for a function like C(s), because C(s*) = C(s)*, where * means 
‘take the conjugate of’. However, for the gravitational tensor g"’”, we might not be so lucky. And 
finally, there was nothing particularly special about a = 1. It could have been any real number > 0, 
matching the physical singularity for X(s) at (a, 0). Similarly, we could have chosen any a < 0, by 
selecting the counterpart to (*), described on page 316. And lastly, letting a ---» 0 shouldn’t cause 
any problems either, since we believe g”’ is well-behaved in the complex plane C ... in the case 
where it is coupled directly to A(s). 


As a quick confirmation, suppose (hypothetically) that one of the gravitational components [g"’”] is 
a constant, so that g’Y = c. Then the bracketed term associated with cos(yr) in (§) above is 0, and 
the bracketed term associated with isin(yr) is 2c. The integral in (§) now computes to (for any r > 0) 


00 


anic [ sin(yr) dy/y = 4kic-n/2 = c 
() 


since k is equal to 1/271. 


319 


While there is no guarantee that the integral in (§) will always converge, it is still, in my opinion, 
an interesting expression that is worth pondering. Indeed, the fact that we can actually produce a 
harmonic expression for g'’Y is progress in its own right, and could be of some value down the 
road, as we learn more about how to solve the field equations of general relativity, when g""’ is 


coupled directly to the underlying dark energy density function A(s). To wit, 


GhY = «fer Xs)g"" ds 
Y 


where here, GYY = CY — kT“Y, and C"“'’, T“Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively ... 


Revisiting Our Smoothing Methodology For g""Y When A(s) = o/s 


On pages 235-6, we developed an averaging methodology for the gravitational tensor g""’ in the 
expression below, where the argument to g""’, which is really s + cos(®), has been replaced by s. 


cooks) f° eg"'(s) /[(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (*) 
¥ 


Recalling the methodology, using the diagram below, a vertical line in the complex plane C runs 
from cos(8) + ico to cos(®) + isin(®), where @ is between 0 and x. The line will pass through all 
disks in the strip above the x-axis, except the one [D] centered at O, where the line will halt on 0D 
[the boundary of 9], at some point on or above the x-axis. For example, the line associated with 
@ =0 would halt at (1,0) ... whereas the line associated with @ = 2/2 would halt at (0,7). 


E ||[¢ tT 
B 
L|||D 
iB | 
F (2%) 4.0) 


ic 


rd 


320 


The same is true for all disks below the x-axis, where in this case, the lines from cos(8) — ico to 
cos(@) — isin(®) halt on 09, on or below the x-axis. And, according to our methodology on pages 
235-6, the value of g" at these points on 0D, whether above or below the x-axis, would all be 
mapped to g”"(0); which, in turn, just happens to be the average value of g’Y over the whole of 
0D. 


Thus, when considering the integral (*) as 0 ---» 0 [where y is now 09], the question of what to 
choose for an ‘averaged or smoothed out’ version of g"’Y becomes clear. We select it in exactly the 
same way as we did for any other disk in the diagram above [namely g""’(€), where & is the center 
of that disk]; but here, we infer what that must be by looking only at 0D. 


After averaging g"’’, where 6 ---» 0 and y is now 09, this allows us to write (*) as 
xoe'g’"(0) f (e"/s) ds = oe'g"*(0), 
Y 


which is exactly what we would have gotten, had we calculated (*) just as it is, when 0 ---» 0! The 
rest of the details can be found on pages 228-9, where the field equations of general relativity are 
developed for small 8, in the case of a coupling between g"” and A(s). 


A Metaphysical Interpretation For The Gravitational Tensor g"Y When X(s) ~ o/s 


Let us recall our harmonic representation for g"’Y on page 318, where a is any real number ... 


00 


uv 


g(a) = aS {cos(yp[g"’ (a + iy) — g"(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g"(a + iy) + g"(a—iy)]} dy /y 


fe 


What is interesting to me about this equation ... is that g”"(a), a real-valued expression, can be 
manufactured from a Fourier transform, ostensibly along the a-line in the complex plane C. But the 
gravitational components {g"“(a)], as we perceive them, seem very real, and indeed, are the 
bedrock of General Relativity, itself. In fact, our whole understanding of space and time is 
intimately connected to these components. 


Yet the realness of g"(a) is actually built from its imaginary counterparts, by way of a Fourier 
transform in C. How then, does something quite real to us [g"’’(a)], come from something wholly 
imaginary, meaning of the mind or of the collective consciousness, in creation ? Could it be that 
g'*(a) is actually an illusion, built from artifacts by some external intelligence or agency, that we 
know nothing about ? Certainly the mathematical expression above has to make you wonder ... 


feof 


The literature seems to suggest that for any holomorphic function g() in the complex plane C, which 
is real-valued along the x-axis, it is always the case that g(s*) = g(s)*, where * means ‘take the 


321 


conjugate of’. If this is so, then the same property would also apply to g"’’, when it is coupled 
directly to the dark energy density function A(s) ... since here we believe g”’ is well-behaved 
throughout C. 


afeokake aco 


A Proposed Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s 


In the case where we are dealing with a simple inverse density function [A(s)], associated with dark 
energy [&], with physical singularities at the origin O of the star, and at (+1, 0), we are going to 
provide a formulation for the field equations of General Relativity, in the case of a coupling 
between g"” and A(s). This formulation will cover off the entire two-dimensional plane, so that we 
are no longer restricted to small @. And here, we'll deal with 0 between 0 and z, due to symmetry. 


Let us recall in the uncoupled case [pp 221-7], that the field equations take the form 


G'Y = o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(®))]g"" — (*) 


where GY = CY’ — kT*’, and CY , TY are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively. And, it should be said, both G"’ and g"* are functions of (r,@) in (*) above. 


In the coupled case, the Laplace inverse takes the exact form og’’(0) [pp 228-9] for the singularity 
associated with X(s) at O, and at (+1, 0), the Laplace inverse takes the exact form [page 316] ... 


oe'g"’(+1) at (41,0) ... as 8 ---» 0 and ce“g"%(-1) at (-1,0) ... as @---» 0 


However, because of symmetry, we want the same to be true as @ ---» 7, and this can be arranged by 
rewriting the above as 


cel) g-¥(eos(9)) ... as 0 -—-» O orm and cet g"¥(cos()) ... as 0 > O orm 


Combining all three, and factoring in the Jo(rsin(®)) term to achieve symbolic agreement with (*), 
we then have, for the coupled case, with @ between 0 and 7... 


GY © ofg'¥(0) + (eS g4¥(cos(0)) + eT 9" (-cos(6))}Jo(rsin(®))] — (*) 
Now let’s compare (+) with (*) in three separate cases. First, let 0 ---» 0. Then (*) becomes 
G"’ = ofl + 2cosh(r)]g"” (uncoupled) 
whilst (+) becomes 
G"Y = ofg"(0) + (e"g"“(41) + e7g"%-1)}] (coupled) 


Notice that the coupled form agrees symbolically with the uncoupled form if we approximate both 
g”*(+1) and g"*(-1) with g"“(0). This is the smoothing effect we spoke about in earlier notes. 


322 


Now let 6 ---» x. Then (*) becomes 
G"Y = o[1 + 2cosh(r)]g"” 
whilst (+) becomes 
GY’ = ofg'(0) + {etgYG1 + eT") } 


and the remarks above apply again, identically so. That is to say, there is no difference between the 
cases 6 ---» 0 and 6 --- 7, as it should be, where symmetry is present in these equations. 


Finally, let 0 ---» 1/2. Then (*) becomes 
G"Y = ofl + 2o(r)]g"” 
whilst (+) becomes 


GY & ofl + 2o(r)]g""(0) 


The two agree symbolically, but ... the interesting difference here is that in the case of a coupling, 
the term g"’(0) shows up, which makes sense. The further away we are from the physical 
singularities (+1, 0) associated with A(s), the Jess of an influence they should have on the field 
equations of general relativity, when there is a coupling. These singularities [(+1,0)] would have 
their greatest impact when 6 is close to 0 or x. 


There is always a tradeoff when dealing with equations like (+) above. For example, when 0 is 0 or 
m, we could attempt to solve (+) as is, but it would probably require numerical analysis and a 
computer. Even so, if it could be done, it would tell us not only how gue is behaving at O, but also 
at (£1, 0). Whereas if we smooth (+), by replacing g"“(+1) with g""’(0), the equations are much 
simpler to solve, but the behavior of g"’’ at (£1,0) would not be as accurate as it would be at O. 


Finally, it should be said that g"(+1) means ‘look at the value of g"’Y one unit to the east of O’, 
whilst g"’(—1) means ‘look at the value of g"’’ one unit to the west of O’. And, if we wanted to 
scale up to three dimensions from two, it wouldn’t be a problem. The research notes on pages 197- 
243 give several examples of how to do this, and this note, in particular, tells us what sort of formu- 
lation we might be searching for, in the case of a coupling, when looking at (+). 


feof aco 


We can simplify (+) by noting that g"’(cos(@)) and g"’(-cos(0)) are going to be the same value, 
because of symmetry. Thus, (+) becomes 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(®))g"*(cos(8))] (8) 


323 


where 8 is between 0 and a, say. This is probably a fairly decent estimate for the field equations of 
General Relativity, where there are physical singularities at O and at (+1, 0), associated with A(s), 
in the case of a coupling. The solution to (§) will be g"’(r, ), but unlike the uncoupled case, we 
expect the gravitational tensor g"’ to be well-behaved everywhere here; that is, for all r > 0, and for 
all 8. 
As to the dark energy [6], in this case, it is made up of two parts within (§). First, the term o that is 
associated with g"’’(0), and second, the term 2ccosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(®)) associated with g"’’(cos(@)). 
In total, this computes to 

€=o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(6))] , 
which exactly matches what we see in (*), in the uncoupled case. 


Scaling Up When A(s) = o/s 


If we decide to scale up to five physical singularities, by adding the north and south points (0, 1) and 
(0,-1), the field equations of General Relativity become [pp 225-6], in the uncoupled case ... 


GY = ofl + 2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(®)) + 2cosh(rsin(@))Jo(reos(@))]g" 
In the coupled scenario, we would write, where 0 is between 0 and q, say ... 
GY = o[g**(0) + 2cosh(rcos(8))Jo(rsin(®))g""(cos(®)) + 2cosh(rsin(8))Jo(rcos(8))g"”*(sin(6))] 


Thus, the argument to g"” is always anchored to the argument in the cosh() term ... save for the 
radius r, and so in three dimensions [pp 225-6], the coupled equations would look like ... 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"’(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(p))Jo(rcos(p))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos())Jo(rsin())g"*(cos())] - 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O, and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 


A Physical Interpretation For g"’’(cos()) In The Coupled Case When A(s) = o/s 


In this note, we want to better understand the meaning of g'’(cos(@)), within the context of our 
form for the field equations of General Relativity, when there is a coupling. Recall that our form is 


G"Y = olg"(0) + 2cosh(rcos(0))Jo(rsin(®))g""(cos(®))], (8) 


324 


where the physical singularities associated with (s) are at the origin O and at (+1, 0). Now the 
diagram below is a polar plot of cos(®), as 8 ranges between 0 and 2/2. Thus, when @ = 0, cos(@) is 


the length of the segment running from O to (1,0). Similarly, at an angle of @, cos(@) is the length 
of the segment OA. These segments become shorter and shorter, until finally at 6 = 2/2, the length 
of the segment is zero, which of course, is cos(z/2). 


When 0 = 0, the term g"*(1) shows up in our equation (§), because the form is exact here, and 
cos(0) = 1. And this makes sense, because the singularities at (+1,0) have their greatest impact on 
the field equations when 0 is close to 0 or z [see pp 272-73, where the evolution of the quantumlike 
dark energy scalar field is shown in different frames, as 8 moves from 45° to 90° in a 3D setting. 
Note that the second set of spikes only emerge when we get very close to 90°]. 


Now let @ start to move northward in our diagram above. Intuitively, one would guess that the field 
equations should have the same form, but that the argument to gy should weaken, because the 
physical singularities associated with A(s) at (£1, 0) ... do not have the same impact on the 
gravitational tensor, itself. And indeed, g"’(cos(®)) is a measure of how much the gravitational 
tensor is influenced by the singularities at (+1,0), along the radial line é). 


Finally, at 9 = 2/2, the physical singularities at (+1,0) have all but lost their influence, and only the 
term g"'’(0) shows up in (§), which is what we might expect. 


alesse 


325 


Although we have decided to parametrize g"’’ via cos(0), there are other options. However, they 
would most certainly be more complex, making (§) even more difficult to solve than it is already. 
I’m not sure we should go down that path, for it seems to me that what we want here, is the 
simplest algebraic and geometric formulation possible, without giving up too much in the process. 
For example, if instead of (§) we were to choose 

G"Y = ofl + 2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin(9))]g¢"(O) 
as our form, things get much simpler, but we most certainly will lose information about how g"” 
behaves near the physical singularities (+1, 0), when solving the equation above. As such, I do 
believe (§) is our best option, and one which, someday, might yield a solution of interest ... 
Finally, for small r ---» 0, (§) becomes ... 


GYY = ofg"(0) + 2g""(cos(0))] , 


so that the angle of approach still matters. Approaching the origin along 8 = 0 produces a different 
result than, for example, approaching the origin along 0 = 1/2. 


A Heuristic Derivation For The Field Equations Near x/2 When X(s) ~ o/s 


Recall, from page 316, our expression for the dark energy contour integral ... in the case of a 
coupling, for the physical singularity at (+1, 0) associated with A(s) ... 


coe!) f° e*g""(s + cos(0)) /,/ — isin(@)(s + isin(®) ds (*) 
* 
Now let 6 ---» 2/2, so that (*) becomes 


cof ee"(s) /(s—D(stDds (+) 


7 
If we compute ({) along the arms associated with the branching points (0, +i) ... and follow the 
methods outlined on pages 316-19, we arrive at the following expression for our Laplace inverse ... 


00 


xo f {cos(yn[g" (iy) — g!"”Ciy)] + isin(yr) [g""(iy) + g’Ciy))} dy//y?-1 I) 
1 


Here, we can’t equate this to anything, because the branching points don’t ‘merge into a pole’ like 
they did when 6 ---» 0. But the expression above is ‘similar to’ our general harmonic expression on 
page 318, and reproduced here, when a = 0... 


326 


00 


20) = AS {eos(ynle"™ iy) — 2° Giy)] + isin(yr) [2 Gy) + eGiy))} dy/y 2) 
ie) 


Now since (1) involves a square root term that resembles ‘Bessel-like’ behavior, when integrating 
from | to 00, we might surmise, when looking at (2), that (1) might be ‘similar to’ og""*(O)Jo(r). 


We can confirm this in a very simple case, where the gravitational component is a constant ... say 
g''’ =c. Then (1) computes to, 


oo oo 
4xioc S singe) dy /Jy?=1 = oc: 2/n S sin(yr) dy //y2-1 = og (0)Jo(r) 
1 1 


after ‘aligning symbolically’ with (2), since « is equal to 1/27. 
Repeating the exercise, using the counterpart to (*) [p 316] for the physical singularity at (—1, 0), 
would lead to the same result as above, so that in total we would have 26¢""%(0)Jo(r). Combined 
with the physical singularity at the origin O, would lead to 

GY = ofl + 2Jo(r)]2"""(O) 
for the field equations, when @ ---» 2/2, in this case. 
Thus, from a heuristic point of view, we get a result which is consistent with what we found on 
pages 321-3. But while there can be no assurance that it is exact, except in very special cases, the 
result is encouraging, and when we combine it with previous research notes, only bolsters our view 
that 

G"Y = of[g"(0) + 2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin(®))g""*(cos(8))] 


is probably a fairly decent estimate for the field equations of General Relativity, where there are 
physical singularities at O and at (+1, 0), associated with A(s), in the case of a coupling. 


A Less Heuristic Derivation For The Field Equations Near 2/2 When A(s) ~ o/s 


Let us begin by introducing the following expression, from the previous research note, but modified 
now to suit our purposes ... 


aS {cos(yr)[g'"" (iy) — g"”Ciy)] + isin(yr) [g"’Gy) + g"’Ciy)]} dy Vy?- 
& 


Here € is any real number between 0 and 1. Notice that when ¢ ---» 0, we recover the harmonic 
expression on page 318 whena=0... 


327 


00 


20) = aS {eos(ynle"™ Gy) — 2° Ciy)] + isin(yr) [2 Gy) + e™*Giyy)} dy/y... Q) 
Oo 


Now in (1) there are two pieces to consider; first, the cos(yr) term paired with the denominator 
vy? - € , and then, the sin(yr) term, also paired with /y?- ¢?. From Bessel theory, it is known 
that 


ain J sin(yr) dy/Jy?-1 = Jo), 
1 


so that upon mapping r to re [page 227], this becomes ... 


oo 
an f sin(yr) dy /\/y? —e2 = Jo(re). 
€ 
Similarly, 
oo 
- am f cos(yr) dy /\y? -e2 = Yo(re) . 
& 


Here Jo and Yo are Bessel functions of the first and second kind, with one singular difference. As € 
tends to 0 (¢ ---» 0), Jo converges to a meaningful value, but Yo does not (in fact, Yo(0) =—00). 


Thus, when considering (1), as  ---» 0, we’re going to recover (2), but now, since g""’ is well- 
behaved because it is coupled to the underlying dark energy density function A(s), we have to rule 
out the presence of Yo when evaluating (1) for small s. In other words, g"’(0) is a finite value, 
which forces this conclusion. 

That leaves us with a combination of g"’’(.) and Jo here, as the dominant factors, and we’ll presume 
this can be written as g'’’ (.) Jo(re), where the argument to g'’’ either does or doesn’t depend on 
small s. 


If it does, then the same should be true as ¢ ---» 1. The argument to g”” should still depend on ¢, 
yet as we have seen in the last research note, ¢ approaching | is equivalent to evaluating the field 
equations as 9 tends to 2/2. And here the Laplace inverse computes to 


ca 


af {cos(yr)[g"" (iy) — g"’Ciy)] + isin(yr) [g"’ Gy) + g"*Ciy)]} dy A/y?-1 
1 


328 


where o has been normalized to 1. Setting the gravitational component to a constant now, so that 


g'’’ = c, leads to the following, for the expression just above [see page 326] ... 
oo oo 
4xic S sincye) dy /fy?-1 = c-2/n S sin(yr) dy //y?-1 = g™(0)Jo(r), 
1 1 


and we see here, by arbitrarily choosing g”’(0) = c, that the argument to g"” needn’t change at all. 
It is still zero, just as it was when ¢ ---» 0. 

Thus, for small ¢, there is no need to presume the argument to g"’” should depend on ¢, in which 
case we are left with the formulation g"Y(0)Jo(re) ... for any choice of ¢ between 0 and 1, when 
evaluating (1) above. In particular, when ¢ = 1, this is g"’(0)Jo(r), which is what we concluded in 
the previous research note. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
In considering (1) again, 
co 
aS {cos(yr[g" (iy) — g!YCiy)] + isin(yr) [g""(iy) + g"’Ciy)]} dy /Vy?= =... (D) 
& 


we could suppose the integral does, in fact, contain terms in g'’Y(0), Jo(re), and re-Yo(re), after it is 
evaluated. For example, something like 


2’ (O)[Jo(re) + re-Yo(re)] 


might be feasible, since the expression just above does converge, as r or € ---» 0. In fact, Jo(re) 
would tend to 1, whilst re-Yo(re) would tend to 0. 


And so, as € ---» 1, we would have, for the coupled case, 
G"Y & ofl + 2o(r) + 2rYo(r)]g"""(0) 


as our form for the field equations, as 6 tends to 2/2, presuming of course, that the argument to g"Y 
does not depend on &. 


However, the form above would not be consistent with the uncoupled case below, as 0 ---» 1/2 ... 
G’Y = ofl + 2Jom]g"”, 
so that our perception of dark energy [the bracketed expression, which we’ll label &], would differ 


between the two. This, to me, is an untenable outcome. Our perception of € should always agree, 
when comparing the uncoupled and coupled forms, no matter the choice of 0. 


329 


Taal OT a 7 Ybo vi 
VV 
} 


bil 


1.0! 


Plot of Jo(r) at 6 = 2/2 Plot of Jo(r) + rYo(r) at 6 = 1/2 


Thus, ruling out Yo seems to be the only plausible path for us, when evaluating (1), and this takes 
us back to the top of page 328, where we concluded that g'’’(0)Jo(re) is the most likely form for (1), 
when ¢ is between 0 and 1. 
In turn, this means the expression 

GY = o[g"'(0) + 2cosh(rcos(0))Jo(rsin(®))¢"""(cos(@))] 
is probably the most tenable form, in the coupled case, where the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O and at (+1, 0). For here, we have complete consistency with this 
research note, and the previous one, when 0 ---» 2/2, and we have complete consistency with its 
uncoupled counterpart [page 323] 

GY = ofl + 2cosh(rcos(0))Jo(rsin(®))]g""" , 

when looking at dark energy. 


A Less Heuristic Derivation For The Field Equations For Any @ When X(s) = o/s 


Let us bring back our original harmonic expression, but modified again to suit our purposes, which 
we'll label (1) [and throughout, we'll assume @ is between 0 and 7] ... 


wf {cos(yr)[g"*(a + iy) — g(a —iy)] + isin(yr) [g’’(a + iy) + g"’(a—iy)]} dy //y?- & 
g 


Notice that when ¢ --- 0, we recover g"’’(a), where a is any real number [page 318], and that when 
a= cos(@) and ¢ = sin(@), (1) is actually the Laplace inverse of our dark energy contour integral (*), 
in the case of a coupling, for the physical singularity at (+1, 0) associated with X(s). Here we are 
normalizing o to 1, for the time being, and omitting the fos term, found in (*) below. 


330 


coe!) f° eg""V(s + cos(0)) /,/(— isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (*) 
Y 


Thus from our two previous research notes, we may conclude that the likely form for (1) is going to 
be g(a) - Jo(re), so that after factoring in the other physical singularity at (-1, 0), and also at O, 
the field equations become, in the case of a coupling ... 


G'Y = o[g"(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g""(a)]  (F) 


Here, we’ve brought back both the o term and the cosh() term, which are associated with (*) and its 
counterpart on page 316 [for the counterpart, s + cos(®) maps to s — cos(@), and rcos(®) to —rcos(@), 
in the integral above]. Notice too, that g"’Y(a) = g"’’(-a), because of symmetry, so that (+) can be 
written in the way that it is. 


But, in fact, (+) is actually the form 
G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(0))Jo(rsin(®))g"*(cos(®))],  ($) 


which we proposed earlier, before doing any heuristic analysis !_ See pages 321-23 here, for the 
details. 

Thus, by taking a heuristical approach and doing some comparative functional analysis, we see that 
the form we originally proposed ... is probably correct. To me, at least, this is a very encouraging 


milestone, in our journey to better understand how gravity behaves in the presence of dark energy 
singularities, where g"’Y is coupled directly to the underlying dark energy density function A(s). 


Some More Validation of Our Harmonic Representation For The Gravitational Tensor g"’Y 


Let us recall the harmonic representation on page 318 for g"’’, where a = 0 and k= 1/27i... ... 


00 


gO) = af {cos(yn[g"(iy) — g"”Ciy)] + isin(yr) [g"" Gy) + g'’Ciyy}dy/y CS) 
fe) 


Here, we are going to let g"’’(s) = ¢(B — s), where C(.) is the Riemann zeta function, and B is now 
any real number > 1. In this region, C(s) is well-behaved, and has no poles. Now since it is the 
case that C(s*) = C(s)*, where * means ‘take the conjugate of’, (*) can be rewritten as 


00 


2m J {Asincyr) — Beos(yr)}dy/y (+) 
° 


where here ... 


331 


A 


{cB + iy) + K(B—iy)}/2 


B 


{cB + iy) — G(B—iy)}/ 2i 


But from page 260, (+) is actually ¢(B), which just happens to be g""Y(0), in this case. In general, 
the statement 


00 


e'(a) = af {cos(yr)[g"'"(a + iy) — g"'Y(a —iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g(a —iy)]} dy/y 
fe 


will always be true if g" (.) is well-behaved in the complex plane C ... or at least in the region 


enveloped by the contour y, as shown below [see pages 316-19, where we tacitly assume the dark 
energy contour integral actually exists]. However, for this case involving C(B — s), we must have 
that 0 < Re(AB) < B — 1, since €(s) has a simple pole ats = 1. In doing so, we exclude the pole 
when traversing y, as we shall see below ... 


£||[e¢>— 
B 
L||[D 
ising 
F 
o 
-ising 
A 
| 


Now let’s take a closer look ‘under the hood’, as to why things really work here. To begin with, 
then, suppose the physical singularities associated with X(s) were located at (+6, 0), where 6 is any 
real number > 0. 


Then our dark energy contour integral becomes, for the physical singularity at (6, 0) ... 


caePO'®) [oS gg + 8c08(0)) /\/(s — tSsin(®))(s + tSsin(®)) ds (f) 
bi 


332 


Now for the purposes of generating a harmonic expression, we don’t need the term ce"), so 


after dropping it, ({) becomes 
xf ees + 5cos(0)) /\/(s — t5sin(6))(s + iSsin(6)) ds (~) 
Y 


Thus, for very small 8, the numerator term g"’(s + 5cos(@)) will become g"'’(s), and the residue in 
(~) will compute to g"’’ (0), as both 8 and 6 ---» 0. Additionally, the integration along the arms 
associated with the branching points +i5sin(8) will compute to 


co co 
2SereinNomdy feed 
() ) 
idsin(8) arms -idsin(8) arms 
so that finally, the following expression emerges, after equating the residue with the arms [see 
pages 316-19 for more on this methodology] ... 


00 


gO) = af {cos(y[g"“(iy) — g"’Ciy)] + ésin(yr) [g"’(y) + g"’Ciyy]}dy/y 
ie) 


What’s important to see here, is that the Laplace inverse in (~) above makes sense as 6 ---> 0, 
because we have defined g'’’(s) to be C(a — s), where a is any real number > 1. As such, we are 
assured of convergence to 0 along the large arc in the contour y above, as its radius tends to 0 [see 
page 259], and when traversing y, no poles are encountered because 0 < Re(AB) < a— 1. 


An Equivalency Theorem For The Field Equations For Any 9 When A(s) ~ o/s 


Let us recall our Laplace inverse from page 329, where a and ¢ are real numbers with ¢ > 0, and 0 is 
between 0 and a. We’ll label the expression below (1) ... 


00 


aS {cos(yr)[g'"" (a + iy) — g"*(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g"(a—iy)]} dy //y? = € 


€ 


Now from our previous research we know that if (1) equates to g'*(a) - Jo(re), where a = cos(@) and 
¢ = sin(@), then the form for the field equations, in the case of a coupling is [pp 329-30] ... 


G"Y = o[g’*(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"’(a)] (2) 


Here, the physical singularities associated with A(s) are at O and at (+1, 0). Conversely, if (2) is 
true, then nec: ily (1) must equate to g'*(a) - Jo(re), since the right-hand side of (2) is derived 


from the Laplace inverse, according to the expression below ... 


333 


GW = «fF Us g"ds 
Y 


Thus, we have an equivalency here, in so much as 
(y= g(a) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true. 
This equivalency is almost self-evident, but it means we can look at the matter in two different 
ways. For example, we can choose to see it solely via (2) ... or we can choose to see it via the 
equation 
(1) = g"*(a) - Jo(re) 

But regardless of which approach we take to developing a form for the field equations, in the case 
of a coupling, where the physical singularities associated with A(s) are at O and at (+1, 0); it must, 
in the end, be a form which is compatible with its uncoupled counterpart, when looking at dark 
energy [&]. 
In (2) above, the dark energy component is 

E=o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(6))] , 
which exactly matches what we see in the uncoupled case [pp 321-3]. 

Revisiting The Riemann Hypothesis — A Dialogue Between Joe and Jim 

Joe develops a mathematical method M that shows, in the region @*, the critical strip minus the 
critical line, no roots of C(s) exist. Joe is so delighted with his proof, he decides to show it to Jim, 


one of his closer friends. Jim points out to Joe that roots in @* can never be verified, but this 
doesn’t seem to bother Joe much, because he says to Jim, ‘M never found any’. 


A ‘zero-free’ region of (s) shown in blue, but is it ? 


334 


Jim replies by saying, ‘well Joe, had your method M encountered a root in @*, you must believe, 
then, it would have reported it as such, right ?’ Joe agrees, and seems to have no problem with this 
conclusion. 


But herein lies the problem. For M to be completely unambiguous, it must be able to report a root 
correctly in @*, should it encounter one. This cannot do, according to our methodology on 
pages 293-6. 


Thus, while it is perfectly acceptable for Joe to assert that M is true, Joe cannot make this assertion 
without ambiguity. For Joe could only do this if roots in @* were verifiable. 


So the focus here is not M, in and of itself; but rather, what it means to believe M, without any 
doubt at all. It means embracing a false conclusion; namely, that J will report roots correctly in 
@*. Since no mathematical method M can do this, by default, it leaves the Riemann Hypothesis in 
an indeterminate state; there simply is no answer, one way or the other. 


Indeed, if roots in @* were verifiable, it is my opinion that the Riemann Hypothesis would have 
been resolved long ago, perhaps by Riemann, himself ... 


Hidden Variables and The Field Equations For Any 8 When A(s) ~ o/s 


On page 307, we discussed ‘hidden variables’ by way of the Riemann zeta function [C(s)], and how 
they might fit into the field equations of General Relativity. Here we are going to complete that 
picture a little more, in the case of a coupling between g'’’ and A(s), where the physical singularities 
are at the origin O of the star, and at (+1, 0). 


Let us begin by defining 

u(B.s) = As)E(B—s + acos(®)) , 
where B is any real number > 1, a is associated with the location of the physical singularity, and 0 is 
between 0 and a. Here we have a coupling between the dark energy density function A(s) and C(.), 
where C(.) is to be thought of as a ‘form of consciousness’ streaming into our universe, via the 


singularities associated with A(s). 


For example, for the singularity at O, C(.) would not depend on 0, because of radial symmetry, and 
because a = 0. Thus, the dark energy contour integral, in this case, would look like ... 


GY = «fe nB.s)et'ds (**) 
> f 


where A(s) ~ o/s. And the contour y would be the one shown below, where the branching arms no 
longer exist, so that it is made up of AB and the large arc only. 


Since C(B — s) has a pole at s = B — 1, we'll exclude it by choosing 0 < Re(AB) < B— 1. The residue 
in (**) then computes to og"’’(0) - (B), since again o = 0 in this case. 


For the physical singularity at (+1,0), the exact form for the dark energy contour integral is 


cof e*s"(s)C(B — s + acos(0)) //s? — 2scos(@) + Ids (+) 


Y 


where now a = 1, and y includes the branching arms [see pages 221-7 for more of the details here]. 


And after translating s ---» s — cos(8) [that is, let u = s — cos(®)], (+) becomes, after mapping u back 
tos... 


coel®) f° eg""(5 + cos(0))(B —s) //(s — isin@®))(s + isin(®)) ds (*) 


Y 


so that the argument to ¢(.) does not depend on 0. And again, here 0 < Re(AB) < B — 1, and because 
of the way C(.) is defined in (*), we expect the integral to converge to 0 along the large arc in y, and 
also along the small circles associated with the branching points, as their radii shrink to 0. 


For the physical singularity at (—1, 0), a =—1 in (+), and the minus sign in the denominator becomes 
a plus sign. After translating s ---» s + cos(®), (*) is replaced with its counterpart, where s + cos(@) 
maps to s — cos(®), and rcos(9) to —rcos(8). The C(.) term, however, stays the same. 

Notice that as @ ---» 0, the residue in (*) computes to ce"g'"’(+1) - C(), and for the counterpart, the 
residue is ce" g"*(-1) - C(B). This is highly reminiscent of our work on pages 321-3, where we 
developed a form for the field equations, where there are physical singularities at O and at (+1, 0), 
associated with A(s), in the case of a coupling. 


336 


Here, that form is essentially the same, but with the factor €(B) included. To wit, 
G"Y = o-C(B)[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(8))Jo(rsin(@))g"*(cos(8))] , 


where G"Y = CY — kT“, and C"'’, T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively. Yet I wish to caution the reader that this form is a hunch, as we’ll see later on. 


Thus, for the case where B > 1, we see how we can incorporate a ‘hidden variable’ into the field 
equations, where the variable C(.) is associated, perhaps, with a form of consciousness streaming 
into our universe, through the physical singularities associated with A(s). 


Plot of C(B) for B > 1 


What is interesting to me here, in all of this, is the way in which we originally defined the argument 
to C(.). We chose C(B — s + acos(8)), where a is to be associated with the location of the singularity, 
when forming the dark energy contour integral. At O, a = 0, so the angle 0 doesn’t matter, because 
of radial symmetry. But @ does matter when a = +1, and that is because our perspective is always 
relative to O. 


The ‘hidden variable’, namely C(.), is streaming through the singularities associated with X(s), so 
that relative to O, the angle 6 has a role to play in ¢(.) ... when considering these singularities at 
(+1, 0). Just as it does in X(s), itself ... 


We can actually create a harmonic expression for (*) on page 335, using the methods outlined on 
pages 316-19. After dropping the ce" ®) term, (*) becomes 


«f ee"(s + cos(0))6(B — s) //(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (8) 


Y 


337 


and the residue in ($) computes to g"’’(a)-C(B), where here a = 1, and 0 ---» 0. The arms compute to 


2S e®"e"(a + iyye(p—iy) (ONO) dy of eg (a —iy)C(B-+ iy) A(OIO) dy 
oO oO 
isin(®) arms -isin(®) arms 


and after equating the residue to the arms [pp 316-19], the following harmonic expression emerges, 
for any a, which we’ll label (1) ... 
co 
g""(o)-G(B) = wf {cos(yr)[g""(a + iy)G(B — iy) — “(a —iy)GG + iy)] 
+ isin(yr)[g'" (a + iy)B—iy) + g'"(a—iy)C(B + iy)]} dy /y 


It is not hard to show, that by setting the gravitational component to a constant, say g’’ = c, the 
expression above reduces to 


co 


axic J { Asin(yr) — Beos(yr)}dy/y (2) 
° 


where 


A = {(B+iy) + CB-iy)}/2 


B = {GB+iy) — B-iy)}/2i. 


From page 260, (2) computes to c-C(B), since 4«i = 2/7 [x is equal to 1/2mi]. And this agrees with 
the left side of (1). 


We’ll now introduce a modified version of (1) to suit our purposes, where € is between 0 and 1, and 
we’ll label this (3) ... 


Af {cos(ynle*"(a+ iyycP—iy) — oa iy\ZB + iy)] 
= + isin(yr)[g""’ (a + iy)G(B—iy) + g™’(a—iy)C(B + iy)]} dy / Jy? = & 


One might think, by looking at (1), and comparing to previous research notes, that the likely 
estimate for (3) is g"’’(a)-C(B)-Jo(re). There actually appears to be some evidence for this when f is 
somewhat larger than 1, but when f is closer to 1, discrepancies start to show up. Here is a table, 
where g"’” = | in expression (3) above. The integration range is always from y = € to 100, and all 
integrations were carried out on the Wolfram website. Recall again that B is always > 1 ... 


338 


valueofr  valueofe valueoffp  valueof(3) value of €(B)-Jo(re) 


1 3/2 -762433 1.998983 

1 5/2 824982 1.026503 

1 12 -796810 0.862174 

1 9/2 -778326 0.807060 

1 11/2 -768914 0.784484 

2 3/2 —0.068986 0.584887 

2 5/2 0.144545 0.300347 

2 712 0.197408 0.252265 

2. 9/2 0.212788 0.236139 

2 11/2 0.218276 0.229534 
The conclusion to be drawn from this data is that our estimate for (3); namely g"’’(a)- C(B)-Jo(re), 
probably isn’t too far off from the truth, and seems to get better for larger B. For smaller B close to, 
but greater than 1, discrepancies appear, but perhaps it’s not that relevant anyway, since it is the 
case that C(f) ---» 06 as B ---» 1. Thus, ¢(B) only makes sense, physically, for larger p. 


Here is a plot of the value of (3) along the y-axis, versus the value of B along the x-axis. Note that 
because (3) is derived from (*) on page 335, we expect that (3) will indeed converge. Thus, 
equating (3) to g"(a)- C(B)-Jo(re) won’t match as B ---» 1, since here C(B) ---» 0. This is not 
something we could have known by examining only the physical singularity at the origin O, but it 
can be deduced by studying the harmonics associated with the physical singularities at (+1, 0). 


value of (3) versus B when r= | ande=1 


339 


The plot above demonstrates that physically acceptable outcomes are possible for the ‘hidden 
variable’, which we postulated to be C(f), initially. And while C(f) is still a likely candidate for 
larger B, something interesting happens as f ---» 1. The graph ‘rolls over’, as B ---» 1, thereby 
avoiding the catastrophe that otherwise would have occurred, had it simply followed C() out to o0. 
I find this to be a rather satisfying conclusion ... at this juncture ... 


A Harmonic Expression For ¢(a)-¢(B) When « and B Are Greater Than 1 


Let us bring back our harmonic expression on page 337, valid for any a, and for B > 1, which we'll 
label (1), and remind ourselves here, that « is equal to 1/271 ... 


0 


g'"(a)-C(B) = aS {cos(yr)[g"“(a + iy)G(B— iy) — g(a —iy)G(B + iy)] 
° + isin(yr)[g''’(a + iy)C(B—iy) + g(a —iy)CB + iy)]} dy /y 


Now let a = 0, so that (1) becomes the following, which we’ll label (2) ... 


g'")-4(B) = af {costynte" Gy)c(B—iy) — gi" iy)C(B + iy)] 
. + isin(yr)[g""" (iy)G(B—iy) + gC iy)C(B + iy)]} dy /y 


uy 


ae let us define g’’'(s) = C(a — s), where a > 1, so that 20) = (a), and thus (2) becomes (3) 
below . 


co 


&(a)-C(B) = J {cos(yr)[G(a— iy)(B—iy) — Ca + iy)&(B + iy)] 
+ isin(yr)[C(a — iy)C(B—iy) + Ca + iy)CB + iy)]} dy/y 


Thus, we see that in the range a and B > 1, the product ¢(a)- C(B) can be expressed as a Fourier 
transform, ostensibly along the a and B-lines in the complex plane C, simultaneously. 


As a verification here, let a = 3/2 and B= 5/2. Then the integration on the Wolfram site reports the 
300-1 3 5 3 5 
{ -— i(cos.y)(¢(= =3 y)e(= = y)-¢(; +i y}e(- +i y}}+ 
Jo my rie 2° , ae 2° 
iny) (c(> -iy) (2 (2 +iy)(2+iy)))ay = 3.50402 
isin(y)(<{=-iy)<(> -iy)+ = +iy)e(> +i ))) y= 3. 
ad 


value above, whilst in the image below, we see what C(a)-C(B) actually is, again from Wolfram ... 


340 


Input 


Decimal approximation 
3.50446824141800416 


The two agree to about 5 parts in 10,000, and we are satisfied that our harmonic expression (3) is, 
indeed, correct ! It’s an interesting way to look at multiplication, for normally one would simply 
multiply the two parts together, and be done with it. Yet through harmonics, we see the same thing 
in a very different light (note that in our testing, we chose r = 1, but the choice is arbitrary here, so 
long as r is greater than zero) ... 


Some More on Hidden Variables and The Field Equations For Any 8 When A(s) = o/s 


On pages 334-9 we discussed ‘hidden variables’ when using ¢(.), and how they might be connected 
to the field equations of General Relativity, where there is a coupling between g"’’ and i(s). Recall 
the physical singularities are at the origin O of the star, and at (+1, 0), so here we want to elaborate 
on things, just a little more. 


Let us begin by recalling our form for the field equations, in this case, where a = cos(@) and ¢ = 
sin(0), and G"Y = CY — kT“Y, where CY , T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively [0 is between 0 and 7] ... 
G"Y = ofg"(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"*(a)] (+) 
When ¢ --- 0, we are looking to the east or to the west, relative to O, and (+) reduces to 
G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(r)g"*(a)] , 
where a = 1. And from expression (3) on page 337, and reproduced here, 
oo 
ax J {cos(ynte™"(a+ iy)B—iy) ~ g"%(a—iyGB+iy)] 
; + isin(yr)[g"¥(@ + iy)C(B— iy) + g""(a—iy)C(B + iy)]} dy / Jy? - & 


we infer that as ¢ ---» 0, the Laplace inverse is exact, since again, from page 337, it has already been 
shown that 


341 


co 


g'"(@)-C(B) = anf {cos(yr)ig''" (a + iy)(B—iy) — g"”(a-iy)C(B + iy)] 
+ isin(yr)[g''” (a + iy)C(B—iy) + g'’(a—iy)C(B + iy)]} dy/y 


where B > 1. 


Thus, we have an exact form for the field equations in this case, where the ‘hidden variable’ is C(.), 
and that form is, for all B > 1, anda=1... 


GY = 6-GB)[g""(0) + 2cosh(r)g""(a)] 


Indeed, this is the only time things are exact, and in fact, the larger ¢ is [i.e. ¢ ---» 1], the /ess precise 
things become, or so it seems. 


afeoeakeaeok 


Let us now produce some tables, as we did on page 338. We’ll look at data when r = 1 or 2, and 
when ¢ = 0.5 or 1. Here are the results, where g’’Y = 1 in expression (3) on page 340 ... 


valueofr  valueofe valueoffp  valueof(3) value of C(B)-Jo(re) 


1 3/2 -762433 1.998983 
1 5/2 824982 1.026503 
1 7/2 796810 0.862174 
1 9/2 -778326 0.807060 
1 11/2 -768914 0.784484 
1 13/2 -764242 0.774385 
2 3/2 0.068986 0.584887 
2 5/2 0.144545 0.300347 
2 7/2 0.197408 0.252265 
2 9/2 0.212788 0.236139 
2 11/2 0.218276 0.229534 
2 13/2 0.220505 0.226579 
1 0.5 3/2 1.63471 2.451635 
1 0.5 5/2 1.17966 1.258945 
1 0.5 7/2 1.03203 1.057405 
1 0.5 9/2 0.97692 0.989811 
1 0.5 11/2 0.95349 0.962124 
1 0.5 13/2 0.94283 0.949737 


Notice from this tabular data that the value of (3), compared to the value of ¢(B)-Jo(re), seems to be 
best when = 0.5, which is 30° above the x-axis. And for larger B, the value of (3) compared to 
C(B)- Jo(re), dovetails nicely. 


342 


From this we may conclude that for larger B, the form for the field equations, 

G'Y = o-{(B)[g""(0) + 2cosh(ra)lo(re)g"*(a)] 
is a reasonably good approximation that incorporates the ‘hidden variable’ ¢(.). For smaller B, close 
to but larger than 1, such an approximation no longer works, and the only way to compute what the 
hidden variable might actually be, at the physical singularities (+1, 0) associated with X(s), is by 
performing integrations using (3). A tall order which could well be beyond our reach ! 
But if it is achievable, then (*) becomes, where a = cos(0) and ¢ = sin(@) ... 


G*Y = of€(B)g"“(0) + 2C(B, O)cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"“(@)] (~) 


Here C(B) will always be associated with g"’(0) because of radial symmetry [pp 307-9], and C(B, 6) 
is whatever we pick up from (3), assuming that (3) computes to 


2°"(a)-(B,4)-Jo(re) 
Note that this implies C(B, 8) is also a function of @ now, as it should be, since the original argument 


to C(.) was ¢(B — s + ycos(0)), where here y is associated with the physical singularities tied to X(s) 
[page 334]. Also note that when 6 = 0, C(B, 8) = C(B). 


Some More on The Riemann Hypothesis — A Tale of Two Frames 
In the diagram below, @ is a root of C(s) in the critical strip, and S is the signal, which can be 
generated via the a-line or the B-line, as per our discussions on pages 294-6. In fact, each line 
contains a copy of the root (a # % and B = 1 — a), so here we want to understand, in a little more 


detail, what it means to say that ‘relative to S, it is not possible to distinguish between the a-line 
and the B-line’. 


a-path 


B-path 


We'll start by abbreviating the statement above, so that (*) means ‘relative to S, it is not possible to 
distinguish between the a-line and the B-line’. 


Now let © be an observer associated with the signal’s frame of reference, and let © be situated at a 
point p anywhere on €, where € is one of a or &. Since (*) holds true, © does not know which line 
it is on, nor does it know what p actually is. The most @ can know, at this point, is that it is a 
certain distance above or below the x-axis [say ¢, where ¢ > 0], but nothing more. 


Now let g be the counterpart to p, so that if p happened to be a + ig, then g would be f + ée, and 0 
could just as easily be situated at p or g, without knowing what either was. Since the choice of p is 
arbitrary at this juncture, it doesn’t matter what C(p) and C(q) compute to. They may be equal to one 
another, or they may not. Thus, the setup here, to this point, is simply a reiteration of (*), but tells 
us nothing about what is going on at the point level on €, from the perspective of 0. 


For @ to make an inference at the point level, we need to introduce a moderator in this experiment, 
say M, who is an ‘all-knowing’ being. © can ask M any question it has, and M can respond, 
provided there is no violation of (*). Now if it is the case that ¢(p) = C(q) [and M will know if this 
is so], M can actually tell © that this is true, without violating (*). For now, even with this 
knowledge, @ cannot distinguish between p and q, since € (a) maps back to both p and q 
simultaneously, where a is whatever C(p) and C(q) compute to. 


On the other hand, if ((p) # C(q) [and M will know if this is so], @ can most certainly distinguish 
between p and q, by an application of ¢, provided @ can obtain the information that it needs from 
M [at a minimum, what C(p) and Cg) compute to]. In this case, though, M will go silent and say 
nothing, so that (*) is not violated. Indeed, if @ just knew via M that C(p) # ((q), then © would also 
know that ‘being situated at p’ was not the same as ‘being situated at q’, even though @ has no 
knowledge of what p and q really are. And that is because @ can ask M if the value of ¢(.) has 
changed. In this sense, then, (*) would also be violated, which explains the moderator’s silence. 


Thus, our methodology WM, first outlined on pages 294-6, validates (*) at the point level, whenever 
it is the case that C(p) = C(q). That is to say, whenever p and g are pseudo-roots [pp 302-4]. The 
Riemann Hypothesis, then, becomes a special case where C(p) = C(q) = 0; but either way, J shows 
us that it is not possible to distinguish between p and q at the point level, on &, and és, if ((p) and 
&(q) agree. 


In turn, this means that if M’ is any other mathematical method seeking to resolve the Riemann 
Hypothesis, it will never be able to verify these pseudo-roots in @*, where @* is the critical strip 
minus the critical line, and verify means ‘prove without ambiguity’. For to do so would mean 
contradicting M, in so much as M’ would now be able to distinguish between p and q. 

A Harmonic Expression For ¢(a)-¢(B) When a and p Are Between 0 and 1 
In this case we are in the critical strip, and the methods on pages 262-4 apply, where our contour 


integral is 


cf eg(s) | /(s— isin@) + isin(®)) ds (+) 
Y 


344 


and g(s) = C(a — s)C(B — s). Since a and £ are between 0 and 1, traversing the contour y, as shown 
below, 


£||[e¢ — 
B 
L||[D 
ising 
F 
oO 
-isine 
A 
e||| 


will pick up the residue at O, as 9 ---» 0, and also, the residues at a — 1 and B— 1 < 0, since these are 
now the poles of g(s). At O, the residue is C(a)-C(B) and at the other two points, the residues are ... 


e@-Deg_—a+i)/(a—1) at a-1 e8-) (a _—p41)/(B-1) at B-1 


And from page 263 [especially the expression at the top of the page], we may now conclude that 
[labelling this formula as (*)] ... 
E(a)-C(p) = 24%"? CB-a+ I) / (a= 1) + MP“ Ga—p+I)/G-D} + 
ax f {cos(yr)[G(a — iy)G(B — iy) — Ca + iy)&(B + iy)] 
+ isin(yr)[C(a — iy)G(B—iy) + Cla + iy)G(B + iy)]} dy /y 


° 


Thus, the expression for ¢(a)-C(B) is a doubling of the sum of the residues as shown above, added to 
the harmonics along the branch lines, in the contour y. Notice, too, that when a = B, the formula is 
not meaningful, since €(1) is infinite. 


As an example, suppose a = 1/4 and § = 3/4. Then the residue at a — 1 computes to —1.64533 and 
the residue at B — 1 computes to 4.54930. The harmonic expression computes to —3.00718, so that 
(*) evaluates to ~ 2.80076. By comparison, €(1/4)-C(3/4) ~ 2.79872. The two agree to about 2 
parts in 1000, which is very reasonable, indeed. 


Here are the snapshots from the Wolfram site, where in this case we chose r = 1, but any r > 0 
would suffice ... 


345 


f-= icon (e( -iy)e(> -i y)-<( riy)e(> + iy))+ésiny) 


: ((? -iy)e(2 -~iy)+4(2 riy)e(> +iy))Jay = -3.00718 + 0i 


3 i 
4¢(5) _ 463) 
3¢3/4 Ve 
Decimal approximation Decimal approximation 
—1.64533165056556 4.54930094009 1052 
residue at a— 1 residue at B — 1 


Decimal approximation 


2.7987230915458621 


Similar tests were performed when a = 1/4 and B = 1/3. In this case (*) evaluated to ~ .79135, 
whilst the expression €(1/4)-C(1/3) computes to ~ .791613. Here, the two agree to about 3 parts in 
10,000 ! 


A ‘Fixed Amplitude’ Theorem For Dark Energy [&] When A(s) = o/s 


Up until now, we really haven’t focused much on dark energy [&], along radial lines at different 
angles [6] from the x-axis. Here, we’re going to do a little more of that, where there are physical 
singularities at O and at (+1, 0), associated with X(s), in the case of a coupling. We know already 
that for the two-dimensional case, 


€=o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin())] 
where o is some constant [perhaps imperceptibly small], and is between 0 and 7, say [see pages 


272-3 for pictures of the evolution of the quantumlike dark energy scalar field in 3D, in the angular 
direction, for a fixed radius r]. 


346 


Thus, when @ = 0, the dark energy [€] is driven solely by the term 1 + 2cosh(r), in accordance with 
the location of the physical singularities, where we’re normalizing o to 1 for the time being. And, 
when @ = 1/2, € is driven by the term 1 + 2Jo(r), where r is the radial distance from the origin O. 


Now we’d like to show a few plots of € along these radial lines, when 0 is between 0 and 2/2, and 
then offer up a proposal for detecting € in the radial direction [x-axis below], in one special case. 


1000 5000 


500 
| 
5 


2 4 8 0 \ 
| 5000 \ 
7 | | 
500 \ | \ 
\ | \ 
/ \/ 
1000 10000 
6 =30° 0 = 45° 
600, 
500| [| 15 
i0| | | 10 
300| | 5 \ 
200} | | ° - = ‘ / \ 
| | 5 10 15\_/ 20 \ fs 
100} | : \ | 
| | \ | 
10 


100! . 
6 =60° 6 = 80° 


347 


| fei f\ 
N\NANaAA AANA ANAT 10 


INA 


20 40 60 80 100 120 20 40 60 80 «100, 120, M40 


6 =89° 0 =89.5° 


“ly 

NAAN NAY 
Sy 
al 


' 


\ I\"\\ \{\ | Nh, 


20 40 60 80 oo 612040 


6 =90° 


One can see from these pictures above, that the cosh(.) term in € has considerable influence over 
the dark energy waveform, in terms of ever increasing amplitudes, on both sides of the x-axis. That 
is, until @ approaches 90°. And somewhere, above 89.5° but below 90°, the waveform should 
exhibit a fixed amplitude which is not changing in value, beyond a certain radius r, as the amplitude 
itself transitions from strictly increasing beyond a certain r, to strictly decreasing for all r. 


Let’s label this angle ©, and ask ourselves the following question. Might it be possible to detect the 
€-waveform at ©, via some physical experiment, since the amplitude is now unique, in that it isn’t 
changing beyond a certain radius r ? If so, it might provide some evidence for dark energy, as 
we’ve described it here; which, in turn, could very well justify the existence of the dark energy 
density function [A(s)]. Time will tell, I suppose, if such a thing is possible ... 


ales ake seo 


For this €-waveform at © to exist, we must assume the radius r is bounded, which makes sense 
from a physical perspective. Otherwise, no matter how close to 90° the angle © actually was, the 


348 


cosh(.) term in € would eventually force the amplitude in this waveform to increase, by letting r 
tend to ©. Here is a picture of the &-waveform when ® = 89.97° and r is capped at 1600 units. 


0.8 


4 
071 
0 500 1000 1500 


You can see from this picture, that the amplitude of the €-waveform is nearly constant beyond a 
certain radius r, and stays that way out to r = 1600, our upper bound (here, o has been normalized to 
a value of 1). 


It should be remembered, too, that we are dealing with a guantumlike dark energy scalar field [&], 
best understood by looking at the quantum fluctuations in the angular direction, along a circle r 
units from the origin O. Here are a few pictures that demonstrate the idea, but see also pages 278- 
83 for more pictures, when using a Yukawa density. 


a \\ {\ / | {\ / 


\ | | | 


100 
| | 


——— 
ae 
—— 
—__ 


In these snapshots above, the dark energy [&], defined on page 345, shows the quantum fluctuations 
along circles of radius 4 and 5 respectively, where the x-axis [0] is between 0 and 27. Note that the 
peaks in these fluctuations are at @ = 0 and z, so that when measuring the fluctuation at these peaks 
in the radial direction, we would come up with the term 1 + 2cosh(r). We’re still measuring a 


349 


fluctuation, radially, but it’s less obvious that we’re doing so. And similarly for any other radial 
line we might happen to be on, as depicted in the pictures on pages 346-7. 


Now whether we can actually detect these quantum fluctuations, either in the angular or radial 
directions, is certainly debatable; but my hope is that the €-waveform shown at the top of page 348 
might be measurable, because it is of fixed amplitude beyond a certain radius r. To be sure, this €- 
waveform at © really is a quantum fluctuation in its own right, but unique because of the constant 
amplitude. 


An Interesting Identity From Bessel Theory Related To Dark Energy [6] When A(s) ~ o/s 


In G.N. Watson’s magnificent work titled A Treatise on The Theory of Bessel Functions (second 
edition), there is an interesting identity which applies to our representation for € described on page 
345, and reproduced here ... 


€=o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(@))] — (**) 


The identity in Watson’s book can be found in Chapter V, page 149, and is shown below, which 
we'll label (+) ... 


ay Bartek ; 
(2 sin 8 2, P@ran) C,,” (cos 9). 


fo) 
ld) 


Here, z is a complex number, so we can let it be our radius r from (*) above, and Cy” is a 
Gegenbauer polynomial of order v. When v = 1%, Cy” reduces to a Legendre polynomial Pp, and (+) 
simplifies, considerably. Additionally, by replacing z with -r in (+), we obtain a second expansion, 
so that by adding the two expansions together, and remembering that Jo(-x) = Jo(x), one obtains ... 


erent Jy (zsin 0) = 


2cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(®)) = 2: r" Pa(cos(6))/T(n+1),n=0,2,4... (8) 


Note that the summation on the right-hand side is over all even numbers, because for all odd 
numbers, the terms in the two expansions [z = r and z = -r] cancel one another. 


Now (§) is most easily verified by letting r = 1, and @ = 2/2. Then the left side of (§) is 2Jo(1), 
which is approximately 1.53; and the right-hand side, out to a few terms is, approximately, 


2(1-1/4+ 3/192) = 1.53 


It just might be that (§) may prove to be useful, down the road, as we learn to better understand the 
quantumlike nature of €. If nothing else, it is yet another way to perceive dark energy, in this case. 


afeskkeaeok 


350 


A Brief Note on Connections to Laplace’s Equation For Dark Energy [6] When A(s) ~ o/s 


In G.N. Watson’s book, titled A Treatise on The Theory of Bessel Functions (second edition), we 
see a comment on page 155 [chapter V] related to Laplace’s equation. It is shown below ... 


It is well known that solutions of Laplace’s equation, which are analytic 
near the origin and which are appropriate for the discussion of physical 
problems connected with a sphere, may be conveniently expressed as linear 
combinations of functions of the type 


rP, (cos 8), r*P,™ (cos) °° md ; 


these are normal solutions of Laplace's equation when referred to polar 
coordinates (7, 8, $). 


Now from (§) on page 349, we also see that the dark energy component can be written as 
€E=o[1 + 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(9))] = o[1 + 2-L 1 P,(cos(6))/T(n+ 1)],n=0,2,4..., (8) 


so that the inference here, from the comment above, is that € satisfies Laplace’s equation in polar 
coordinates, where the Laplace operator in three dimensions reduces to the following ... when is 


omitted. 
18 22) 1 0(, ,of 
Vit 3 (" ar) * sind 00 (sino) 


Early testing seems to indicate that this is true, for when I calculate V2 f where f = r” Pa(cos(@)) 
and n = 2 or 3, V2f is indeed zero, providing we can calculate meaningful derivatives in r and 0. 


If we are correct here, the same should be true in three dimensions [pp 225-6, 272-3, 323], after 
invoking an appropriate change of coordinates, if need be. 


A Heuristical Argument For Covariance and The Field Equations When A(s) ~ o/s 
Let us recall our expression for the field equations, in two dimensions, where there is a coupling 
between the gravitational tensor g"’” and the underlying dark energy density function A(s) [a = 
cos(@) and ¢ = sin(@)] ... 
G'Y = o[g"%(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"*(a)]— C*) 


Here, the physical singularities associated with A(s) are at O and at (+1, 0), and GYY = C*Y— kT", 
where C"’ , TY are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively. 


Now we already know that G"’ and g"” are fully covariant [pp 178-80], and that in (*) above, the 


dark energy associated with g"’(0) is 6, whilst the dark energy associated with g"’’(q) is 


351 


€ = 2ocosh(rcos(8))Jo(rsin(8)). 


Since o is a constant, it satisfies Laplace’s equation by default, and we now know that € also 
satisfies Laplace’s equation, where the Laplace operator V? is the three-dimensional variant 
mentioned on page 350, which omits the > term. 


Thus, the field equations become fully covariant ‘across the board’, in so much as conservation 
principles apply not only to GY and g"”’, but also to the dark energy components in (*). And quite 


frankly, we couldn’t ask for a better outcome. 


For here, we believe that (*) will admit non-singular solutions in g"’’, and now know that dark 
energy, driven by the underlying dark energy density function [A(s)], obeys Laplace. 


sks ak 


In three dimensions, the following equations apply in the case of a coupling [page 323], which 
we'll label (+) ... 


G'" = ofg"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"” (cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos())Jo(rsin())g""*(cos(o))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O, and at 


d,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 


Notice that a dark energy component [o now omitted], such as € = 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)), also 
satisfies (§) on page 349, and is reproduced here, where 0 has been replaced with a. ... 


2cosh(reos(a))Jo(rsin(a)) = 2-2 r" Pa(cos(a))/T(n+1),n=0,2,4... (8) 


Thus, it stands to reason that € will also satisfy Laplace, where @ has been replaced with @ in the 
Laplace operator on page 350. And similarly for € = 2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin()), where 0 maps to . 


Now as to the term & = 2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)), in (+) above, we let cos(.) and sin(.) trade places 
in (§), and we replace a with B. Then Laplace is satisfied where @ has now been replaced with B in 


the Laplace operator, and sin(8) has been replaced with cos(f) in this same operator. 


2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)) = 2-L r™P,(sin(B)) /T(n+1),n=0,2,4... (8) 


2 1 0 ( 20f 1 @ of 
vie r? Or (- z) 7 r’cosB OB cosB 2) 


352 


Thus, in this sense, (+) also becomes fully covariant ‘across the board’, and for the time being, 
anyway, by a reasonable approach which justifies this conclusion, in my opinion. 

And here again, we believe that (7) will admit non-singular solutions in g'’’, and now know that 
dark energy, driven by the underlying dark energy density function [A(s)], obeys Laplace, according 


to our approach above. 


Some More Plots For a 3D Star When X(s) = o/s 


For a 3D star [pp 225-6, 323], using a simple inverse density function [A(s) = o/s] ... with physical 
singularities at the origin [O] and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1), 


we can trace the evolution of our quantumlike dark energy scalar field, by starting with the plane at 
6 = 0° to the x-axis, as shown above, and then rotating this plane to 30°, 45°, 60°, and finally 90°, 
where we reach the y-axis. Here are the plots for a radius r = 6; and as well, the energy of the 
quantum fluctuation along each circle has been included, which was calculated by performing 
integrations on the Wolfram site [ is between 0 and 27 on the x-axis in these plots and o = 1]. 


300 | | | | } | | 300 | | | | 
200} | | | | | | | | 200| | | | 


100} | } | | | | ] | 100} | | | | 


r=6,0=0° 6 =x, Energy = 607 units r=6,0=30°, =x, Energy = 176 units 


400 \ 


300 


200 


100 


| | ; =i || | 
I | wal | 
| || ; || 


r=6,0=45°, b=x, Energy = 217 units r=6,0=60°, =x, Energy = 176 units 


400 } 


| | \ | 
| | | 
300 || | | | | | | 


200! | | } | ; | | 


100} | | | i | | | 


r=6,0=90°, =x, Energy = 607 units 


One can see from these pictures that there is a symmetry about @ = 45°, and that the energy of the 
fluctuations is much greater at § = 0° and 6 = 90°, than it is when 0 is somewhere in between these 
two extremes. And this is due to the location of the physical singularities associated with dark 
energy. 


Now whether there is a mean-value theorem of sorts, which associates the average value of the 
dark energy on a sphere r units from the origin O, with, say, the energy at the origin, I do not know. 
We do know, however, that the dark energy components satisfy Laplace, as per our previous 
research notes, but this may not be enough, in and of itself, to conclude that some kind of mean- 
value theorem does, indeed, exist (note to the reader: energy here in the diagrams above is ‘flat 
space’ energy; the integrations do not use a Jacobian). 


alesak sok 


354 


An Interesting Identity From Bessel Theory and Connections To Laplace 


Tf we bring back our expression from page 349, which we'll label (+), 


. T x 2 vin) 
ee, (esin 8) = ray (sin ay 5, rosea C,," (cos 8). 


we see by replacing z with ir, where r is our radius, that (+) becomes [after equating real and 
imaginary parts, with v = 2]... 


cos(rcos(6))lo(rsin(6)) = XZ (-1)"?r" P,(cos(6)) /T(n + 1) ,n=0, 2,4... real part (1) 
sin(rcos(0))lo(rsin(®)) = Z (-1)°~ ?? 1 P,(cos(@)) / (n+ 1) ,n=1,3, 5... imaginary part (2) 


And here, it should be mentioned that Io(x) = Jo(éx), where Ip is a modified Bessel function of order 
0, andi is V—1. 


Now (1) is most easily verified by setting r= 1, and 9 = 2/2. Then the left side is Io(1), which is 
roughly 1.266, whilst the right-hand side, out to a few terms, computes to ... 


1+ 1/4+3/192 = 1.266 


Similarly in (2), setting r = 1 and @ = O yields sin(1) in radians for the left side, which is 
approximately 0.841; whilst the right-hand side, out to a few terms, computes to 


1-1/6 + 1/120 = 0.841 


Both expressions, on the left sides of (1) and (2) obey Laplace, according to our previous research 
notes. 


60 i {\ 60 A \ 


plot of (1) for r = 6, 6 between 0 and 2x plot of (2) for r = 6, 8 between 0 and 27 


355 


A Slight Diversion 


As to the form for the field equations, in three dimensions, when ey is coupled to a Yukawa 
density [pp 237-9], with physical singularities associated with A(s) at the origin O, and at 


(1,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1), 
this is 
GY = ofg"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Fo(wsin(a))g"’(cos(a)) + 


2cosh(rsin(B))Fo(@cos(B))g"’(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(rcos(p))Fo(@sin(p))g"""(cos(p))] - 
Here, Fo is Jo ifr > pt, and Fo is Io ifr < pp. As well, cos(a) = sin()cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(@), 


and GY = CY — kT%’, where CY , T“Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively. And finally, 


ifr>p, = Vr? — we 
ifr<p,o= Vie v2 
where A(s) = oe S/s. 
We are mentioning this now, because at first glance, there doesn’t appear to be a way to show that 


the dark energy components in the equation above obey Laplace. There is nothing in (+) on page 
354 that we can use here [unless j1 = 0], but perhaps down the road a method will be found. 


A Possible Interpretation For The (r, a, 8) Layout When (s) ~ o/s 


Let us bring back our expression for the field equations, in the case of a coupling [page 323], which 
we'll label (+) ... 


G'Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"’(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos($))Jo(rsin())g"*(cos())] - 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O, and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 
Now we already know, from previous research notes, that the dark energy components associated 


with g"’” satisfy Laplace, so here we want to offer up a possible interpretation for the angle a, so 
that relative to our coordinate system (r, a, B), we will know how to interpret Laplace. 


356 


In the left diagram below, we see a circle AECB traversing a sphere of radius r, at say, a latitude of 
45° relative to the equator. The right diagram shows this same circle in blue. 


Right Cone 


Thus, in an (r, 8, $) layout, is the 45° arc from P to C along the sphere, so that we have ... 
cos(a) = (V2/2)cos(®).  (*) 


Now when 6 = 90°, we are in the x-y plane mxy, where OD is the x-axis, and of course, « = @ (the y- 
axis is perpendicular to the page). Here the vector Vo associated with 0, always lies on the tangent 
line to the circle [equator] centered at O, in mxy, so that at D, for example, Vo would be (0,1). Note 
that Vo is always perpendicular to V;, the radius vector, as 8 moves from 0 to 2, around the 
equator. 


At C in the left diagram above, let m- be the tangent plane to the sphere at C, where C is in the x-z 
plane. Then the radius vector V+ is (V2/2, 0, v2/2), emanating from O, so that we have a few 
possible choices for Va. One is (0, 1, 0), which would be tangential to the circle AECB at C, in the 
horizontal plane tech containing this circle; but this would essentially return us to the (r, 8, ) 
layout, which we are not dealing with right now. 


The correct choice, in my opinion, is that vector Va, which is 45° above or below the tangent line 
containing (0, 1, 0) at C, as measured within me. We make this conclusion because from (*), it is 
the case that « = 45° if 0 = 0°. Note that Va is still perpendicular to V,, so that it emanates from C 
in Te. 


Now let 6 = 90°, turning counter-clockwise, relative to OD. Then (*) tells us « = 90°, and here the 
radius vector V; is (0, v2/2, 2/2). The most likely choice for our vector Va, perpendicular to Vr, 
is the one which is now 90° above or below the tangent line containing (1, 0, 0) at E, as measured 
within me — the tangent plane to the sphere at E. And again, Va is perpendicular to V;, so that it 
emanates from E in Te. 


Thus, we build up a ‘field of vectors’ on the circle AECB, at differing angles, according to the 
methodology above, as the angle @ varies in accordance with 0. 


357 


Now we can interpret Laplace in a more meaningful way, as per the previous research notes. For 
the dark energy components f = 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)) or f= 2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin()), f satisfies 
Laplace below where we replace 0 by a or by , accordingly. In the case of @, we would be 
looking at great circles running from the north pole to the south pole on our sphere, at different 
angles to the x-axis, say. And here, V@ would be the tangent vector at any point on the circle, but 
in the plane of the circle itself, and again, perpendicular to the radius vector V-. 


», 108 221) 1 OC. 21) 
2 . 9 
VI- 2 o (" ar) * 72sind 00 (sin 30 


If f= 2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)), the following Laplace operator applies, as per our previous research 


notes ... 
: 1 2 (2h) 1 0 2) 
“ 7 Or \" Or m r’cosB dB cosB op 


Thus, V?f =0 in all cases, where now, perhaps, we have a more meaningful understanding of what 
the angle a actually is, and hence, B as well. 


P 
A CLES Cc 
D 
Ny, Tangent Vector (0, 1,0) 
Radius Vector 
Pp? 


The diagram on the right shows the vector Vq in the tangent plane to the sphere at C, at an angle a 
to the tangent vector (0, 1, 0). Note that both Va and (0, 1, 0) are perpendicular to the radius vector, 
and that a is measured within the tangent plane. 


‘Tangent Plane to Sphere at C 


Some More On a Possible Interpretation For The (r, a, 8) Layout When X(s) = o/s 


In the diagram on the right, just above, notice that Va can be split up into vo components — one 
along the tangent vector (0, 1, 0), which we’ll call Vo, since here we’re moving in the direction of 
0; and secondly, along the tangent vector to the great circle [APCDP'] running through C in the x-z 
plane, which we’ll call Vp. This second tangent vector is actually (- V2/2, 0, V2/2), and emanates 


358 


from C in me — the tangent plane to the sphere at C. Notice that all of V;, Vo, and V@ are 
perpendicular to one another, and that again, both Vo, and V@ lie in mc, as does Va, 


Now since the total net flux [¥] of dark energy at C, in the (r, a) layout is zero [from previous 
research notes], it stands to reason [physically] that the same must be true at C in the (r, 0, ) 
layout, where V; is the radius vector, and Vp and V@ are the components of Va, as described above. 


Tangent Plane to Sphere at C 


Tangent Vector (0, 1,0) 


This takes care of the dark energy component f = 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)) in (f) on page 355, and 
a similar argument can be made for the (r, 8) layout corresponding to f= 2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)), 
and for the (r, @) layout corresponding to f = 2cosh(rcos($))Jo(rsin(p)). Thus, the total net flux of 
dark energy at C across all three components, taken together in the (r, 6, ) layout, must also be 
zero. 


The exercise can now be repeated for any point on the circle AECB, in the left figure on the 
previous page, and we should arrive at the same conclusion in (r, 8, ). Indeed, anywhere on the 
sphere itself, since our choice of circles is arbitrary. 


Thus, dark energy has no ‘sources’ or ‘sinks’ as we perceive it, in our reality, when X(s) ~ o/s. 
The only source for dark energy is the underlying dark energy density function [A(s)], and while 
A(s) has singularities, they are ‘erased’ at our level by way of the Laplace inverse transform, 
according to the following expression, in the case of a coupling ... 


GW = «fe Asyg"as 
Y 


359 


Some More on The Riemann Hypothesis — A Tale of Two Frames, Revisited 


In this section we are going to revisit our previous research note [pp 342-3] and simplify things, 
somewhat. The moderator A/ will still play a role here, and we’ll simply consider the different 
possibilities. The reader is encouraged to revisit the previous note before proceeding. 


Let us start with the simplest case, where the observer © is told by M that (p) = C(q), and © is 
situated at p or g, without knowing what either is. If now, @ trades places with its counterpart, so 
that had it been at p it would now be at g [and vice versa], nothing changes. Although @ happens to 
know, at the point level, that Cp) and C(q) agree, © cannot use this knowledge to distinguish 
between p and qg. To O, being situated at p is exactly the same as being situated at g, precisely 


because C(p) = C(q) ! 


Now suppose @ is told by M that C(p) # C(qg), even though @ has no knowledge of what p and q 
really are. Once again, let © trade places with its counterpart, so that had it been at p it would now 
be at g [and vice versa]. Since @ is aware it has traded places, and since © also knows that ¢(p) # 
C(q), © can reason that being situated at p is not the same as being situated at q. 


© doesn’t have to ask M if ¢(.) changed value [p 343]; rather, it simply has to realize that trading 
places with its counterpart leads to the conclusion above, if © knows ¢(p) and C(qg) do not agree. 
And furthermore, © knowing that ‘being situated at p is not the same as being situated at q’ is a 
contradiction of (*) on page 342, where (*) means ‘relative to S, it is not possible to distinguish 
between the a-line and the B-line’. And this is because @ has adopted the signal’s [S] frame of 
reference, and also because p belongs to the a-line, and q to the B-line. 


Thus, (*) can only maintain consistency at the point level, whenever ¢(p) = C(qg), and so, our 
original methodology ML, first outlined on pages 294-6, validates (*) at the point level, whenever it 
is the case that ¢(p) and C(q) agree, but nowhere else. In other words, there is no mathematical 
method WM’ that can verify roots or pseudo-roots of C(s) in @*, the critical strip minus the critical 
line, where verify means ‘prove without ambiguity’. 


360 


Still More On a Possible Interpretation For The (r, a, 8) Layout When A(s) = o/s 


In the diagram below, recall that Vo, and V@ are the components of Va, in the tangent plane to the 


Tangent Plane to Sphere at C 


Tangent Vector (0, 1,0) 


Radius Vector 


sphere at C, and that the total net flux [¥] of dark energy at C, in the (r, a) layout is zero [from 
previous research notes]. Thus, it stands to reason [physically] that the same must be true at C in 
the (r, 0, $) layout, where V, is the radius vector, and Vo and V@ are the components of Va, as 
described in a previous research note [pp 357-8]. 


Now let’s increase the flow across C, along both Vo and V@, where this increase is measured by the 
distance between the vertical green and blue lines, and the horizontal green and blue lines, 
respectively. Since the fotal net flux in the (r, 8, ) layout is zero at C, as per our comment above, 
it is still going to be zero after the increase. That is to say, flow in will still match flow out, at C. 


But notice now, after the increase, that the two corresponding vectors produce a new vector Vy, 
which is at a different angle y to the tangent line (0, 1, 0), in the tangent plane at C. And since total 
net flux at C hasn’t changed, it must be the case that this is also true in the (r, y) layout. Thus, 
knowing that total net flux is zero in the (r, a) layout, means it must be zero for any other vector 
emanating from C in me — the tangent plane to the sphere at C — at any angle to (0, 1, 0). 


We could have increased or decreased the flow along Vo and V», and we could have done the same 
for the radius vector V;, had we wanted to. But the net result is the same; total net flux across C 
would not have changed for any other vector emanating from C in mc. It would always be zero. 


Skok 


361 
Spherical Harmonics, Dark Energy and The Case For Laplace, When X(s) = o/s 
— A Physical and Mathematical Approach — 
In this note we are going to look at the full three dimensional Laplace operator, and take a hybrid 
approach to understanding Laplace. Up until now, we’ve looked at ‘slices’ in the (r, a), (r, B) and 
(r, >) layouts, so the time has come to see if we can do the same in the (r, 0, $) layout, ‘in one shot’ 
as they say. 


Recall that in a mathematical coordinate system [pp 365-8] and labelling as (*), 


G"Y = of[g"%(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g""’(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos($))Jo(rsin())g"*(cos(o))] - 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O, and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 
Now in physical coordinates, the Laplace operator under consideration is [labelling as (+)], 


10 of 1 Of. Of 1 Of 
er E(B) ask mh) ang 
f r2 Or (: or v r? sin@ 00 nae = r? sin? 0 Op? 


and we already know that Laplace [or a variant] is satisfied by our three dark energy components in 
(*) above, where the > term in (+) is omitted, and 0 is replaced by a, 6 or @ [pp 350-52]. 


Thus, the same must be true in the primary planes [x-y, x-z, y-z] ... where dark energy is at its 
strongest [maximum value]. That dark energy is at its maximum here, is most easily seen by 
revisiting the diagrams on pages 352-3. As we rotate away from a primary plane, dark energy over 
a great circle of radius r, decreases in value and as we rotate toward a primary plane, dark energy 
now increases, reaching a maximum value in the primary plane, itself. And this is because of the 
location of the physical singularities, associated with A(s). 


And furthermore, from our previous research [pp 349-50], we know that when looking at ‘slices’, 
2cosh(reos(0))Jo(rsin(®)) = 2-L r™ Pa(cos(®))/T(n+1),n=0,2,4..., (8) 


for an arbitrary angle 0, and that (§) is also true when cos(.) and sin(.) trade places. In particular, 
it’s true for the primary planes, where we are dealing with a two-dimensional layout, by default. 


Notice, now, that the series in (§) converges for all r > 0, and that, in particular, it does so in the 
primary planes, where dark energy is at a maximum. What, then, can we say about a dark energy 
component, such as 


362 


f= 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)) , 


in a three-dimensional layout, say (r, 8, @), where we might not be in a primary plane ? Remember, 
cos(a) = sin(p)cos(8), so posing the question is actually meaningful. 


To answer the question, we have to borrow some mathematics from spherical harmonic theory. 
Any solution to Laplace in three dimensions [(}), page 361], using physical coordinates, is always a 
linear combination of functions of the type 


1 P,™ (cos nm 


where P,’” is an associated Legendre polynomial and {cpm} are constants. That is to say, for r > 0, 


XL camr"Px(cos0) > mg, (88) 


. mM 
n=0 m=-n sin 


supposing the series converges. Notice now, that when m is set to 0, and remains fixed at zero, we 
are summing only over the variable n, and recover the series (§) on the last page, where the constant 
is 2/I(n + 1), n= 0, 2, 4 ... , because we are dealing with an (r, 6) layout. The angle > is no longer 
relevant. 


Thus, when traversing a great circle which is not in a primary plane, dark energy can be expressed 
by (§§) in an (r, 8, $) layout. But does (§§) converge for all r > 0? After all, it’s highly unlikely 
we are ever going to be able to calculate the constants {Cym}, which is why we offer a physical 
argument. 


Since dark energy, over a great circle, is at a maximum in the primary planes, representable via (§), 
the series in (§§) has no choice but to converge, over any great circle not in a primary plane, and 
does so for all r > 0. And this, in turn, tells us that each dark energy component in (*) [page 361] 
satisfies Laplace in a three-dimensional layout, namely, (r, 8, >). No longer do we need to deal 
with ‘slices’ as we have in the last few research notes; rather, we can do it all in ‘one fell swoop’, 
according to the approach outlined in this note [see also pp 365-8 for the follow-on note]. 


Finally, why are we doing this ? To me the answer lies in the solution to the field equations (*) on 
page 361. What can we expect g"” to look like ? Since the right-hand side of (*) is comprised of 
dark energy components that are harmonics [they satisfy Laplace], g"’’ is likely to have a harmonic 
representation itself. Not unlike, perhaps, solutions to Schrodinger’s equation. Will there be 
orbitals or other mysterious phenomena, also embedded within g"’ ? Only time will tell ... 


alesse 


There are several reasons for putting forth the idea that a dark energy component, such as f above, 
which is not in a primary plane, can be resolved via (§§). First, and perhaps foremost, we know 


363 


from previous research notes that our dark energy components satisfy Laplace in an (r, 8, o) layout, 
even when looking at ‘slices’ [pp 355-8 and page 360]. Second, (§§) above reduces to (§) on page 
361 when m is fixed at zero. Thus, (§) must be a ‘special case’ of something more general. Third, 
the elements 


cos 


{ Pr"(cos0) "mod } 
sin 
form a basis for regular functions over the unit sphere, that are ‘square integrable’. And finally, 
(§§) must converge for our dark energy component over a great circle, say, which is not in a 
primary plane, and this must be so for all r > 0. And that is because (§) converges in a primary 
plane, where dark energy is at a maximum. 
So there is good reason to believe (§§) holds in general for our dark energy components, which of 


course, is the desirable outcome. Indeed, it may allow us to solve the field equations (*) on page 
361, using techniques that are already well understood for other differential equations. 


An Interesting Identity Concerning Jo(./r? — 2 sin(9)) From Bessel Theory 
The expression Jo(./r? — ? sin(8)) appears in our field equations, when using a Yukawa density 
[see page 355], so here we want to write down an expansion for it, in the hopes that it will help us 
to better understand the dark energy components, within this context. Indeed, the goal, ultimately, 


is to see if these components obey Laplace. 


In G.N. Watson’s book titled A Treatise on The Theory of Bessel Functions (second edition), there 
is an interesting identity on page 358, which is reproduced here and labelled as (*) ... 


2 
ST, [W(Z? + 2 —2Zz cos p)} = & emdm(Z) Jin (z) cos mp 
m=0 
And here, €m is 1 if m= 0, otherwise it is 2. Now let ¢ = 2/2, and replace z with iz to obtain ... 
ea 
Jo(VZ2 =z?) = X &m Jm (Z) i™ Im (z) cos(mn/2) 
m= 


Recall that i"/m(x) = Jm(ix), where Im is a modified Bessel function of the first kind. Now finally, 
Jet Z = rsin(9) and z = psin(), where r is our radius, and 1 appears in the Yukawa density 


Xs) = oe #S/s, 
Then our expression above becomes ... 


Jo(/r2 = p2 sin(0)) = LX em Jm (rsin(@)) Im (usin(®)) — (§) 


m=0,2,4,... 


We can verify this rather simply by setting r= 5, 1» = 3 and @ = 7/2. Then our series expansion in 
(§), out to a few terms, becomes ... 


364 


Jo(5) Jo(3 #) — 2 Jn (5) Jo(3 #) + 2 Jg(5) Jq(3 i) — 2 Jg(5) Jg(3 i) 


and, from the Wolfram site, this computes approximately to -0.397179. On the other hand, Jo(4) is 
approximately -0.397149, so we have very good agreement here. 


Whether the identity (§) will prove to be useful, down the road, remains to be seen. But if nothing 
else, we have another way of looking at the expression Jo(/r? — yu? sin(6)). 


Revisiting a Possible Interpretation For The (r, a, B) Layout When X(s) = o/s 


On page 360, we put forth an argument which showed that if total net flux is zero in the (r, a) 
layout, Laplace is also satisfied for any other vector emanating from C in m — the tangent plane to 
the sphere at C — at any angle to (0, 1, 0). This argument, however, was a little thin on detail, so 
here we'd like to expand on things a bit. 


‘Tangent Plane to Sphere at C 


Tangent Vector (0, 1, 0) 


In the diagram above, for our dark energy component € in (r, a), let V-" represent flow in at C, in 
the direction of V; and let V,°“" represent flow out at C, in the direction of V:. Assume V°"' = 2V-", 
and assume also Vq'" = 2V,°". Since we know Laplace holds at C, in the (r, a) layout for our dark 
energy component [&], it must be the case that 


Vib Veit = Vote Vqott : 
which means V;'" = V,°", and Vo" = Vai". Now write Vai" = Voi" + Vo" [in the vectorial sense], 


where Voi" = Vai" - cos?(a) and Voi" = Vai" - sin’(a). Thus, with a = 45°, both Vol and V@'" are 
exactly half of Va'". Let’s label Vo"", in the (r, a) layout, by the symbol aV@ "". 


365 


Now let’s double the size of Vo", to reflect inflow of € in (r, y), by assumption. Then Vy" becomes 
Vai" + aVo" = 3/2 + Vai", so that Vy" - sin’(y) = 2+ aVo® = Val", since again, in (r, y) Voi" has 
doubled. Thus, sin(y) =./2/3, so that y is approximately 55°. 


Originally, it was the case that Voi" = 2V»" in (r, a), so now, after the doubling, we have Vo" = 
4V 9 in (r, y), where here Vo" = aVo".. Thus, the net increase on inflow is 2V"". And, in order 
to preserve the angle of the new vector [V,], above and below the tangent line containing (0, 1, 0), 
because of the doubling; Vo must also double in size in (r, y), supposing that none of the 
increased outflow travels in the direction of Vo". Thus the ner increase on outflow is Vo". 

The net effect of doing this ... is that we have an additional flow of Vo", coming from the net 
increase on inflow, which has to go somewhere in (r, y); where Vo" is the original outflow in the 
(r,@) layout, before its doubling. And this ‘somewhere’ is along V,°"". 


Thus, we see how we can create an inflow/outflow scenario at C for & which satisfies Laplace in 
the (r, y) layout, given that Laplace is satisfied by € in (r,@). And in this case, it was done where 
flow in didn’t necessarily match flow out along V; or Va, in (1, @) at C. This was the gist of our 
remarks on page 360, but here we’ve discussed things in a little more detail. 


Spherical Harmonics, Dark Energy and The Case For Laplace, When (s) = o/s 
—A Physical and Mathematical Approach, Part II — 


In this note, we wish to continue the discussion on pages 361-3. To begin with, let’s distinguish 
between mathematical and physical coordinate systems [MCS and PCS, respectively]. 


Mathematical Coordinates Physical Coordinates 


Most of our earlier work uses MCS, but on page 361 ... the Laplacian that is shown there, and 
reproduced below, is actually using PCS ... 


1 0 / ,Of 1 O/, Of 1 Of 
Vf= - + ( 6 ) = 
f r2 Or (: or ) r? sin@ 00 ca + r? sin? @ Oy? 


366 


This is easily remedied by letting @ and ¢ trade places, as we see in the next screenshot, which 
we'll label (+), and we’ll call it V2 as well. It is the MCS variant of Laplace. 


1 2(2 2), 1. #f 4,1. 2 Al af) 
2 ar (7 ft bag resin? é dF ks sing 2 sin ¢ 


In doing so, solutions to (+), which is to say VF = 0, are now of the form 


z 5 nm?” Pul"(cos) © m0, (88) 


n=0 m=-n 


m 


where P,” is an associated Legendre polynomial and {cpm} are constants. This is our starting point 
for further investigation into the Laplacian nature of our dark energy components in (*), on page 
361, using a mathematical coordinate system. Note that each term in (§§) satisfies (+) above. 


Let us begin with f = 2cosh(reos(a))Jo(rsin(a)), where cos(a) = sin(p)cos(8), in an MCS setting. 
Then from previous research we know that 


2cosh(reos(a))Jo(rsin(a)) = 2- r" Pa(cos(a)) /T(n+ 1),n=0, 2,4... 


2-E r" Px(sin(o)cos(8)) /P(n + 1),n=0,2,4... (8) 


Now if we can write the expression, just above, in the fashion of (§§), we will have succeeded in 
showing that f satisfies Laplace, in the (r, 8, @) layout [MCS]. Note that here, Pp is just P,?. 


The idea is to compare coefficients associated with r”, and see if we can get some sort of agreement 
between them, in (§§) versus (§). When n = 0, which means m = 0, Pn” is identically 1, so setting 
Coo to 2 gives us a match, and we are done. 


Now we don’t have to look at odd integers for n, but it doesn’t hurt to do so. In this case, for n = 1, 
we'll ‘pretend’ we’re summing (§) over all n > 0, and the Legendre polynomials are then ... 


Fie) = ~HPLC) 
P?(x) = 
Pi(a) = a") 


Thus, we see that Pi! (cos) =—sin(@), and so in (§§), for n = | and m= 1, we get a match with the 
expression P;(sin($)cos(8)) = sin(})cos(@) = —P1! (cos ¢) cos(), if we choose ci, = —2. The other 
two constants Cio and c).; can be set to zero, and hence we see that rP,(sin()cos(@)) satisfies (+). 


367 


Now let’s go on ton = 2. Here the Legendre polynomials are ... 
(a) 
Py" (2) 
P9(z) = 4(8a? —1) 
P}(z) 
(x) 


and after a bit of algebra, we see that 
P2(sin()cos(8)) = —1/2- P2°(cos$) + 1/4: P2’(cos$)cos(20) 


Thus, 77P2(sin($)cos(®)) also satisfies Laplace (+), and the hope here is that in the series (§), any 
element Pp(sin(p)cos(@)) can be resolved as per (§§), using the examples above as illustrations. 


If so, our dark energy components in (*), on page 361, would satisfy Laplace (+), and of course, 
this is our quest, ultimately ... to show that this is true. 


In the case where n = 3, the Legendre polynomials are ... 


Py3(a) = — ay PR (2) 
P5?(x) = 4 P? (a) 
P;*(x) = —3yP3 (2) 
P2(2) = 3 (52° — 32) 
P3(2) = $(1—52*)(1—2?)¥? 
P2?(x) = 152(1— 2?) 
P3} (x) = -15(1 — 2”)*? 


and here, after some mild algebra, the combination that works for us, almost magically, is ... 
P3(sin()cos(®)) = 1/4 - P3!(cos$)cos(0) — 1/24 - P33(cos$)cos(30) 

Thus, we see again that r’P3(sin($)cos(0)) satisfies Laplace (+), and are probably at a point where 

we can conclude that our dark energy component f = 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)), also satisfies (+), by 


way of (§), and our approach above. 


As to the dark energy component f = 2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)), here sin(B) = sin(p)sin(), so that we 
have ... 


368 


2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)) = 2° r Pp(sin(B)) /T(m+ 1), n=0, 2,4... 


2-D r"P,(sin()sin(@)) /T(m+1),n=0,2,4... (~) 


Now the same arguments apply, for here we note that the expression below allows us to choose 
either cos(m@) or sin(m@). 


bad n 


XL cams Pa (cos$) mOé, (88) 
11 


n=0 m=-n 


As an example, if n = 1 then P,' (cos) =—sin(g), and P;(sin($)sin(@)) = sin(p)sin(@), and this can 
be written as —P;'(cosg)sin(®). Thus, rP:(sin(p)sin(@)) satisfies Laplace (+) on page 366, since it is 
equal to -rP;'(cos@)sin(9), which is a term in (§§). 


Finally, we have the dark energy component f = 2cosh(rcos($))Jo(rsin()), which as a summation, 
can be written as ... 


2cosh(reos($))Jo(rsin(>)) = 2: r™ Pa(cos(o)) /T(n+ 1) ,n=0,2,4..., 


and here we know, from previous research, that this expression satisfies Laplace (+) on page 366, 
where the 6-term in this operator is omitted [see, for example, pages 355-7]. 


So I think at this point, we can conclude that all of our dark energy components in (*), on page 361, 


do indeed satisfy Laplace (+) on page 366, in an (r, 8, ) layout [MCS], and the same will be true in 
a PCS setting as well, so long as we are careful to let 6 and @ trade places, where applicable. 


On The Covariant Nature of The Field Equations When i(s) ~ o/s 
Let us bring back our expression for the field equations of General Relativity, from page 361, in the 
case of a coupling between the gravitational tensor g’Y and the underlying dark energy density 
function A(s) = o/s. 


Recall that in a mathematical coordinate system [labelling as (*)], 


G"” = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"” (cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(f))Jo(rcos(B))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin())g"*(cos())] « 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(®) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O, and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 


369 


As well, G'Y = C'Y — kT’, where CY, TY are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively; and CY = R"Y - %Rg", where R"" is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


Now from pages 178-80, we already know that CY, T"’’ and g"’’ are fully covariant, and now have 
enough evidence to conclude that the dark energy components in (*), on page 368, exhibit 


covariance as well, in so much as each of them obeys Laplace (+) on page 366. 


Thus, we have complete consistency in the field equations above (*), from a physical perspective, 
in so much as it is a fully covariant model, ‘across the board’, as they say. 


And finally, the quantumlike field equations (*) represent a coupling between g"” and A(s), so we 
expect they will lead to non-singular solutions for g”’, which will also be quantumlike, involving 
harmonics, among other things. And this is due to the harmonic and quantumlike nature of the dark 
energy components, which we now believe obey Laplace. 
Some Additional Testing 
In the case where n = 4, the Legendre polynomial is ... 
P?(x) = 2(352* — 302° + 3) 

and omitting the factor 1/8, we want to know if f= r*P4(sin()cos(0)) satisfies Laplace (+) on page 
366. It should, especially if it can be decomposed as per (§§) on page 368. The good news is it 
does, but the expressions are complicated, and are listed below for the reader. These are the first, 
second, and third terms in Laplace (+) on page 366 for f (again, omitting the factor 1/8) ... 

207? (35sin*(¢)cos*(8) — 30sin2(¢)cos?(6) + 3) 

207? (—7sin?(#)cos*(@) + 21sin*(@)cos?(0)sin?(0) + 3cos?(0) — 3sin2(@)) 

20rcos?(0)(—7sin*(p)cos?(8) + 28sin2(¢)cos()cos?(8) + 3sin?(p) — 6cos?(p)) 


After adding these terms together ... and using the appropriate trigonometric identities, where 
applicable, the sum of these terms reduces to ... 


—6cos*(0) + 6cos?(0) —3 +3 =0 
Revisiting an Interpretation For g"’Y(cos(0)) In The Coupled Case When X(s) ~ o/s 


On pages 323-5, we put forth an interpretation for g”’(cos(@)), in the case of a coupling for our 
field equations. Here, we'd like to say just a bit more. 


Since the argument cos(0) to g”’” is actually a radial measure, which we can always make greater 
than or equal to zero, by looking at its absolute value; the same must be true for the field equations 
in (*) on page 368. 


370 


Thus, in a mathematical coordinate system, g'’’(cos(«)) should be interpreted as g'’’(cos(a), 8, $), 
where cos(a) = sin()cos(@). Similarly, g"’Y(sin(p)) should be interpreted as g"’’(sin(B), 0, @), where 
sin(B) = sin()sin(@). 


And finally, g"’(cos($)) is to be written as g"*(cos(), 0, o), since a great circle running from the 
north pole to the south pole on our sphere of radius r, could be at any angle 0 to the x-axis. 


And again, the physical singularities associated with )(s) are at the origin O, and at 
(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1), 


in this case [pp 368-9]. 


polar plot of sini@) 


Mathematical Coordinates 


In the diagram above, on the right, are the polar plots of cos(®) and sin(®). As @ increases in value 
from 0 to 2/2, the radial segment OA, which is cos(0), decreases ... and the radial segment OD 
[sin(®)] increases. 


For our coupled equations in two dimensions, and reproduced here ... with physical singularities at 
the origin O and at {(41, 0), (0, £1)}; g"*(cos(®)) is a measure of how much the singularities at 
(+1, 0) influence the gravitational tensor, as we move away from them or toward them, relative to 
the dark energy component f= 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(9)). And similarly for g’’(sin(®)) and (0, +1). 


G"Y = o[g**(0) + 2cosh(rcos(8))Jo(rsin(®))g""*(cos(8)) + 2cosh(rsin(8))Jo(rcos(®))g""*(sin(6))] 
As to the /eft-hand side of the field equations, be it in the expression above or (*) on page 368, this 


is vintage Einstein. Everything is to be calculated in the usual way, as though, as it were, we had 
set 6 to zero. 


371 


Does e'°°S)J, (rsin(0))cos() Satisfy Laplace in Spherical Coordinates ? 


On page 125 of G.N. Watson’s book, titled A Treatise on The Theory of Bessel Functions (second 
edition), he notes that expressions of the type [labelling as (*)] 


ee = mo . Jin (kp) 


satisfy Laplace in cylinder coordinates [p, $, z]. Thus, one could ask the question if the same is 
true in spherical coordinates, using a physical coordinate system, as shown below. 


P 
A fie Se Right Cone 
Gag F< 


D r- Radius 
a 


Pp’ 


In the left diagram above, let @ be the cylinder in the sphere, with height OE = z and diameter AC, 
so that its radius p is just 4%- AC. The x-axis, we should say, is in the direction OD. 


Let us now rotate the p-z axes by 90° — 0, so that the vector V, now becomes Vo at C — the tangent 
vector to the great circle APCDP' running through C. Similarly, Vp becomes V, at C — the radius 
vector in the direction OC. And as to V@ at C, nothing changes. 


Now since this is a simple rotation, Laplace is still satisfied by (*) in cylinder coordinates, but by 
performing this rotation, we are now in an (r, 8, $) layout, so that (*) should satisfy Laplace in 
spherical coordinates. Let us see if this is so, where in (*) we let k = 1, m = 1, z = rcos(®) and p = 
rsin(@), so that our function f, for the case of cos(), is just 


f= eS} (rsin(0))cos(o). 


Now let us bring back our expression from page 349, as shown below, which we’ll label (+) ... 


ees, (esind) = (a sinayt = 2 


r@ =P Gr any On” (08 9). 


372 


And here in (+), we’ll set v = 3/2 and z =r, so that fis the right-hand side of (+), multiplied by the 
term cos(). We'll call this g. Now when n = 0, the relevant term in g [meaning we omit any 
constants] is ¢ = rsin(@)cos(), since Co” = 1 for any choice of v. 


In physical coordinates, any term in the series [pp 361-3] 


bd n 


Die nm?" Pul"(cos) °* mg, (88) 


n=0 m=-n Su 


always satisfies Laplace, where the Laplace operator is the one shown on page 361, and reproduced 


here ... 
1 0 ( ,of 1 O/. of 1 &f 
Vif= (r )+ ( 6 )+ = 
{=a oe) tae y? sin? 0 OP? 


And since ¢ can be written as —rP\'(cos@)cos(o) [pp 365-8], we see that f satisfies Laplace above. 


Now let’s go on to n = 1. In this case, the relevant term in g is t = r’sin(®)cos(®)cos(q), after 
examining C\>”, and this can be written as — 1/3 - 7° P2! (cos @)cos(p). Thus, we see again that r 
obeys Laplace, just as it does when n = 0. 


We could look at n = 2, but if we did, I can confirm for the reader that the relevant term in g 
matches r°P;! (cos@)cos(), up to some constant, after examining C3”. 


And so, we have enough evidence now, to conclude that f does indeed satisfy Laplace above, and 
we'd expect the same if f was equal to 


f= eS, (rsin())sin(g). 


Indeed, the choice of m shouldn’t matter either, except that when matching with the associated 
Legendre polynomials, we’d be looking at P,:™. And finally, the constant k was set to 1 in our 
studies, but it too can be arbitrary. 


Some Plots of f = 2cosh(rcos(0))Jm(rsin(8))cos(m@) For Even Values of m 


For even values of m, we can generate the function f just above, by summing (+) on page 371 for 
both z = r and z = -r, and then adding the two expansions together. And because J» is an even 
function when m is even, we arrive at f for m = 0, 2, 4, ... all of which, obey Laplace. 


Note that when m = 0, we are dealing with a fundamental dark energy component fo, in a primary 
plane [x-y, x-z, y-z], so that for even m > 0, we might be looking at ‘echoes’ of fo ... in an (r, 8, >) 
layout. It is just speculation at this point, but because f does obey Laplace for all even m, in 
particular, the echoes, if we wish to call them that, may have some physical significance, whatever 
that turns out to be. Here are the plots, using physical coordinates ... 


373 


| \ 
400) 100| 
| | 
3100} 80 
iP | 
| 60} 
200 
i | 
| 40} 
100} | 
| 20} 
i | 
| 
4 | 
AVE 5 \ /6 1 T 2 
m=0,@=0,r=6,0=x m=2,@=0,r=6,0=x 
\ 
B 1 
20 
3 
15 
2 
10 
1 
5 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 
m=4,6=0,r=6,0=x m=6,¢=0,r=6,0=x 
05 7.x10783 
-13 
aa 6.x10 
5.x1073 
oS 4.x1073 
02 3.x1o-8 
2x10 
ol 
Lx10-8 
TY 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 5 
m=8, @=0,r=6,0=x m=24, 6 =0,r=6,0=x 
oak oi 2 


For our dark energy component f = 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)), we saw on pages 365-8 that for the 
case of n = 2, f could be resolved as (omitting r) ... ... 


374 


P2(sin()cos(0)) = —1/2- P°(cos@) + 1/4 + Px*(cos$)cos(20) 


For our dark energy component f = 2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B)), we looked at the case n = 1, but did 
not look at the case n = 2. In this case (n = 2), fcan be resolved as (omitting r) ... 


P2(sin(p)sin(@)) = —1/2- P2°(cos@) — 1/4- P2°(cos)cos(20) 
Thus, we have still more evidence that our dark energy components do, indeed, satisfy Laplace ... 
A Mean Value Theorem For Dark Energy When X(s) ~ o/s 


Recall that in a mathematical coordinate system [labelling as (*)], our field equations are ... 


G"” = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"” (cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(f))Jo(rcos(B))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin())g"*(cos())] « 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O, and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 


Now the dark energy component [é], associated with the first gravitational component g"’(0), is 
simply o, so that over a sphere’s surface [S] of radius r centered at the origin O, the average value 
of € on S is also going to be o. And this, in turn, is equal to the value of € at the origin O. 


For the dark energy component & = 2ocosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a)), associated with g"*(cos(a)), we 
know from previous research [pp 351-2] this can be written as ... 


g=20-L r" Py(sin(o)cos(0)) /P(n+ 1),n=0,2,4... (8) 


If we now integrate € over S, where $ ranges from 0 to z, and 8 ranges from 0 to 2z, and recall that 
our Jacobian J is r’sin(), then this is the equivalent of integrating g - J over S. 


When n = 0, Pa(sin()cos()) is equal to 1, so our integrand J becomes 2c - J, and the integration 
over S now computes to 26 - 4nr’, exactly. 


When n = 2, P2(sin(p)cos(@)) is equal to % - (3 sin?()cos?(@) — 1), so that the relevant term in g - J 
(meaning we omit any constants and also r) is J = 3sin>(¢)cos*(8) — sin(). If we now integrate J 
over S, the value is 0. And similarly for any other choice of n > 0, be it even or odd. The value of 
the integration, for the relevant term, will always be zero. 


Thus, the only term that matters is n = 0, so that the average value of & over S is, in fact, 20 - 4a? 
divided by the area of the sphere S, which gives us 20. And this is also equal to € at the origin O, 
meaning as r ---> 0 in & 


375 


A similar exercise can be carried out for the other dark energy components [&] in (*), and we will 
come to the same conclusion; namely that the average value of € over S is equal to the value of € at 
the origin O. And this value is o for the first component, and 2o for the remaining components. 


Thus, the average value of all of the dark energy components over S, taken together, is 70, which is 
equal to the sum of the dark energy components at O. 


An Interesting Identity From Bessel Theory 


Let us recall our expression from page 349, reproduced below ... 


Tv) (2 sin 8)-4 3 grtn-k 


erent J, (zsin 0) = r@ oF Gran) 


C,," (cos 6). 


If we set v = | in this expression, and use the fact that 
Jin(t) = V2/tr sin(r) f 
then it is not too hard to show that 
e'©°S cin(rsin(@)) / rsin(@) = Dr" Cy!(cos()) /T(n +2) ,n=0, 1, 2,3... 
On The Evaluation Of a Certain Definite Integral 
From our expression just above, we may write 
eS) cin(rsin(®))sin(®) = Dr *! C,!(cos(0))sin2(0) / (n+ 2),n=0,1,2,3... C*) 


Now from the literature, it is the case that if n # m, then the following is true for Gegenbauer 
polynomials ... 


1 i 
/ Cl (@)C') (w)(1 — 22)"2 de = 0. 
1 


Thus, with a = 1 and m = 0, it must be the case that for all n > 0, with x = cos(®), we have 


T 
S Cu'(cos(0))sin2(0)0 =0, 


0 


and so, upon integrating the left-hand side of (*) above, from 0 to z, only the first term (n = 0) on 
the right-hand side of (*) matters. And this computes to mr/2, since Co!) =l. 


376 


Thus, it is the case that 


qT 


Set sincrsin(o))sin(0) do = m/2, 


to) 
for any choice of r > 0. 
22 2 2 ae 

a3 T 
{ 2° sin(x) sin(sin(x)) dx = 1.5708 { 79 sin(x) sin(2 sin(x)) dx = 3.14159 
Jo Jo 
Visual representation of the integral Visual representation of the integra 

o} y \ 25 \ 

\ 


And there are many other techniques that can be used as well, for evaluating definite integrals, 
some of which you will find in Chapter 12 of G.N. Watson’s magnificent work titled A Treatise on 
The Theory of Bessel Functions (second edition). 


Undecidability, The Riemann Hypothesis and The Continuum Hypothesis, Part I 


The Continuum Hypothesis (CH) is an undecidable statement within the framework of Zermelo- 
Fraenkel set theory, that incorporates the axiom of choice. Specifically, CH asserts that there are 
no sets whose cardinality lies between the integers and the real numbers (often referred to as 
intermediate cardinality). From the work of Cantor, and then later on Godel and Cohen, it was 
shown that ultimately CH cannot be decided. 


Let S be the set of all sets with intermediate cardinality, and assume for the moment that CH is 
indeed undecidable (we know it is, but to form an equivalency here, which is what we’re after, 
we’ll proceed by making this assumption). Then there is no mathematical method M’ that can 
verify any member T of S, where verify means ‘prove without ambiguity’. Thus, if CH is undecid- 
able, then T is unverifiable. 


Conversely, suppose T is any member of S and that T is unverifiable. Then M' will still conclude 
that S$ is empty [S = {®}], even though this is really not the case. In turn, this leaves CH in an 


377 


indeterminate state because M' is no longer trustable. M' would be telling us the truth if S was 
really empty, but ' would nor be telling us the truth if S was really not empty. Thus, if T is 
unverifiable, then CH is undecidable. And so we have the following equivalency ... 


CH is undecidable if and only if T is unverifiable, where T belongs toS = (*) 


Now replace CH with RH, where RH is the Riemann Hypothesis, and replace T by a root or 
pseudo-root [w] in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line. Then from (*) above, we can 
conclude that since the undecidability of CH is equivalent to the unverifiability of T, it must be the 
case that the undecidability of RH is equivalent to the unverifiability of @ in C*. 


RH is undecidable if and only if @ is unverifiable, where @ belongs to @* (+) 


Thus it follows that if we can show @ is unverifiable in @*, we will have demonstrated 
indeterminacy in RH. And this we did, starting with our methodology on pages 294-6, and going 
forward from there [see for example, pp 342-3 and page 359]. 


So by using CH as our guide, so to speak, we realize from our earlier work on RH, that the 
Riemann Hypothesis has no answer; it too is undecidable, if we accept the methods first outlined on 
pages 294-6. And I think the methods there are acceptable, despite the fact that undecidable 
arguments, in general, carry with them a fair degree of controversy, no matter the audience ... 


Undecidability, The Riemann Hypothesis and The Continuum Hypothesis, Part II 


In this brief note, we’re going to look a little more closely at the two statements that are connected 
to the Continuum Hypothesis (CH), and then tie this back to the Riemann Hypothesis (RH). Let S$ 
be the set of all sets with intermediate cardinality and let T be a member of S. Then these 
statements are, within the context of ZFC (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, plus the axiom of choice) 


(1) there is no way to prove that T exists and 
(2) there is no way to prove that T does not exist 


If now M’ is some mathematical method seeking to resolve CH, and based on ZFC, then by (1) M' 
will conclude that S is empty. However, by (2) M' can’t conclude (unequivocally) that S is empty, 
which means JM is not trustable. MM’ could very well be telling us the truth if S was really empty, 
but M’ would not be telling us the truth if § was really not empty. And this is the same conclusion 
we came to in the previous note above, because of the unverifiability of T. 


Thus CH is undecidable and for the same reasons, RH as well. If J is the set of all roots and 
pseudo-roots of (s) in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line — then any method M’ based on 
ZFC principles, that is seeking to resolve RH, one way or the other, will not be able to do so. And 
that is because any @ in J is unverifiable, if we accept our methodology, first outlined on pages 
294-6. 


378 


Undecidability, The Riemann Hypothesis and The Continuum Hypothesis, Part IIT 


Building on Parts I and II above, we see from Part I that the undecidability of CH (which we’ll call 
CHU), is equivalent to statement (1), whereas in Part II, CHU is equivalent to both statements (1) 
and (2). Again, these statements are, where T is a member of S, the set of all sets of intermediate 
cardinality ... 


(1) there is no way to prove that T exists and 
(2) there is no way to prove that T does not exist (unequivocally) 


Thus in Part I, we use (1), but infer (2) must hold, whereas in Part I, both (1) and (2) are actually 
used, together. 


(3) CHU is equivalent to (1), Part I 
(4) CHU is equivalent to (1) and (2), Part II 


Now since (3) and (4) hold, it must be the case by equivalency that statement (2) is actually 
inherited in (3) from (4), even if prima facie this isn’t obvious. Thus, a sufficient test for the 
undecidability of CH is really statement (1), where statement (2) is tacitly present. We infer 
statement (2) in (3), as we said, but now learn that it was really part of (3), all along ! 


qj) (2) 


A 
ae) 
Vv 


()&(2) <==> ~~ CHU 
[4] 


Now the proof of (2) above is due to Cohen, but based on what we’ve just said, it seems to have a 
broader meaning. In the case of CH and the set S, it appears in (3) as a silent partner, so to speak, 
because of the unverifiability of T. Indeed, statement (2) really isn’t specific to CH at all, in my 
opinion; rather it surfaces in ZFC (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, plus the axiom of choice) because 
the elements of S cannot be verified. Thus, statement (2) is really commentary on the limitations of 
ZFC, itself, within the context of unverifiable sets. 


Tf we are on the right track here, the same will be true for RH, the Riemann Hypothesis. If J is the 
set of all roots and pseudo-roots of C(s) in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line — then J is a 
set of unverifiable elements [pp 294-6]. Thus, by what we’ve just said, statement (1) is a sufficient 
test for the undecidability of RH because statement (2) is implicit — it is there by default, so to 
speak, within the ZFC framework. And so, we don’t actually have to go out and prove (2) directly, 


379 


for RH, as Cohen did for CH [here, of course, T becomes a root or pseudo-root of ((s) in @*, in 
these statements, and S becomes J]. 


In other words, because the elements of J are unverifiable, it is not necessary to prove ‘there is no 


mathematical method M' that can conclude [unequivocally] F is empty’. The limitations of ZFC 
will do this for us, within the context of unverifiable sets ... ... 


On The Evaluation Of a Certain Definite Integral, Part II 


If we differentiate n times under the integral sign [d/dr], in the expression below from Part I [pp 
375-6] ... 


qT 


Se%Msincrsin(o) sin(0)do = m/2, 
° 


then it is not too hard to show that for any real r and integer n ... 


Tt 


Ser*sincrsin(o) +n0)sin(0)d0 = ar/2,ifn=0 


Oo 
= 1/2, ifn=1 
=0 ,ifn>1 
“x “x 
2: Doe A A : : : 
f °°) sin(x) sin(x + 2 sin(x)) dx = 1.5708 { 7) sin(x) sin(2 sin(x) + 10x) dx = 0 
0 Jo 
Visual representation of the integral Visual representation of the integral 
\ 
f 
a 
Op |1 5/ 2.025 3.0 


380 


Undecidability and Ghosts In The Room 


Let GH be the ‘ghost hypothesis’ which asserts that there are no ghosts in the room R. And let D’ 
be an apparatus designed to detect ghosts, and built according to some set of principles. And define 
the following statements thusly, where G is a ghost that belongs to the set of all ghosts G in R ... 


(1) there is no way for D' to show that G exists and 
(2) there is no way for D' to show that G does not exist (unequivocally) 


Following our reasoning in Part I [pp 376-7] we see that if GH is undecidable [which we’ll label 
GHU] then (1) holds, and conversely. And, following our reasoning in Part II [page 377], we see 
that if GH is undecidable, then (1) & (2) hold, and conversely. Thus, 


(3) GHU is equivalent to (1) above 
(4) GHU is equivalent to (1) and (2) above 


To expand on things a bit, suppose GHU holds. Then 9' cannot detect any ghost in R, so (1) 
follows. Conversely, if (1) holds, D’ will conclude there are no ghosts in R, even if this isn’t so. 
Thus 9’ is not trustable, and so (3) follows. 


Now if again GHU holds, then clearly (1) and (2) above are true. Conversely, if (1) & (2) hold, 
then by (1) D’ will conclude there are no ghosts in R, but by (2) D’ cannot say this, unequivocally. 
Thus, 9’ is again not trustable and (4) follows. 


(1)&(2). <==> ~~ GHU 
[4] 


we can never know for sure that there are 
ghosts in the room 


So just as in Part (III) [pp 378-9], it must be the case that statement (2) is inherited in (3) from (4), 
because of equivalency, which means (1) is a sufficient test for the undecidability of GH. And 
indeed, it is not hard to show that (2) is also a sufficient test for the undecidability of GH, making 
one wonder if statements (1) and (2) really are two sides of the same coin ... 


381 


To wit, if GHU holds, then 9’ cannot say there are no ghosts in R, unequivocally, which is (2). 
Conversely, if (2) holds — meaning 9' cannot say, definitively, there are no ghosts in R — then D’ 
cannot confirm there really are no ghosts in R, if, in fact, this is the case. In turn, this makes GH 
undecidable, and so (2) is equivalent to GHU, and thus (1) is inherited in (3) from (4), by 
equivalency ... ... 


we can never know for sure that there are 
no ghosts in the room 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


Let us bring back our two statements from page 380, where 9’ is our detector and G is a ghost in 
the room R ... 


(1) there is no way for D' to show that there are ghosts in R 
(2) there is no way for D' to show that there are no ghosts in R (unequivocally) 


Now suppose it is the case that (2) holds but (1) doesn’t, so that D' has the ability to verify ghosts 
in R. Let there be n > 1 ghosts in R, and let them begin to leave, one by one. After the first ghost 
leaves, D' will know there are n — 1 ghosts remaining, because it now has the ability to verify them. 


Eventually, there will only be one ghost G left in R, and once it leaves, D' will say it couldn’t verify 
that G left, because if it could, D' would be able to say, unequivocally, that there were no ghosts in 
R. And this is a violation of (2). So on the one hand 9' can verify that the first n — 1 ghosts have 
left the room, but on the other, it can’t verify that the last ghost has left the room (in fact D’ will 
continue to report n = 1 even though the true value of n is now 0). 


Well, you can’t have it both ways. Either 9’ can verify these ghosts have left, or it can’t. If it can, 
we run into a contradiction. Therefore, if (2) holds, (1) must hold as well. 


On the other hand, suppose (1) holds but (2) doesn’t, so that D’ can say, unequivocally, there are no 
ghosts in R. Now let ghosts start to enter the room, one by one. Initially, there are no ghosts in R, 
and since (2) no longer holds, D' can say, unequivocally, that n = 0. But as another ghost G enters 


382 


R, D' will not be able to verify G by (1), and so concludes that n is still 0. And indeed, it won’t 
matter how many ghosts there are in the room — 9’ will continue to report that n = 0. Thus, D’ 
can’t say, unequivocally, that n = 0, only when there really are no ghosts in the room. Our 
assumption that (2) doesn’t hold produces a contradiction, so that if (1) holds, (2) must hold also. 


Putting the two results together suggests that (1) and (2) are actually equivalent to one another. If 
we have (1) then we must have (2), and vice-versa. Thus, (1) and (2) appear to be two sides of the 
same coin, as we said earlier. 


In turn, this means that either (1) or (2) is a sufficient test for the undecidability of GH, our ‘ghost 
hypothesis’ (page 380). If we opt for (1), we don’t need to prove (2), because it will be true by 
default, and if we opt for (2), we don’t need to prove (1), for the same reason. 

And indeed, this will be true for the Riemann Hypothesis (RH) as well. If J is the set of all roots 
and pseudo-roots of C(s) in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line — then these statements are, 


where M' is some mathematical method ... 


(1) there is no way for M' to show that J is not empty 
(2) there is no way for M' to show that J is empty (unequivocally) 


And from what we’ve just said concerning GH, we can demonstrate undecidability in RH by 
choosing either (1) or (2). In the essay, we chose (1), as per the methods first outlined on pages 
294-6... 

Undecidability and The Riemann Hypothesis — A Brief Summary 


Initially, we showed by the use of Fourier transforms, that we could generate a signal S from either 
the a-line or the B-line in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line [pp 294-6]. 


a-path 


B-path 


Here, it is the case that @ is a root or pseudo-root of C(s), lying on both the a-line and the B-line, so 
that C(p) = C(q) ‘”, where p = a + ie, and q = B +e, for some ¢ > 0 and B=1-—a. Thus, relative to 


383 


S, it is not possible to distinguish between the a-line and the B-line ©, which means that if (1) 
holds, then relative to S, it is not possible to distinguish between p and q [pp 342-3 and page 359]. 


To wit, if an observer (@, in the signal’s frame of reference, is situated at p or g, then @ is ‘blind to 
the line’ and so, won’t know if it’s really at p or at g. If © now knows that (1) holds, then even with 
this knowledge, © cannot distinguish between p and g, which means that to @, there is absolutely no 
difference between being situated at p versus at g. The two perspectives are, in fact, identical. 


On the other hand, if © knows Cp) # €(q) , then © will know that being situated at p is nor the 
same as being situated at g. © is still ‘blind to the line’ but now knows there is a difference 
between & and é, at p versus at g, because of (2). However, this is a violation of (*) above, since 
relative to S, it should never be possible to detect such a difference between & and &, at these two 
points. 


Thus, our methodology M, first outlined on pages 294-6, validates (*) at the point level, whenever 
it is the case that C(p) = C(qg), but nowhere else. In turn, this means that if M’ is any other 
mathematical method seeking to resolve the Riemann Hypothesis, it will never be able to verify 
these roots or pseudo-roots in @*, where @* is the critical strip minus the critical line, and verify 
means ‘prove without ambiguity’. For to do so would mean contradicting M, in so much as M' 
would now be able to distinguish between p and gq. 


And finally, based on our previous research note, titled Undecidability and Ghosts In The Room [pp 


380-2], we only need to prove the unverifiability of J — the set of all roots and pseudo-roots of C(s) 
in @* — in order to show that the Riemann Hypothesis is undecidable. 


Some Notes On G"Y = og”*(0) When A(s) ~ o/s 
Recall that in a mathematical coordinate system [labelling as (*)], the coupled field equations are ... 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"’(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(p))Jo(rcos(B))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin(p))g"" (cos(p))] 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) are at the origin O, and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 


As well, G'Y = CY’ — kT’, where CY, TY are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively; and CY = R"’ - Rg", where R"" is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


Now if, for the time being, we omit all of the dark energy components, except for the one at the 
origin [O], where there is a dark energy singularity, then we have ... 


GY = og") 


384 


And since (+) is going to be symmetric in all directions, we’ll suppose that g!! = g'T and g*4 = —g"* 
(the radial and time components, respectively), are a function of r only. Furthermore, for a perfect 
star, we’ll presume that only pressure and density are present in T“’’, along the diagonal, so that in 
contravariant form, T** = —pg**, where p is density. 


The expression for C*4 is —(1/1?)- g*4-(rU. — g!))’, where ’ means d/dr, so that in this case, (+) 
becomes ... 


—(h?)- #4 — gl)" = —kpg** + og4(0), 
or, upon rearranging terms, 
(1 —g!'))" = kpr? — or? - g4(0)/ ea) 8) 


Now since we believe g* is well-behaved at O, it must be the case that the right-hand side of (§) 
tends to 0 as r ---» 0. Thus, we may conclude that 


lim (r-[g'') +g!) = 1, 
r---0 


so at the center of the star [O], where the dark energy singularity resides, g'"! is actually finite and 
tends to 1, if [g'']’ is finite at O. The singularity is probably a gateway into some reality beyond 
our own. 


In general, though, it won’t be this easy to formulate C" and T"’, when all the dark energy 
components in (*) are included. Since the right-hand side of (*) is an (r, 8, @) layout, so must be 
the left-hand side, which means that the gravitational tensor itself, on the left-hand side, is also a 
function of (r, 8, @). The components must match for a given choice of u and y, left side to right 
side, before a solution is found, and admittedly, it’s a tall order, no matter how you look at it. 


But after looking at the methodology that was developed for the Schwarzschild metric, in the case 
of a perfect star, it doesn’t seem to me that we can use that approach. For there, a solution is 
developed outside the star, and used to interpolate inside the star. Here, in our case, when looking 
at (*), the right-hand side contains, among other things, the term og'"*(0). This alone implies a new 
approach is probably in order ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


In the case where we are dealing strictly with the quantumlike dark energy components, (*) 
becomes 


G"Y = o[2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"""(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B))g"”*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin(>))g""(cos())]_ (1) 


385 


And here, we believe a harmonic solution #’ = g"’’ exists, that is valid for all r > 0. In the other 
case, discussed earlier, where we only have a dark energy singularity at the origin [O], 


GY = og") 2) 
and here we believe another solution VW" = g"’ exists, that is also valid for all r > 0. Thus, 
providing it’s physically acceptable, solving (*) on page 383 might best be done by breaking it up 


into two pieces; by solving (1) and (2) separately, and then adding the two solutions together, so 


that the total solution J" is ... 


GY = Ng yy 
Some Notes On G"Y ~ og"Y(0) When A(s) ~ o/s, Part II 


Using the same setup as in Part I [pp 383-5], we’re now going to calculate an expression for g*4(0). 
Here, we’ll start with C!!, which computes to ... 


(2M) {[gcal’ / 2gu} -[2"P — (hn?) - gh 8") 


The T'! component is pg'', where p is pressure in the star, so for the coupled scenario; that is to 
say ... 


GY = ok. 
it is the case that ... 


(2t) > {L gual’ / 2gu} - [e™"P — (lt) g-(1— g") = kpg™ + og"(0). (8) 


Multiplying each side of this equation by r, and using the fact that g"" tends to | as r ---» 0, (§) 
reduces to (as r---» 0) ... 


[get]’/ ge = Ug"). 


Remembering from Part I that g** = —g", and moving the left side of the equation, just above, into 
its contravariant form, so that g“ = 1/gii, we have (as r ---» 0) ... 


ig) / ge = (gh — Dr. 


Expanding g'"' on the right-hand side as a Taylor series, in the equation just above, gives us, to first 
order ... 


gla) = gh) + r-[g (OY 
And finally, knowing that g'(0) = I, we see that for the coupled case, in the limit, as r ---» 0... 


gO) = [e4O!'/[g''(OY 


386 


Some Notes On GY ~ og"*(0) When A(s) = o/s, Part III 
In doing the calculations above, in Parts I and II, I took my information from Stefan Waner’s book, 
titled Introduction to Differential Geometry and General Relativity [pp 116-123, Sixth Printing, 
May 2014]. 


Here, in looking for a solution to G"Y ~ 0, Waner begins with the basic assumption that the 
gravitational tensor, in covariant form [gu,v] is 


Waner also mentions that the inner block, containing the terms r? and r’sin?(8), must be this way in 
order to preserve spherical symmetry [p 117]. So if we accept this layout for gu,v, then the 
curvature tensors used in Parts I and II; namely C!! and C** in contravariant form, are correct. 
Thus, our conclusions are also correct; namely, that for the coupled equation in contravariant form, 
GY = og'(),  (H) 
we have, from Parts I and II above [pp 383-5] ... 
g''(0) = 2100) =1 5 40) = [gO / [gO 


And, of course, the presumption here is that g*4(0) is also well-behaved at the origin O of the star, 
as is its covariant counterpart, g44(0), relative to (+). 


Thus, in covariant form, a non-singular solution [gu,y] to (+) at O might be possible, since we only 
need to find gw and gu in the picture above. And these are the covariant equivalents of g'! = g™ and 
g =—") obtained from (+). 
Some Notes On G"'Y = ogY(0) When X(s) = o/s, Part IV 
Let us bring back our expression from Part II [p 385] and rewrite it, so that for the coupled case ... 
(g'(Ol = [e**O)I' / [4] . 
Thus, as r ---» 0, we have ... 
g'@Y = [gl /[g**@] = [log eV’ 


which means that up to some constant, say C, it is the case that for small r ... 


387 


gir) = (log g*4(@)} + C 
And so, for small r ---» 0, with @ = exp(—C) ... 
2 & Cexplg''@) 


We can actually confirm this formula (*), in a weak sense, by noting that for the Schwarzschild 
metric, where m is the mass of the star [Waner, page 123, Sixth Printing] ... 


grr = t(r—2m), so that g = g!! =(r—2m)r. 


Similarly, 


git = (r—2m)/r, so that g“ = r/(r — 2m) =-g*4 . 


Thus, as r ---> 0, the first Schwarzschild component gil = (r — 2m)/r, tends to —c, so that the right- 
hand side of (*) is 0. On the other hand, the fourth Schwarzschild component g** = —r/(r — 2m), 
also tends to 0, so that both sides of (*) agree. But it is a weak confirmation, because in the case of 
Schwarzschild, the components are only valid outside of the star. 


Some Notes On G"'Y = og"(0) When A(s) ~ o/s, Part V 


In Bernard Schutz’ book titled A First Course in General Relativity [Second Edition], the covariant 
form for C2,2 is listed on page 260 as follows ... 


Cop = reo" + (0 4 O'/r—O'A! — A’/r], 


where e is defined to be g™ and e7” is g. And here T22 = pr’, and g2=r° ... so. that the 
covariant form for our coupled equation is now [with g22(0) = 0] ... 


C22 = kpr? + og22(0) (§) 


Cancelling the term r’, which is common to both sides of (§), and then multiplying each side by r, 
leaves us with ... 


re? [" + (@'? + @'/r — OAT — A'/r] = kpr 


Now as r ---> 0, all terms in the bracketed expression just above, will vanish on the left-hand side, 
save for the third and fifth; and the right-hand side will also vanish, so that for small r ---» 0, 


Oo =A’ 


Thus, ® and A behave in exactly the same way, up to some constant, as r ---» 0, and we now have, 
from the expression just above ... 


[get]’/ gee ~ [gee]’ / ger 


388 


And since gr.r(r) ---> 1 as r ---> 0, the expression above can be written as ... 
[geel’ © [gud’/ gu © Plog gun) J’ 
Thus, just as in Part IV, for some positive constant 2, with small r ---» 0 and gii = grr... we have 
gut) ~ D exp(git)).  (~) 
Now let’s compare this to (*) in Part IV, where we found that 
gO = @ expe"). ©) 
The reader may see an apparent contradiction here, since both @ and Dare positive constants. For 
recall that g*4 = —g"', so that a sign change emerges between the two expressions, just above. But 
is ita conflict ? 
Not really, for in Part IV, we saw that 
[g"@r = [s“@l'/[g**@] = [log ga) 1" 
and this can also be written as ... 
(g'@l = [g@r'/ [g*4@] = [og -g*“@) 1’ 
Similarly, we may write ... 
(gee)? © [gul’/ gee * Plog gie(r) J! = [log —guc(r) J’ 


so that ultimately, the sign of gt is arbitrary, from this analysis, as r ---» 0. It could be positive or 
negative, but either way, we still maintain consistency with our previous results. 


Said another way, if g*+ is positive in (*) above, then we would use —gi, in our analysis that led to 
(~). And if git is positive in (~) above, then we would use —g** in our analysis that led to (*). 


Thus, we have demonstrated that no inconsistencies arise when analyzing C22 ... and comparing 
our results here with what we found in Parts I through IV. 


feof cok 


Now since ®’ ~ A’ as r ---» 0 [page 387], it suggests to us that for small r, ® ~ A + «, where k is 
some constant. And since we know g;,(0) = 1, A tends to 0 as r ---» 0, implying that gi: is positive 
as r ---> 0 [recall that ® = 2-log(gi:)]. 


afeakake aco 


389 


Dr. Einstein 


‘I have a general interest in special relativity and a special interest in general relativity’, to which 
Dr. Einstein replied, ‘it is good that you are both a generalist and a specialist, for you need both at 
any point in space-time, to understand the theories’ ... 


Relativity: 


The Special and General Theory 


Albert Einstein March 1879 — April 1955 
Some Notes On G"Y = og"**(0) When A(s) = o/s, Part VI 


In our previous research above [pp 383-8], we analyzed a few curvature tensors and developed 
various results as r ---» 0. In particular, we saw that 


[g'(O)’ = [g**C)]"/ [e**O)] . 


where, for example, [g'-!(0)]’ means ‘take the derivative of g!'(r), and evaluate at the origin O”. 
But we could ask the question, ‘what happens if [g''(0)]’ is actually zero ?’ 


In such a case, [g*“(0)]’ is also zero, so that in the expression above, [g**(0)] is actually undefined. 
And so, the expressions (~) and (*) on page 388 can still be used, even if [g'!(0)]’ = 0. 


Now let’s bring back our formula (§) from page 384; namely, 


390 


et -a(—g!))’ = kprget — org (0), (8) 


and let us assume that near O (r ---» 0), we can use the following Taylor series expansion, where 
ne ed 
again, means take the derivative of g!"'(r) and evaluate at O ... 


gh) = gO) +r [sO 
Then since g!!(0) = 1, (§) becomes 
~2g'4- [g(r = kprg*t — org), 
or, upon rearranging terms, 
~2¢"*-[g'\(O)] = kpre“ — org*40) (1) 
Now as r ---> 0, the right-hand side of (1) will be 0, and so on the /eft side, either 20) = 0, or 
[g'(0)]’ =0. Since we don’t believe g**(0) is equal to 0, it must be the case that [g'"(0)]’ = 0, and 


hence [gO] is also zero, based on our previous comments. 


Thus, let us try the following Taylor series expansion near O, where ”” means ‘take the second 
derivative of g'-'(r) and evaluate at O” ... 


gh) = gO) + 7/2-[ghO!" (2) 
If we now insert (2) into (§), we obtain ... 
~(3/2)- g'4-[g@)]" 7 = kpr’g'4 — org4@), 
and, after cancelling the r’ term on both sides, we have ... 
~(3/2)- g**-[g'!@)]"" = kpg*4 — og'(0). 


Now letting r ---» 0, we can replace g** = g*4(r) with g*4(0), so that the equation just above 
becomes ... 


[gO] = (2/3) -(6 ~ kp). 
And so, our Taylor series expansion near O, for small r ---» 0 is ... 
gn) = 1 + (1/3)-(6 — kp)? 
And thus, from (*) on page 388, assuming gt is positive as r ---» 0, we have (for small r ---» 0) ... 
gO) = @ expe"), 


since g*4 = -g"', And here, @ is some positive constant [see Part V, pages 387-8]. 


391 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


Suppose (go) =e > 0, for some arbitrary choice of ¢, however small. Then the analysis that led 
to (*) and (~) on page 388, and reproduced here, applies ... 


galt) ~ D-exp(giat)). (~) 


a 


gta) = @exp(g'@). 


Now let ¢ ---» 0. Then in the limit, (*) and (~) still hold, and we define gi.(r) and g*4(r) as above, 
for small r ---» 0, even when [g'"(0)]' = [g*4(0)]’ = 0. 


afeoioke seo 


The cosmological constant A is roughly 10~?, and Einstein’s gravitational constant k is about 103, 
in standard units. Our expression for g(r) for small r ---» 0 is ... 


g(r) = 1 + (1/3)-(6 — kp): (#) 
and I don’t think o is going to be very much different than A. So in the expression above [f], I 


wonder now if small r ---» 0 really is a quantumlike effect, at very small scales, that is described by 
parabolic behavior, as we move closer and closer to O, where the dark energy singularity resides. 


oo 2 2a 
If we attempt a similar analysis for gs, by looking at C44, then (§) on page 390 becomes ... 
gaa (t(1— gl)’ = kpr’gas — orgaa(O). (8) 
And this is because the tensors are ‘lowered’ by operating on them with ga, - gaa. 


However, nothing new can be gained from this equation above ... because the piece that doesn’t 
change is 


@(d-g"'))’. 
Thus, if we want an estimate for gi1, for small r ---» 0, it is best done by taking the inverse of g!!(r) 
in (+) above, since this is normally what we would do for a diagonal [g"’], anyway. In so doing, we 
have, for small r ---» 0 and Q(r) = (1/3): (6 — kp)-r?... 
Sut) = 1/1 + QM) 5 Bur) & D exp(gis), 


where Dis some positive constant. And so, our metric ds? for small r ---» 0 looks like ... 


ds? = gia(r)dr? + r°d0? + rsin2(O)dg? — gis(r)dt? 


392 


1/(1 + 7°) akin to gia(r) [C] (l/e)exp(1/(1 + 7°)) akin to git(r) [D] 


In pictures B and D we have chosen our constant to be (1 /e), so that at r = 0, g(r) - gue(r) = 1, 
which we expect, exactly. Now compare [D] to the picture below, where we simply invert B. 


393 


The inversion of B amounts to plotting e- exp(-(1_ + 1°), and while we could take this expression 
for git(r), I believe it is more correct to use the expression in [D], deduced from Parts I to V [pp 
383-8] in our research. 
Some Notes On G"Y ~ og”*(0) When A(s) © o/s, Part VII 
Let us bring back our expression from page 385, namely ... 
(2/t) + ([gul’ / 2g} fg" P — (A?) - e+ (—g") = kpg' + og), (§) 
and multiply each side by r’, so that 
2r- {[gcl’ / 2g} -[e"P — gC —g") = kpreg + org) (88) 
Since we already know that [g'!(0)]’ = [g*#(0)]’ = 0 (as are the covariant equivalents), we will now 


insert the following Taylor series expression into (§§), and then let r ---» 0, recalling as well that 
g'"(0) = g''(0) = 1. It is the (1 — g™) term above where the insertion takes place ... 


ao) = gO) + P/2-[gMO]” 

And so as r ---> 0, (§§) reduces to ... 

?/2-[g'(O)]” = kp? + or 
Cancelling the term r? on both sides now gives us ... 

[g@)]" = 2(6 + kp), 
and hence 
gil) = 1+ (6 + kp)-r 
Now this must agree with our expression (+) on page 391, and reproduced here, 
ell(r) = 1 + (1/3)-(6 — kp): (¥) 

so that 

3(0 + kp) = (@— kp). (Ft) 
Now something rather fascinating emerges from this result. First, if o = 0, then for a perfect star in 
the static case (no flow of star material), with no dark energy singularity at its origin O, it is the 
case that 


3p+p=0, 


394 


where p and p are pressure and density in the perfect star (essentially a perfect fluid). On the other 
hand, if o is not zero, then from (+), 


o = —(k/2)-3p +p) (**) 


In this case, there is a dark energy singularity S at the center [O] of the star, and the underlying dark 
energy density function associated with S is (s) ~ o/s. The dark energy, itself, which permeates 
space-time is also o, since it is the Laplace inverse of A(s), and here we traverse the dark energy 
contour integral in counterclockwise fashion. 


But seen as the constant associated with A(s), it appears as though o is intimately connected to the 
Einstein constant k, as well as pressure and density in the star. This is true when the singularity S is 
at O, and consequently, there seems to be no connection to the cosmological constant A in this 
case; at least based on current estimates of what A might be. Yet these estimates are controversial, 
to say the least ... 


A SIMPLE CASE STUDY 


In our equation of state, where o = 0, and there is no dark energy singularity at the center [O] of 
the perfect star, viz., 


3p+p=0, 


let us suppose density [p] in the star is an inward force with positive sign. Then this must be 
exactly balanced by pressure [p], an outward force with negative sign, according to the formula 
above, for the static case (no flow of star material). 


Now if o is not zero, so that dark energy is pouring into the star at O via the singularity there, then 
there will be a slight increase in outward pressure, making p even more negative. At the same time, 
it is possible that the density p might decrease slightly, because we would expect the star to expand 
by an almost imperceptible amount, symmetrically, in all directions. 


The net effect is that (*) would become negative, making o positive, from (**) above. Here o is to 
be interpreted as the constant associated with the underlying dark energy density function, 


Ms) = o/s. (-) 


Now as we said before, the dark energy, itself, which permeates space-time is also o, in this case, 
because it is the Laplace inverse of A(s). And if we calculate this inverse from the dark energy 
contour integral, using a standard counterclockwise orientation, then dark energy [o] will also be 
positive, which guarantees us consistency. 


On the other hand, if we were to reverse our sign conventions, then from (**) o would become 
negative in (~); and we would compute a negative value for dark energy, itself, via the Laplace 
inverse of A(s), again using a counterclockwise orientation, also guaranteeing us consistency. 


395 


Some Notes On GY" ~ og"(0) When A(s) = o/s, Part VIII 
In this note, we want to calculate the volume of a very small sphere [S] at the origin O of the star, 
where our dark energy singularity S resides. Here, the radius of S is much less than 1, so that our 
metric is ... 
ds? = gii(r)dr? + r°d0? + rsin2(O)dg? — gis(r)dt? 
Recall that Q(r) = (1/3): (6 — kp)- 1, and that 
git) © 1/7 + QM) 5 ur) & D exp(gir), 


where Dis some positive constant. And, since dark energy [o] is pouring into the star, we expect S 
to expand ever so slightly. Let’s see what happens ... 


Now with spherical symmetry, our Jacobian [J] for a given radius r will be r’sin(), so that the 
integration becomes, in a mathematical coordinate system ... 


rann 
JS JS J Psin(>),/Gia ddodr . 
ooo 


And this is because when we integrate in the direction of r, we must do so according to our metric 
above. The integration thus becomes ... 


ramn 
SIS rsin(p)/1/(1 + Q(r)) dodédr . 
000 


Now because we expect the sphere to expand, ever so slightly, it stands to reason that Q(r) must be 
slightly negative, and so (6 — kp) < 0. And since from (++) on page 393, and reproduced here ... 


3(0 + kp) = (6 — kp), (fF) 
it must also be true that o + kp <0. Thus, for positive o, it must be the case that 
0 < o < min(kp,—kp). 


Recall, too, that for an outward pressure p, we have chosen it to be of negative sign, and for an 
inward density p, it is of positive sign. 


Now since Q(r) = (1/3) - (6 — kp) - 1’ is slightly negative, let us define it to be —a7r’, so that our 
integral above becomes ... 


396 


ran 
SIS r’sin(p),/1 / (1 - a2r?) dodOdr . 
000 


If we use a Taylor series expansion here, realizing now that r is very small, the expression just 
above becomes, approximately ... 


ramn 


SSIS Psin(>)(1 + %- o2r)dedOdr . 


000 
The integration is now straightforward, and for a? = —(1/3)-(o — kp) > 0, computes to ... 


4n(Ya-r + Yo-or] 


Some Notes On G"Y = og"Y(0) When A(s) = o/s, Part IX 
In Part VII [pp 393-4] we developed an equation for o; namely, 
o = ~(k/2)-Gp +p) (4) 
based on an analysis of (§§) below. In that analysis, we let r ---» 0, and in the process, omitted the 
first term in (§§) on the left side, to arrive at the result that we did. And that is because we knew 
[gt:(0)] =0. Here we'd like to refine the calculation, just a bit now. 
2r- {[gul’ / 2g} -[e"P — gg") = kpr'g™ + org) (§§) 
From page 391 we know that with Q(r) = (1/3) - (6 — kp)- 1’, it is the case that 
git) = 1/1. + Q@) 5 galt) = BD exp(gir(r)). 
where 2 is some positive constant. Thus, near the origin O of the star we may write ... 
gud’ / gu = Dog gul’ = [gas] © -Q(y" = ~(2/3)-(6 = kp) -r 

If we now insert this into (§§), along with our Taylor series expansion below, and let r ---» 0, 

ao) = gO) + P/2-[g"O]" 
we obtain, with g!(0) = 1... 


-(2/3) (6 — kp): + °/2-[g'(0)]” = kp? + or. 


397 


And cancelling the r? term on both sides leaves us with ... 
—(2/3)-(6 — kp) + (1/2)-[g'(O)]” = kp + 6 
Our original coefficient in the first Taylor series expansion, from page 390, was 
[g'"(O)]"” = (2/3) -(6 — kp), 
so if we insert this into the equation, just above, we have 
—(2/3)-(6 — kp) + (1/3)-(6 — kp) = kp +o. 
And so our new equation of state is ... 
—(1/3)-(6 — kp) = kp + 6, 
or equivalently, 
o = —(k/4)-(3p — p). 


And if we adhere to our previous sign conventions, where density [p] is a positive inward force, 
whilst pressure [p] is a negative outward force, then the expression above becomes ... 


o = —(k/4)-(3p + p). 
Comparing to our earlier result in Part VII, and reproduced here, with sign conventions in place, 
o = —(k/2)- Gp + p), 
and we see that the two expressions only differ by a factor of 2 in the denominator ... 
Some Notes On G"Y = og"*(0) When X(s) ~ o/s, Part X 
Let us bring back our expression from page 385; namely ... 
(ir) - (Lg / 2gus} - [e"P — (a?) "+ (1g) = kpg + og). (8) 
And let us multiply each side by [gr.]}°, so that we are ‘lowering indices’. This give us ... 
(ir) (Lgl / 2g} ger — (AP) > gre (Ber 1) = kpl gre? + olger? gO). 


Now since we already know that [gre(O)] = [gur(O)] = 0, let us insert the following Taylor series 
expansion into the equation, just above, remembering that g(0) = 1... 


” 


Sre(t)  gre(O) + 17/2 - [gr0(0)] 


398 


This gives us 
(lr) {Igeal’ /2gc} - ger — (UH?) See (7/2 [ge(O)1) = Kpl ger? + olgecl s%(O) - 
Now multiply each side by 1’, yielding ... 
Pr {Igul" / gu} See — ger (P/2- [geKO)]") = Kplgesl? + olgeslre(O). ($8) 
As r ---> 0, gr ---» 1, and if we omit the first term on the /eft side, the expression above reduces to 
(7/2): [ges(O)]” = kpr? + or? 
Cancelling the r? term, which is common to both sides, now gives us ... 
[g:x(0)]"" = -2(6 + kp) 
Thus, for small r ---» 0, our Taylor series expansion becomes ... 
g(t) © 1 — (o + kp)-r? 
And from (++) on page 393, and reproduced here, our equation of state is .. 
3(0 + kp) = (6 — kp), (fF) 

and thus, we see that 

iat) = gee(t) ~ 1 — (1/3)-(6 — kp)- PP (*) 
Now originally, with Q(r) = (1/3) - (o — kp)- 1°, we found that [p 391] 

gi@ © 1 + (1/3)-(6 — kp) P= 1 + QM), 
and actually used its inverse for g:1(r); that is to say, we let 

git) = 1/1 + QQ). 
But to a first order approximation, because Q(r) is very small, this can be written as .... 
gut) = 1/0. + Q@) = 1- Q®), 

which agrees exactly with our calculation for g:,(r) in (*) above ! 


afeook aco 


If we repeat the exercise, but include the first term on the left side in (§), then (§§) above becomes, 
with r--->0... 


399 


=(2/3) (6 — kp)? = (1?/2)-[g.(0)] = kpr? + of? 
Cancelling the r? term on both sides gives us 
~(2/3) (6 = kp) ~ (1/2) [ge(0)]”” = kp + 6 
Bringing back our equation of state for this case [p 397], which is ... 
~(1/3)-(6 — kp) = kp +6, 
the equation now becomes 
—(2/3)-(6 — kp) — (1/2) [g.(0)]"" = -(1/3)- (6 — kp). 


And so, 


[gis(O)]"” = ~(2/3)-(6 — kp), 
whence our Taylor series expansion is now ... 


1 — (1/3)-(6 — kp)-. 


u 


Silt) = gre(t) 


And this agrees exactly with (*) on the last page; that is to say, our Taylor series expansion where 
we omitted the first term on the left side in (§§). Thus, whether we do or do not include the first 
term on the /eft side in the curvature tensor, makes no difference at all when calculating gr.(r) very 
close to the origin [O] of the star. Said another way, gr.(r) remains invariant under such an 
operation. 


But what does change is the equation of state, as it should, giving us confidence that we have done 
things correctly in our analysis of things. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


Initially, our form for the coupled equations, with a dark energy singularity at the origin of the star, 
was taken to be 


GY = og"), *) 


in contravariant mode. But what if we arbitrarily decide we want to work in covariant form ? It’s 
easy enough to lower indices in G"’” using a diagonal [gu,v], since everything here is going to be a 
function of r and @. But if we lower the left side in (**) via [gu,v], what should we do with the right 
side ? It isn’t a function of r or 6 at all. 


Rather, it’s a constant, and from a philosophical standpoint, I could just as easily have started with 
the covariant form, originally, 


400 


Guy ~ oguv(0) , 
and asked the same question in reverse, if I wanted to move to contravariant form. To me, the only 
consistent way of thinking about this is to say, broadly, that ‘if I raise or lower indices on the left 


side, I must do the same on the right side, within the intended context’. 


Since the right side is a constant, in either form, I would then lower g!(0), for example, in a 
diagonal [g"’], by taking its inverse. Or, if you like, 


Sia Su ght, 
evaluated at 0. 
Said another way, if I start with 


Guy ~ ogu,v(0) , 


and solve for [gu,v], will I get a result that is consistent with the solution [g"’’] I would have got, 
had I started with 


Gt’ = og"%(0). 

Based on the conclusions in this research note, I’m optimistic that this is indeed the case ... 

Some Notes On GY" ~ og"(0) When A(s) = o/s, Part XI 
Let us bring back our first equation of state, from page 393; namely, 

36 + kp) = (6 — kp), (fF) 
where, in an analysis of (§) below, the first term on the left side was omitted ... 
(2M) - {[guil’ / 2gu} Lg" — (tr) g-(1—g™) = kpg™ + og"). 8) 
Since we already know o — kp < 0 [p 395], and since from (++) 
o = ~(k/2)-(@p + p), 

it must be the case that 

o — kp = —(k/2)-@p + p) — kp = —(3k/2)-(p + p) <0. 
Thus, p > —p, where here, density [p] in the star is an inward force with positive sign, and pressure 


[p], is an outward force with negative sign. That is to say, p is a negative value and p is a positive 
value. 


401 


And since here, dark energy is pouring into the star at its center, we believe the star will expand, 
ever so slightly, so that 3p + p < 0, and hence the following inequality arises ... 


pl3<-p<p. (-) 


If we include the first term on the left side of (§) in our analysis, then the equation of state, without 
respect to sign conventions, is 


-3(0 + kp) = (6 ~ kp), 
so that 
o = —(k/4)-Gp-p). 
Since o — kp < 0 still holds, it must be the case that 
o — kp = —(k/4)- 3p — p) — kp = —(3k/4)-(p + p) <0, 


so that again, p > —p. If we now adopt our sign conventions as above, then (~) will also hold in 
this case, since equilibrium is reached in (+) when 3p is exactly balanced by p, and o = 0. 


oo 2 2 a 
In the first case, where the first term in (§) is excluded in our analysis, we showed on page 395 that 
0 < o < min(kp,—kp), 
and thus, from (~) above, 
0 <o < -kp < kp. 


In the second case, where the first term in (§) is included in our analysis, our equation of state, 
without respect to sign conventions, is again ... 


—3(o + kp) = (o — kp). 
Since o — kp < 0 still applies, it must be the case from the equation above, that o > —kp. And if 
we now invoke our sign conventions, as above, then o > —kp, where now p is a negative value and 
p is positive. Thus, the following inequality arises, in this case, according to our interpretation of 


things ... 


0 < -kp < o < kp. 


402 


Some Notes On G"Y = og"*(0) When A(s) ~ o/s, Part XII 


In the diagram below, let S* be our perfect star and define G to be the (near) zero-gravity region, 
out to some very small radius r. Let this be called the Fo frame, since here there is no dark energy. 


S* a perfect star 


zero gravity region in 
S* for very small r 


Because G is essentially zero-gravity, the standard metric applies, which becomes, in physical 
coordinates ... 


ds? = dr? + rd@ + r’sin?(0)dd? — dt? 


Now imagine a ray of light & emanating from O in S*, and travelling at a speed c in this medium. 
Then because gy. and gi are both | in G, from ds? above, it must be the case that & will arrive at P 
in time t = r/c, at least in the stationary frame. The ‘ruler tick’ and the ‘clock tick’ are fixed now, 
because gy. and gr. are both | in Fo. 


In the diagram below, suppose there is a dark energy singularity at the center of S*, with dark 
energy pouring into the star, according to the density function A(s) ~ o/s. Let this be the Fo frame. 


S*-a perfect star 


zero gravity region in 
S* for very small r 


ark energy G emanating 
from 0 


403 


Again, imagine a ray of light & emanating from O in S*, and travelling at a speed c in this medium, 
through G. And let us now take the bold step of assuming that c is not affected by the dark energy 
[o], itself. The light’s energy [E = hv, where h is Planck’s constant] might be affected by o, but not 
Cc. 


Then it stands to reason that since G is essentially zero-gravity, R will arrive at P in time t=r/c, 
since ds” now changes because of o. Indeed, from previous notes we know that in this case 


ds? = gii(r)dr? + dO? + rsin2(O)d? — gis(r)dt? ; 
and with Q(r) = (1/3) -(o — kp)-1°, where < o < kp, that 
gut) © 1- Q) 5 gia) = D- exp(gir)), 
where Dis some positive constant. 
However, because r’/r = t’/t, the ‘ruler tick’ in the o-frame [Fo], relative to its counterpart in Fo, 
is equal to the ‘clock tick’ in Fo, relative to its counterpart in Fo. And since grr and gr: are both | in 
Fo, it seems to suggest that gia(r) and gi,(r), in ds” above, must therefore, agree in Fo. And this is 
due to the constancy of c in both frames. 
Now if we’re on the right track here, then to a first order approximation, for very small r ... 
Bult) © D- exp(girlt)) = De exp-Qw)) = De (U — QW) = De- gus), 
so that necessarily 9-e = 1, and thus J = 1/e. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


If, in the first case [Fo], we believe the correct metric for ds? can be obtained, simply by setting o = 
0, then here 


ds? = gii(r)dr? + dO? + rsin?(O)dd? — gus(r)dt? ; 
and now, with Q(r) = (1/3) -(-kp) - 1°, where 0 < kp, that 
gu) = 1- QM) 5 gurl) & D exp(gis)), 
where Dis some positive constant. 
If we let p --- 0, so that pressure p in the perfect star S° vanishes as well [from the equation of 
state, pp 400-1], then S* ceases to exist, so that we are now in a truly gravity-free region of space, 


and thus the metric above becomes [since Q(r) is now zero] ... 


ds? = dr? + r°d0? + r’sin?(0)do? — D-e- dt® 


404 
If we want this to agree with the standard Schwarzschild metric, free of any matter, then necessarily 
D-e=l. 


alesse 


On pages 402-3, the ‘ruler tick’ and ‘clock tick’ in Fo can always be normalized to 1, so that in turn, 
the speed of light c becomes 1. This may make it easier to follow the line of reasoning there. For 
example, if in Fo the beam of light & travels from O to P [a distance of r units], we can simply refer 
to this as one ‘ruler tick’ in the ‘spacelike’ sense. And we can arbitrarily assign one ‘clock tick’ to 
this event, if we decide to measure in the ‘timelike’ sense. 


Some Notes On G"Y ~ og"’(0) When A(s) = o/s, Part XIII 
In this note, we want to take a look at the interior Schwarzschild metric [M], and compare its 
solution, near the origin O of our perfect star [S*], to the metric discussed in the last research note 


on page 403, under ‘Other Considerations’. 


From the Wiki page, J takes the form, in physical coordinates ... 


-1 
) dr’ 47° (ae* + sin? Ody") - 


where c is the speed of light, rs is the Schwarzschild radius, and rg is the coordinate radius of S*. 
Now because S* is a perfect star, just as in our previous research, the density [p] of the star is 
always constant, because we’re dealing with an incompressible fluid. And we’ll assume here that c 
has been normalized to 1 and that the mass of S* is M. 
Then it is the case that, with G being the gravitational constant ... 
ty = 2GM/c? = 2GM = 2G-(4/3)ar,3-p, 
so that 
ts/t_° = 8nGp/3 = kp/3, 
where k is Einstein’s constant, and again c = 1. 
Thus, the coefficient associated with dr? above is, to first order ... 
CQ -rrs/r3)! = 1+ er /r = 1 + (kp/3)-r, 


and this agrees exactly with g::(r) on page 403, under ‘Other Considerations’. Now for the harder 
part, which is the coefficient associated with dt? above ... 


405 


This coefficient is a very peculiar expression, in that it is the difference of two radical terms, which 
is then squared. And this alone should tell us we may not get perfect agreement with gi1(r), on 
page 403 in ‘Other Considerations’, but let’s see how close we can come ... after making some 
assumptions. 


To begin with, we'll assume rs / rg is a negligible quantity, as it is for most stars, so that the 
expression (1 — rs/rg)'? reduces to 1. Then the coefficient associated with dt? becomes ... 


(-1/4)-[3 — (= Pa / ry? = (-1/4)-[9 — 6-1 = Py /r3)!2 + CL = Py /13)]. 


Now a Taylor series expansion of the middle term, on the right-hand side, gives us, to first order, 
for smallr ... 


(1 = rrs/ 13) = 1 -— (1/2)- rts / 13, 
so that if we insert this into the first equation above, and collect terms, we obtain 
(-1/4)-[9 - 6 + 3-rPa/r? + (I — Pa /r*)] = -(1 + (1/2) /t,), 
and this is equal to 
—(1 + %-(kp/3)-r).  (*) 

Thus, from (*) above, gix(t) = 1 + %- (kp/3)-1°, and this differs from gi.(r) on page 403, under 
the heading ‘Other Considerations’, since there gi:(r) = 1 + (kp/3)-r, if M-e =1. Still, the 
agreement is not too bad, considering that in ‘Other Considerations’ we postulated that a solution to 
G"’ = 0 might be feasible, if we let o ---» 0 in our approximate solution to G"’ = og"*(0), as r ---> 0. 


SOME ADDITIONAL THOUGHTS 


Suppose the interior metric M, shown on page 404, is actually 


Cdr = -( | 
\ 


at least near the origin of S*. Then even at the edge of S*, with r = rg, we see that gi:(r) agrees with 
its counterpart in the exterior metric. And of course, the same is true with gi,(r). 


- -1 
(: - =) dr +r? (ae? + sin’ Ody’) , 


"% 


But in this case, if gi:(r) is expanded as it was above, making the same assumptions, then we find 
that gic (r) = 1 + (kp/3) - 1°, and this agrees exactly with gis (r) on page 403, under ‘Other 
Considerations’ [for our own sun, rs / rg ~ 0.000004]. 


Should we accept the interior metric above as being closer to the truth, than the one on page 404, at 
least near the origin of S* ? No, not necessarily, but if we do, we achieve remarkable agreement 
with what we see on page 403 in ‘Other Considerations’. In fact, the agreement is exact ! 


406 


Some Notes On G"Y = ogY(0) When A(s) ~ o/s, Part XIV 
In this note, we want to review our work and see if there are any alternatives to gi1(r), that might be 
compatible with the original interior Schwarzschild metric M, as outlined on pages 404-5. We 
know that with 
git) = 1 — (1/3)-(o — kp)’, 


the agreement with its counterpart in M is exact for small r, and rs/rg ~ 0, if 6 = 0. 


For some motivation here, let’s look at the Friedmann acceleration equation, for an isotropic 
universe filled with a perfect fluid. 


s4.- 
a 


A — 4nG(p + 3p) 


And here, A [which is akin to 6] is the cosmological constant, and d is a kind of acceleration 
parameter, which is related to the size of the universe, denoted by a. 


ales ake aco 


Now if A is zero and the universe is static, it’s rather like our perfect star S*, where o = 0, and 
there is no flow of material within S*. In such a case, G = 0, so that 3p + p=0, and we should 
expect the same of our ‘equation of state’ in S*. Thus, we are looking for alternatives to 


gut) © 1 — (13): (6 — kp), (~) 
which don’t violate (*). 
Since we believe the first term in (~) is acceptable, all that remains is the second term [gee(r)’ = Oat 
the origin O], and we’ll suppose this can be written as a multiple of what we see in (~); that is to 
say, 

gu(t) © 1 — (W/3)-(6 — kp)-, (Ff) 
where @ is some constant. 
If we now recover our equation of state from page 397, and factor in a, we then have ... 

—(2a /3)-(o6 — kp) + (1/3)-(6 — kp) = kp +o. 


And setting o = 0, we find that (2a — 1)p = 3p, so that necessarily a = 1, in order to attain the 
equation of state, without respect to sign conventions. Thus, gi1(r) in (~) is the correct choice here. 


afeokakeaeok 


407 


We could also choose a = 0, but if we did, we’d lose the parabolic component and gi. (r) would 
evaluate to 1. 


ales aka 


When developing equations of state, such as we did on pages 393-4 and pages 396-7, we always 
have to remember that the analysis was done within the context of an ‘in the limit’ argument, as the 
radius r ---» 0. 


For example, on page 393, the equation of state we developed was ... 
o = ~(k/2)-Gp +p), (tH) 


where o is the dark energy pouring into the perfect star [S*], at its origin O, according to the 
density function A(s) = o/s. 


Now if o = 0, then necessarily 3p + p =0 in (+), and for an incompressible fluid, the density p is 
not changing in S*, so we can arbitrarily choose the value of p at O, if we like. For pressure p in 
S*, it may be a little more subtle, since it’s not clear to me if perfect fluids ¥ exist for S*, where p 
is constant everywhere in the star, itself. 


Tf such an ¥ does exist, we can choose any point in S* when referencing p, just like we could for p, 
otherwise we’d probably want to reference p at O, relative to the equation (t+) above. And that is 
because all of our analysis, starting on page 383 and going forward from there, uses a lim r ---> 0 
argument ... 


feos 


In a paper on the Internet, titled ‘On Schwarzschild’s Interior Solution and Perfect Fluid Star 
Model’, by Barletta et al (2020), the authors revisit the original publication by Schwarzschild, and 
along the way, develop an equation for the pressure p(r), for r > 0. This equation is [from page 11 
of their article] ... 


Here, ro is the radius of the perfect star [S*] ... and po and fo are pressure and density in the star, 
for r > 0. As well, because they are dealing with an incompressible fluid, fo is constant 
everywhere in S*. And finally, the authors define m to be GM / c’, where M is the mass of the star. 


Now when r = 0, the expression above becomes 


pole? + po = 2po]3 — A/ro)-(ro/ 2m = 1)?- (73 /2my!? 1, 


408 


and this can be written as ... 
Pole? + po = 2po|3 — (1/10): (ro/ 2m)? (1 = 2m roy"? + (103 / 2m)" jit . (&) 
And with a very small Schwarzschild radius [2m], so that 2m/To is negligible, the right-hand side of 


(&) computes to fo. Indeed, in this case we can make 2m/To arbitrarily small, if we wish. Thus, at 
r=0, (&) reduces to 


Dolce + po = Po. 
so that pressure po, at the center [O] of the perfect star, would be zero in this hypothetical case. 
Clearly this is not the true value of po at O, but if we want an ‘apples to apples’ comparison with 
the same assumption made on pages 404-5; namely that rs / rg is a negligible quantity, where rs is 
the Schwarzschild radius and rg the radius of the star, then the conclusion above is ‘comparatively 
fair’. 


Now on page 406, we asked if there were any other possibilities for gi1(r), by introducing a into the 
equation below, 


git) = 1 — (o/3)-(6 — kp); 

and concluded that our equation of state [3p + p=0 ] could only hold if (20 — I)p = 3p was 
true, without respect to sign conventions, when o = 0. This forced us to choose a = 0 or 1. 
However, notice here that if a = 2, then necessarily p = 0 at the center of S*, just as it is for po at O 
above, in the hypothetical setting. 

And by choosing a = ¥, our gi.t(r) component now agrees exactly with what we calculated for its 
counterpart in the original interior Schwarzschild metric [pp 404-5], where assumptions coincide; 
that is to say, foro=0... 


gat) = 1 + %-(kp/3)-r. 


But in order to get this agreement, we have to sacrifice our equation of state (*), and instead accept 
a value of zero for p at O, which I’m not sure we want to do. 


Some Notes On G"" =~ og"*(0) When X(s) = o/s, Part XV 


Let us bring back our diagram from page 402, where here o = 0 in the Fo frame, and our metric 
becomes, from ‘Other Considerations’ on page 403 ... 


ds? © gii(r)dr’ + dé? + r’sin?(0)dd? — gui(r)dt?. 
And now, with Q(r) = (1/3) - (-kp) -1°, where 0 < kp, and is a positive constant, we have ... 


git) © 1- QG) 5 gilt) © D- exp(gialr)) . 


409 


S* -a perfect star 


zero gravity region in 
S* for very small r 


In the diagram above, let the ‘distance’ from O to P be the smallest possible ‘length’ or ‘clock tick’, 
available to us at the quantum or sub-quantum level, so that nothing shorter than this exists in a 
measurable sense of the word. Let us refer to this ‘distance’ as ¢. 


If we now move from O to P, we must do so by way of a ‘quantum hop’, and since there is nothing 
smaller than ¢, a single hop will place us at P, whether we are looking in the spacelike or timelike 
direction. Indeed, there is no reason to believe that we would even be able to distinguish between 
these two directions, at such small scales. 


To see this more clearly, suppose it takes Avo ‘quantum clock ticks’ [QCTs] to hop from O to P. 
Then one QCT must equal one-half a QRT [quantum ruler tick, which is ¢], which, by definition, 
doesn’t exist. Thus the QCT must be greater than or equal to the QRT. 

On the other hand, it can never take one-half a QCT to hop from O to P, since by definition, the 
QCT is the smallest possible ‘clock tick’ available to us. Indeed, if this were so, then one QCT 


would be equal to two QRTs, and so we may conclude the QCT must be Jess than or equal to the 
QRT. Putting the two together tells us the QCT must be equal to the QRT; namely e. 


alesse 


In the sequence below, only values for which QCT 2 QRT are admissible, since by definition, the 
QRT cannot be divided any further. 


QCT = ... 3-QRT, 2-QRT, 1-QRT, %-QRT, 4-QRT, ... 


Similarly, in the sequence below, only values for which QRT = QCT are admissible, since by 
definition, the QCT cannot be divided any further. 


QRT = ... 3-QCT, 2-QCT, 1-QCT, %-QCT, %4-QCT, ... 


Thus, it must be the case, that ... 


410 


QRT < QCT < QRT < QCT, 
so that necessarily, the QCT and QRT must be equal. 


feof aco 


Thus, there is no difference between the ‘clock tick’ and the ‘ruler tick’ at these very small scales, 
so that if we want to formulate a metric for ds? at the ‘classical level’, which reflects this quantum- 
like behavior (r ---» 0), it behooves us to search for one where 


gilt) = 1- Qa); gut) = D- exp(gialr)) 
are, to a first-order approximation, equal to one another. And this can be done by setting D- e = 1. 
Now as we said earlier, gi:(r), as shown here, differs from its counterpart in the original interior 
Schwarzschild metric [WM] by a factor of ¥%, in the parabolic component [pp 404-5]; but I would 
submit to the reader that this difference is due to quantumlike behavior, as described above, that is 


not reflected in M, at very small scales near the origin [O] of the star. 


If this behavior was reflected in M, then the metric below might be closer to the truth near O, since 
here gix(r) agrees with its counterpart just above, if rs / rg is negligible, and r ---» 0 [p 405] ... 


; -1 
a (: - =) dr? +r? (ae? + sin” 0 dy”) 


"% 


Some Notes On G"Y ~ og"Y(0) When A(s) ~ o/s, Part XVI 


In our original analysis of g = git(r), associated with the original interior Schwarzschild metric [pp 
404-5], and shown below [labelling as (~)], 


i (5) 


we treated ry / rg as a negligible quantity in the first term above, but retained rs / rg in the second 
term. In some ways, this really isn’t an ‘apples to apples’ comparison with h = gi:(r), as shown on 
page 403 in ‘Other Considerations’, and reproduced below, where the scaling factor is 9-e = 1... 


1 + (kp/3)-r2. 


And that is because forO < r ¢ fg, g is an increasing function bounded above by 1, whereas h is 
also an increasing function bounded below by 1. But this particular problem is easily remedied by 
setting D- e to g(0), and then rescaling so that f= D-e-h=g(0)-h. 


411 


Now with this rescaling, g(0) and (0) agree, and if we expand g(0) as a Taylor series, for small 
values of rs / rz, then f becomes [remembering from earlier notes that rs / rp? = kp/3] ... 


f © Y-(3+(—4e/ 2rg) — 1)? (Ll + Os/ 13) -?). 
And, omitting the term (r; / 2rg)? in this expansion, we obtain [again for small r/r¢] ... 
f = (Cl = 3rs/2rg)+ (+ (ts/1g3)-1?),  (*) 
and this is the result we are looking for in f, that tracks g for small r. 


Now notice here that to first-order, f and g do agree at the origin O of the star [S*], and even when 
we let r = ry in (*) above, f computes to 


(1 = 3ry/2re)-(1 + (s/t), 


which, to first-order, becomes | — rs / 2rg. Comparing to g at r= re, this value is 1 — rs/rg. Thus 
fand g are both increasing functions which agree at O [and thus track each other closely for small 
r], but differ by rs / 2rg on the boundary of the star. This is a fairly decent result, since our analysis 
of things, beginning on page 383 and going forward from there, is largely a lim r ---» 0 argument. 
But to get this result, we have to rescale D- e, as we said above. 


And finally, any analysis done after pp 404-5, should now give consideration to what we’ve said 
here in Part XVI, as I do believe rescaling is the more appropriate approach. 


In the pictures below, rs = 0.1, rg = 1, and0 < r < rg. The picture on the Jeft is g = gii(r) from the 
original interior Schwarzschild metric [~] on page 410 of this research note. The diagram on the 
right is f = gis(r) and labelled (*) on this page. Notice that here, rs / rg is not small. 


0.90 
0,89 0.92 
0,88 0.90 


0.87 0.88 


0.86 
0.86 


0.85 
a 0.84 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 08 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 


1.0 


412 


In the pictures below, r; = 0.01, rg= 1, and0 < r < rg. The picture on the Jeff is g = gi1(r) from 
the original interior Schwarzschild metric [~] on page 410 of this research note. The diagram on 
the right is f = gi.(r) and labelled (*) on page 411. In this case ry / rg is small, but not overly so ... 


0.990 , 


| 0.994 
0.989 | 

| 0.992 
0.988 | 

| 0.990 
0.987 | 

| 0.988 
0.986 | 

| 0.986 
0.985 } 


z 0.9842 
L 
0.0 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 


At r = 0, the agreement is exact, and at r = rg (which is 1), git(r) on the left matches 1 — 1 / rg, 
while on the right, gis(r) matches 1 — rs / 2rg, as it should be. 


ales akeaeok 


One could ask if there is an optimal a > 0 for which g = gix(r, a) below, agrees with its counterpart 
f, at both the origin and at r= rg. Such an o does indeed exist, and we’ll see that it is actually a = 1. 


ne 
(a+4),/1- —-a, p-=) 
\ "9 \ ‘%? 


If we perform the same analysis as we did above, then f becomes, for small rs / rg ... 
f@,a) = (1 - (a+ Drs/ry)- C+ Os/r3)-P), 
and here f and g agree at O. We saw already that with a = 4, this was true from the analysis above. 


Now at r= rg, git(r, a) still computes to 1 — rs/ tg, as it did above when a = %, and if we set r = rg 
in (+), and omit the term (a + 1)(rs/ Tg)” in the expansion, we find that 


Sf (tg, a) = 1 — a-ts/te. 


Thus, the optimal choice for a is indeed 1. 


413 


In the pictures below, rs = 0.01, rg =1,a=1,and0 < r ¢ rg. The picture on the /eft is g = gis(r, a) 
from page 412 of this research note. The diagram on the right is f= f(r, a) and labelled (+) on page 
412. In this case rs / rg is small, but not overly so ... 


0.990 


0.988 0.988 
0.986 0.986 
0.984 0.984 
0.982} 0.982 
0.980 0.980 
z 


0.0 02 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 


You can see from these pictures that they agree when r = 0 and when r= rg. 


A BRIEF PHILOSOPHICAL DISCUSSION OF THE TWO ANALYSES 


On pages 404-5, we started our analysis by setting a = ¥% in the interior Schwarzschild component 
= gi1(1, a) below, which is the accepted classical value, 


and omitted r, / rg in the first term. This allowed us to ‘lift’ g above a lower bound of 1, so that we 
would be able to compare it to our component h = gi,(r) on page 403 under ‘Other Considerations’; 
that is to say, 


2 


h=1 + (/t3)-r, 


where again, rs / ty = kp/3. And this we were able to do without rescaling h, and indeed, this was 
part of the motivation for lifting g in the first place. 


Now admittedly, the analysis was largely theoretical in nature, and may have no physical value at 
all; but it did allow us to say some things about the optimal choice for a [which is 1; pp 405, 410, 
412], and too, allowed us to investigate ‘quantum clock ticks and ruler ticks’ [pp 408-10]. 


And, the analysis also led to a second approach [pp 410-413] where we decided to rescale h, which, 
in turn, led to some interesting results that may have both theoretical and physical value. Perhaps 
the most significant conclusion was that both analyses concluded @ = | was optimal for g. 


414 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS 


Let us bring back our expression for g = g(r, @) below, the interior Schwarzschild component, and 


(« + ny? ~ % -a, 


recall that in the ‘lifted frame’ £, the expression rs / rg in the first term is omitted, so that a lower 
bound of 1 is established in any calculations. This allows us to produce the function below, 


h=1 + a: (ts/ 13) -° 


where / is computed from a Taylor series expansion of g, for small r. And recall as well that rs / rg 
is equal to kp/3. Note that when a = 1, we recover gi. (r), as shown on page 403 in ‘Other 
Considerations’, where the scaling factor is D- e = 1 and gi,(r), itself, is derived from a lim r ---» 0 
analysis [p 383 ff]. It thus becomes our de facto standard. 


There are three cases to consider. First, if a = 0, then g and h agree in £, and both are 1. And 
furthermore, from our expression developed on page 406, and shown below, 


Qa-p=3p, (*) 


we see that for a = 0, our ‘equation of state’, also developed using a lim r ---» 0 argument, is 
preserved without respect to sign conventions [pp 406-8]. Notice too, that the a variable used in (*) 
corresponds to the @ variable in g and Ah, in the lifted frame £ [again pp 406-8], and it is important 
to see this connection. 


In the second case, if a = 1, then g matches h in £, using a Taylor series expansion for small r, and 
additionally our ‘equation of state’ is again preserved from (*), without respect to sign conventions. 
There are, however, no other choices for a that will preserve the ‘equation of state’. 


And this brings us to the last case; namely a = 1%, which is the accepted classical value for g, that is 
to say, the interior Schwarzschild time component gi,(r,@). In this case, if we lift g into £, a Taylor 
series expansion gives us, for small r, 


galt %-(ts/t3)-r, 
and this does agree with h. But from (*), our ‘equation of state’ is violated now, since the pressure 
p in our perfect star [S*] becomes zero, while the density p in S* remains in tact. And thus, our 


‘equation of state’; namely 3p + p =0, without respect to sign conventions, no longer holds. 


Thus, by using a ‘lifting argument’ and comparing to our lim r ---» 0 analysis [p 383 ff:], we see that 
a= is really not a viable choice for the Schwarzschild component g = gi.(r, a). 


415 


In the pictures below, rs =0.01,rg=1,a=1,and0 < r < 


rg. The picture on the eft is g = gis(r, a) 


from page 414 of this research note. The diagram on the right is git(r, a) after lifting it into 2, and 
the third diagram (bottom row) is / from page 414. In this case rs / rg is small, but not overly so ... 


0.990 


0.988 


0.986 


0.984 


0.982 


0.980 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 08 1.0 


1.010 


1,008 


1,006 


1,004 


1,002 


1.000 


Ed 


0,998 L 
0.0 0.2 04 0.6 08 10 


1,010 
1,008 
1.006 | 
1,004 
1 002 


1,000 


4 


0.998 | 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


You can see from the pictures above, that the second and third diagrams look identical, as they 
should. By lifting g into £, we can compare it to a corresponding parabolic curve h, which adheres 


to (*) on page 414, as shown below... 


Qa-I)p=3p. (*) 


Only when a = 0 or 1, does (*) conform to our ‘equation of state’ below, without respect to sign 
conventions, that was developed in the original analysis [p 383 ff] ... 


3p + p=0. 


416 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART II 


Let us bring back our expression for g = gi.(r,a@) below, the interior Schwarzschild component, and 


(a+4),/1- —-a, /1- — ) 
( Vou yy 3 


here, we wish to expand both terms above as a Taylor series, when rs / rg is small. This gives us, to 
first-order ... 


f(t,a) = {1 - (a+ Drs/te}- C1 + BOs / re), CD) 
where 
B =a/(1 — (a+1)rs/ts).  (~) 


Thus, f is essentially a lift into £, which is then ‘pulled back’ by an offset of —(a + 1)rs/ rg , and so, 
is bounded above by 1. 


Note that when r = 0, both f and g agree, since g expands as a Taylor series in the first term for 
small rs/rg. And for any a 2 0, when r= rg, both f and g agree and are equal to 1 — rs/rg. This is 


a significant improvement over our rescaling analysis on pages 410-413. 


Now the rescaling term {1 — (a+ 1)rs/ rg}, in (+) above, does not affect our equation of state [pp 
396-7], but the coefficient B in the parabolic component does. As such, the expression 


(2a—1)p=3p, 
developed on page 406, now changes to 
(2B— Dp =3p. 


And so, our ‘equation of state’ is now preserved, without respect to sign conventions, when B = 0 or 
when B = 1. 


Now when B = 0, ais also 0, so that f and g agree, and are equal to 1 — rs/rg, forallO <r < fp. 
On the other hand, when f = 1, (~) tells us that 


a = (1 — ry/rg)/(1 + rs/tg).  (*) 
For most stars, a small rs / rg is appropriate, so that from (*) just above, a ~ | is the optimal choice 


for g, according to our analysis. For the classically accepted value of a = 2 in g, (*) now tells us 
that rs / rg is about %, which would be more appropriate for something like a neutron star. 


417 


In the pictures below, rs = 0.01, rg =1,a=1,and0 < r < rg. The picture on the /eft is g = gis(r, a) 
from page 416 of this research note. The diagram on the right is f= f(r, a) and labelled (+) on page 
416. In this case rs / rg is small, but not overly so ... 


0.990 0.990 
0.988 0.988 
0.986 0.986 
0.984 0.984 
0.982 0.982 


0.980 0.980 
a a 
l 0.978 L 

0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 


You can see from these pictures above, that they agree when r = 0 and when r = rg, and that they 
are virtually identical ... 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART II 


In our analysis on pages 410-13, which used rescaling, we concluded that a = 1 was optimal for the 
interior Schwarzschild component g = gi: (r, @), and did so without any direct reference to the 
‘equation of state’, which held true, nonetheless. 


This gives us some confidence that the result (*) from page 416, and shown below, may in fact, be 
plausible, since for small rs / rg, @ is very nearly | here. 


a = (1 —1/rg)/(1 + rs/ty).  (*) 


But what happens to g = git(r, a), as shown below, when rs / rg is large ? Will we still see a 
parabolic curve from the origin of our star [S*] to the surface, where r = rg? 


(a+1),/ 
(«9 


In the picture below, rs = 15/16, rg = 1, a= 1/2, and0 < r < fg. The picture is g = git(r, a), 
where we are using the classically accepted value [a = 12] in the time component. If the plot was 
parabolic in nature, all would be well, but in fact, it isn’t. Initially it falls away, bottoms out at 
roughly r ~ 0.7, with a value of about zero, and then rises sharply to 1 — rs / rg, which is 1/16. To 
say the least, this is anything but parabolic, but it could be made parabolic if a was much, much 
smaller than 2. 


10 


418 


0.06 
0.05 
0.04 
0.03 
0.02 


0.01 


L 
0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


So what value of a should we choose ? Well, that’s a good question, but if we use (*) above as a 
very rough guide, then « = 1/31 ~ 0.03225 might be a starting point. And here is the plot of g, 
using this value of a, where all other parameters stay the same ... 


0.062 
0.060 
0.058 
0.056 
0.054 
0.052 
0.0504 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.4 


Now this is probably not the correct choice for a, because (*) is really intended for small rs / rz , so 
that our Taylor series expansions for g are applicable to first-order. But it gives us some feel for 
what « has to be, in order to preserve parabolicity, and furthermore, reinforces the idea that a is 
really dependent on rs / rg. 


For a neutron star, where rs / rg ~ 1/3, (*) tells us that a = 2, which is the classically accepted 
value. In this case, even though rs / rg is not small, the Taylor series expansions still work fairly 
well, as you can see in the pictures that follow ... 


419 


In the pictures below, rs = 1/3, rp = 1, a= 1/2, and0 < r <¢ rg. The picture on the /eft is the 
interior metric g = gis(r, a) from page 417 of this research note. The diagram on the right is from 
the function f = f (r, a) on page 416, and reproduced here. In this case rs / rg is not small, but we 
will use it anyway, for purposes of illustration ... 


faa) ~ {1 — (at Drs/te}- (1 + BCts/ 19°) 1°) 


B = a/(1 - (at 1)rs/ rg) 


0.65 0.65 


0.60 
0.60 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 08 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 


You can see from these pictures, that they agree exactly when r = rg , and very nearly agree at the 
origin O, when r = 0. The reason they don’t quite agree at O, is because f above is made from 
Taylor series expansions in g, but only to first-order. For a value of rs / rg 1/3, there is, therefore, 
bound to be some discrepancy, which we would not see if rs / rg was small. Still, for an object like 
a neutron star, the comparisons are pretty decent, in my opinion ... 


alessio 


Suppose we have an object, such as a neutron star, which now collapses to its Schwarzschild radius 
Ts, SO that ry =rg. From (*) on page 417, and reproduced here, 


a = (1 — ry/rg)/(1 + rs/tg), (*) 
we know that as rs / rg increases, a. decreases, and might surmise that in the limit, as rs / rg ---> 1, it 


is the case that @ ---» 0. In such a case, our interior Schwarzschild time component, g = gi (r, @), 
and shown below, becomes zero. 


fr, rr, 
(asn,/ - —-a,/1- — 


3 
yo 


Thus, in the collapsed neutron star [WV-], time stands still. It no longer exists ... 


10 


420 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART IV 


We wish to continue the discussion in Part III of this series, by developing a second order 
expansion for g = gi1(r, a), as shown below. 


[* | rr, ‘ 
(a+), /1 — -a, /1 - = 
\V "9 \ 9 


When the dust settles on the calculations, this expansion is [labelling as (+)] ... 


f(t,a) ~ 1 — (a+ Drs/ ty + a(t Wty / 2ry)? + ats /ty°) +1? — a(at 1)(ts / 2ry?)? +? 
Now it should be pointed out that there really is no true Taylor series expansion of second order, 
that gives us agreement between f and g, at r = rg, so the /ast term in (+) is actually a correction 
factor that fixes this problem. Thus f and g do agree at r = 0 [up to second order], and also agree 
when r= rg, when we implement the fix. 


But what we want to do here, as in Part III, is ask ourselves what happens to a when rs / rg ---> 1. 
And in order to do this, let’s rewrite (+) as 


f(t,a) ~ {1 — (a+ Drs / ry + a(at (ts / 2rg)?}- (1 + B(ts/te*) +17), 
where now, 
B = (a — a(at I(ts/4rg)) / {1 — (at Urs / ty + oat 1)(ts/2rg)?}.  C*) 
Now again, our expression from page 416 still holds; that is to say 
(2B Ip = 3p, 
so that our ‘equation of state’ is attained, without respect to sign conventions, if B = 0 or 1. And 
when f = 0, it is the case that a = 0, so nothing new here. It is, just as before. And if B = 1, with 
the variable y =r. / rg , then (*) becomes 
1 — (a+ Dy + oat Dy/2P = a — (at 1y/4).  (~) 


Now if, in (~) above, we set a = 0, then it is easy to see that y = 1. On the other hand, if we now set 
y= |, then it is again, easy to see that (~) becomes 


o -3a=0. 


Thus, either a = 0 or a = 3. To decide which a is correct, imagine doing the whole exercise all over 
again, say out to third order. We'd eventually wind up with a cubic polynomial, instead of the 
quadratic just above, and one of those solutions to the cubic would, in fact, be a = 0. But the other 
two solutions would be non-zero values for a, so that if we were to opt for one of the non-zero 


421 


roots, which one do we pick ? If the two non-zero roots are equal, it wouldn’t matter, but what if 
they’re not ? And similarly for a fourth order expansion, and so on. Each expansion will always 
have a = 0 as a root [something that is not too hard to show], but there will be other choices too, 
especially as the order of the expansion increases. 

The only logical conclusion here, is to reason that o must be zero. Thus, as rs / rg ---» 1, it must, in 
general, be the case that @ ---» 0 for the interior Schwarzschild metric g = git(r, a), as shown on 


page 420. And conversely, as a ---» 0, in general, it is the case that rs / rg ---» 1. 


So in that neutron star [4], which collapses to its Schwarzschild radius [p 419], it is indeed highly 
likely that gi:(r,a) = 0 for all r, such thatO < r < fr. 


Now if, in (~), and reproduced below, it is the case that y = 0, then necessarily a = 1. On the other 
hand, 


1 (a+ Dy + aat l(y/2)? 


a— a(a+ 1/4). (~) 


if a= 1, then (~) reduces to 


y -3y=0, 
and a similar argument to the one above tells us that the logical choice for y is zero. 


And, of course, this agrees with our first order analysis in Part II, as y = rs / rg ---» 0 or a ---» 1, 
since there we found that 


a = (1 — rs/rg)/(1 + te/tg). 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 


The full metric may now be written as ... 


fdr = — ((a+1) 
(oa 


and from what we’ve learned previously, « = 1 implies y = 0, so that the expression above becomes 


P 1 
=) dr® + r* (d6” + sin? Ody’) 


ry 


Cede = -Cd? + dr +r (dP + sin’@ d¢’) ‘ 
On the other hand, when y = 1, it is the case that a = 0, and the full metric is now [0 < r < rs]... 


de = (1 - (r/r)) dP + P(d& + sin? dd). 


422 


SOME MORE PLOTS 


In the pictures below, rs = 2/5, ry = 1, a= 1/2, and0 < r ¢ fg. The picture on the /eft is the 
interior metric g = g11(r, a) from page 420, and reproduced below. 


2 
f { 2) = 
(a+ 1) fi- a ji- — 
Vy "9 \ "3 


fQ,a) ~ 1 (at Dry/ty + aa + Dts / 21g)? + a(ts/1e3) 1? — aa + W(ts / 217)? 7 


The diagram on the right is from the function f= f(r, @) on page 420, and reproduced above. It is 
the second order expansion of gi:(r,@), where the rightmost term is the correction factor, so f and g 
agree when r= rg. 


In this case y = rs / rg = 2/5 is not small, but it is the value calculated from (~) on page 420, and 
shown below, when a = 1/2, now out to second order. Recall the first order estimate for rs / rg was 
1/3 when a = 1/2 [see page 416]. 


1 (a+ Dy + aat l(y/2)? 


a — a(a+1)(y/4).  (~) 


0.60 0.60 


0.50 0,50 


) 02 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


You can see from these pictures, that they agree exactly when r = rg, and very nearly agree at the 
origin O, when r= 0. And they track each other quite well for all values of r between 0 and rg. 


423 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART V 
In this note, we are going to study the parabolic curves [ f ] a little more closely, and develop a 
formula for the difference [A] between f (r, a) at r = rg versus r = 0, for any given a, in the second 
order expansion of gi:(r,a). Recall again, from previous notes, that this expansion is ... 
f(t,a) = 1 -— (a+ Drs/ te + aa + D(ts/ 2g)? + alts / tg)? — a(a + 1 ts / 217)? +1? . 
In the picture below we see a family of parabolic curves for f, where a ranges from 0 to 1. In these 


curves, we expect A to be small as o begins to increase away from 0, and at some point, A should 
peak in value, and then become smaller again as a approaches 1. 


Lee larger a 
CIP) PNB 


S(t, &) 


fe ns smaller o 


0 Tr Te 


Indeed, from previous research, « = 0 represents the time component of the interior Schwarzschild 
metric, in a collapsed star [rg = rs], which we believe is zero, while a = | represents the time compo- 
nent in a vacuum, which is one. So somewhere in between a = 0 and a = | is the peak value for A, 
that we are looking for. 
If we define y = rs / rg , then A computes to 

A=-y + (a+ Dy — a(at 1)(y/2y",, 
and from our expression (~) on page 422 and reproduced here, 


1 — (a+ Dy + oat 1)(y/2P = a — a(at+1(y/4) (~) 


we can substitute what «(a + 1)(y/2)? computes to in (~), back into A, so that we obtain the 
following expression for A ... 


424 


A=1-—a +4 a(a+ 1/4) - y. 


Notice here that for A = 0 and a = 0, it is the case that y = 1, which is the case of the collapsed star. 
On the other hand, if A = 0 and y = 0, then a = 1, which is our vacuum, as we said above. 


Now if we rewrite (~) above as a parabolic equation in y, we obtain 
a(a+ 1)y? + (oe? —3a-—4)y + 41-a) = 0, 


so that the proper solution to this quadratic is ... 


_ -(a? -3a-4)- V (ce? - 3a -4/ + 16a(a+1)(@—-1) 
2a(a+1) 


y 


If we now insert this into A above, we finally arrive at our destination, which is ... 


-(a? -3a-4)- V (oe? - 30-4)? + 160(@+ 1)(a-1) 
A= l-a+ ( 
2a(a+1) 


a+1 
-1) 


And here is a plot of A, where a ranges between 0 and 1 ... 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


You can see from the picture that A peaks at precisely a = Y2, where y = rs / fg ~ 2/5, which is 
neutron star territory [see page 422 for some graphs, where A is indeed ~ 0.17]. On either side of 
a = ¥, the curve is perfectly symmetric, suggesting that the parabolas on page 423 behave in 
exactly the same way below a = ¥2, as they do above a = 2. 


This only reinforces our belief that the time component of the interior Schwarzschild metric, 
namely g = git(r, a), is zero for all r, such that 0 < r < rs, once a star collapses to its Schwarzschild 
radius ... 


425 


In looking at our expression for A, and reproduced below, 


-(a? -3a-4)- V (oe? -30-4)7+ 16a (a+ 1)(@=1) 
A= l-a+ ( 
2a(a+1) 


a+1 
-1) 
4 


it is easy to show that as a ---» 1, A ---» 0. But it takes a little more work to show that as o ---» 0, it 
is also the case that A ---» 0, because of the denominator term 2a(a + 1). 


To show that this is so, let us start by expanding the polynomials inside the square root. Keeping 
only first order terms in a, this becomes, for small a ... 


v8a + 16, 
which is approximately a + 4, when expanded as a Taylor series, to first order. Now the other term 
in the numerator is —(a? — 3a — 4), and to first order, this is 3a + 4. Subtracting a + 4 from 3a + 4 
leaves us with 2a, so that A becomes, as a ---> 0... 
A=1-a + (2a/2a(a+1))-(a(at1)/4 - 1). 
And this reduces to 
A=1-a+a/4- I/(a+1). 
If we now let a ---» 0, it is easy to see that A ---> 0. 


SOME MORE PLOTS 


Here is a plot of y = rs / rg versus a, using the second order expression from the previous page, and 
reproduced here ... 


-(a? - 3a-4)- V (ce? -3a-4) + 16a(a+1)(a-1) 
2a(a+1) 


y= 


1.0 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


426 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART VI 
In this note, we want to go back and study the first order model, and show that if Ar is the difference 
between f=/f (r, a) at r= rg versus r= 0, and Ag is the difference between g = gi1(r,@) at r= rg versus 
r=0, then Ar > Ag holds for all a between 0 and 1. Thus, if Ar ---» 0, so must Ag. 
Recall again that fis the first order expansion of g, where 
f@,a) = {1 — (at Drs/ te} + Bets / 19) +1?) 
B = a/(1 — (a+ Drs/te) , 


and g is the interior time component of the Schwarzschild metric, as shown below ... 


Since f and g agree at r = rg , all we really need to do is calculate A = g(0) — f (0), and show that A is 
always greater than or equal to zero, for any choice of a. 


Now with y =r; /rg , A computes to 
A= ((a+1)J1-y - «7 + G@+Dy - 1. 
Remember too, that in the first order model [p 416] 
a=(1-y)/(+y), 


and hence, y = (1 — a) / (1 + q), so that we can reduce A above to the following inequality test, 
supposing it to be valid ... 


1-J1-y+%-@-D/a@+ 20. 
Or more simply, the expression just above becomes 
(l-y/2p2.-y, 
which is, indeed, a true statement. Thus, Ar 2 Ag holds for all a between 0 and 1, as we said above. 
Now Aris relatively easy to calculate and computes to ... 
Ar =a(1—a)/(1+a), 


and here a plot follows on the next page ... 


427 


0.15 


o.10| Ag 


0.05 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


Notice in this picture, as opposed to its counterpart in the second order model [p 424], that the 
parabola is skewed. Nonetheless, the peak value of Ar is again about ~ 0.17, which occurs when a 
is a little greater than 2/5. 


Also notice that as @ ---» 0 or 1, Ar ---» 0 as well. Thus, from our work above, it must also be the 
case that Ag ---» 0, which means that at a = 0, g = gis(r,a) =0 for all0 < r < ry (the case of a star 
collapsing to its Schwarzschild radius, so y = 1). When a ---» 1, we see the same effect, and here 
we are in a vacuum, so that g = 1 because y = 0. 


Were we to repeat the calculations on the previous page, for the second order model, we would 
arrive at a similar conclusion; however, the calculations seem intractable to me. But we do have 
some pictures to justify our conclusions here; for on page 419 we have plots for a neutron star that 
confirm our first order computations above, and again on page 422 for the second order. In both 
cases g(0) exceeds f(0), even if it’s by the slightest amount. Thus, again Ar > Ag holds for all a 
between 0 and 1. 


Below is a plot of y versus a, for the first order model, which is similar to the second order plot on 
page 425. However, this curve has a little more bend in it ... 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


428 


SOME MORE THOUGHTS, SOME MORE PLOTS 


The first and second order models, discussed above in previous research notes, are largely 
predictive tools, based on ‘equations of state’, that tell us what is most likely true when a ---» 0 and 
hence y = rs / rg ---» 1. Indeed, this modelling more generally tells us what is most likely true, as a 
decreases away from | (the vacuum) so that y increases away from 0, in the time component g of 
the interior Schwarzschild metric, as shown below ... 


pte ft 
(a+ — ay f 1 — 


ry \ 


Were we to simply solve the differential equations associated with the field equations of general 
relativity, in this case, we would not arrive at g above, where a is variable and ranges between 0 
and 1; rather, we would conclude that a is precisely ¥2 in g and nothing else, no matter what y was. 
Thus, a becomes the average value between 0 and | (a curiosity in its own right), and to this day is 
the classically accepted value for g, according to the solutions for the differential equations. 


But by doing a lim r ---» 0 analysis of things [p 383 ff], we see that g can be generalized, and to me, 
at least, this is the better approach, as it leads to a very real relationship between a and y that, 
otherwise, we might never have seen [pp 425 and 427]. 


In the pictures below, rs ~ 0.6, rg = 1, a= 0.3, andO < r < ry, where a and y are taken from the 
second order model [p 425]. The picture on the /eft is the interior metric g = gi1(r, a), as shown 
above. 


The diagram on the right is from the function f= f (r, «) on page 420, and reproduced below. It is 
the second order expansion of gi:(r,@), where the rightmost term is the correction factor, so f and g 
agree when r= rg. 


fa) = 1 = (at Vrs/ ty + a(a+ W(ts/ 2rg)? + ats / p53) <r? — aa + 1)(ts / 2ry?)? - 7 


In this case y = rs / rg ~ 0.6 is not small, but it is the value taken from the a-y chart on page 425, 
when a = 0.3. Indeed, such a y may not even be physically meaningful. 


0.40 0.40 
0.38 
0.36 0.35 
0.34 
0.32 

0.30 
0.30 
0.28 


0.262 #4 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 08 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 06 0.8 


429 


You can see from these pictures, that they agree exactly when r = rg, and nearly agree at the origin 
O, when r= 0. And they track each other quite well for all values of r between 0 and rg. Indeed, 
for a second order approximation, f tracks g surprisingly well, given how large y really is ... 
Finally, it should be mentioned that whether we are dealing with the first or second order model, 
the peak value occurs when y = rs / rg is about 2/5, in both cases [pp 423-7]. Could it be, at least in 
the case of a neutron star [W], that V is most likely to collapse to its Schwarzschild radius, and thus 
form a black hole, when y is 2/5 ? 


ales afaeok 


The picture on the /eft is the overlay for rs ~ 0.6, rg = 1, a=0.3, and0 < r ¥ fg, using the second 
order model, from the last page. The diagram on the right is the overlay for ry = 2/5, rg = 1, a= 
1/2, and0 < r ¥ fg, from page 422, again using the second order model. Blue represents the 
interior metric g = gr1(r, a), as shown on page 428, and gold represents f(r, a), also shown on page 
428. 


0.40 


0.35 


0.50 


0.45 


L 
0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 08 


430 


An Interestng Estimator For y = rs / rg In The Second Order Model 


In the second order model, we know from previous research, that y is defined to be ... 


-(e* -3a-4)- V (ce? -30-4)? + 16a (a+1)(a-1) 
2a(a+1) 


and the question comes up as to whether there might be a simple estimator for this expression. It 
turns out there is, and here are a few plots that demonstrate this idea. The blue curve is y above, 
and the gold curve is the estimator yest = (1 — a) / (1 + a/n), where n = 2, 3, 4. 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 02 04 0.6 08 


0.2 04 06 08 10 


Notice that when n = 2, the blue and gold curves coincide, so that we have a near perfect estimator 
for y above when yes = (1—a)/(1 + a/2). 


1.0 


431 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART VII 
In this note, we now want to go back and study the second order model, and show that if Ar is the 
difference between f = f (r, a) at r = rg versus r = 0, and Ag is the difference between g = gi.(r,a) at r 
= Tg versus r = 0, then Ar > Ag holds for all @ between 0 and 1. Thus, if Ar ---» 0, so must Ag. 
Recall again that fis the second order expansion of g, where 


f(t,a) = 1 -— (a+ Drts/ te + aa + D(ts/ 2g)? + alts /tp3)- 1? — a(a+ Its / 217)? +17, 


and g is the interior time component of the Schwarzschild metric, as shown below ... 


Since f and g agree at r = rg , all we really need to do is calculate A = g(0) — f (0), and show that A is 
always greater than or equal to zero, for any choice of a. 


Now A computes to [where y is now yest = (1 — a) / (1 + a/2) from page 430] 
A= (Cat DJI-y - a)? — aa+Dy/2? + |@+Dy - 1, 
and from our expression (~) on page 422, and reproduced here ... 
1 - (a+ Dy + aa+ Iy/2P = a - aa+1y/4),  (~) 
the inequality test for A becomes ... 
A= ((at+1)J1-y - a)? + a(atly/4) — a 2 0. 


Using the fact that y = (1 —a)/ (1+ 4/2), it is not hard to show that a = (1—y)/(1+y/2), so 
that after some mild algebra, the inequality test for A reduces to [0 < y < 1]... 


y — 24y + 32 > 84-yJ/1-y (4) 


To see that (*) is true, we'll do a plot, which is shown below. In this plot, the blue curve is the /eft 
side of (*) and the gold curve is the right side of (*). You can see from the picture that the gold 
curve is always bounded by the blue curve, whence (*) holds. 


Thus, for the second order model, it is always the case that Ar > Ag when y = (1 —a)/ (1 + a/2) is 
the estimator from page 430. 


432 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 10 


Now as a ---> 0 or 1, Ar ---» 0 [see pages 423-5]. Thus, from our work above, it must also be the 
case that Ag ---» 0, which means that at a = 0, g = gis(t,a) =0 for all0 < r < ry (the case of a star 
collapsing to its Schwarzschild radius, so y = 1). When a ---» 1, we see the same effect, and here 
we are in a vacuum, so that g = 1 because y = 0 (note that because f and g are parabolic, and hence 
increasing functions, relative to the first and second order models, both flatten out to straight lines, 
as a ---> 0 or 1, since again, Ar > Ag). 


If we bring back our expression (*) from the previous page, as shown below [0 < y < 1], 
f - My +322 84-yJT-y 
and square each side, and then collect terms, (*) reduces to ... 
V(y+8P > 0. 


And of course, this is a true statement. Furthermore, in the range 0 < y < 1, this can be reduced 
even more, by writing 


433 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART VIII 


We wish to continue the discussion in Part IV of this series, by developing a third order expansion 
for g = gti(r, a), as shown below. 


[Te | rr, ‘ 
(a+), /1— —-a, /1 - = 
Vy "9 \ "9 


When the dust settles on the calculations, this expansion is [labelling as (+)] ... 


f0,a) ~ 1 (a+ Drs/ ty + aa t Dts / 21g)? + aa + (ts / 2g)? + alts /ry3) +17 
— a(a+ W(ts/ 21?) +r? — a(a + Drs / 21’) +. 
Now it should be pointed out that there really is no true Taylor series expansion of third order, that 
gives us agreement between f and g, at r = rg, so the /ast two terms in (+) are actually correction 
factors that fix this problem. Thus fand g do agree at r= 0 [up to third order], and also agree when 


r=rg, when we implement the fix. 


But what we want to do here, as in Part IV, is ask ourselves what happens to a when rs / rg ---> 1. 
And in order to do this, let’s rewrite (+) as 


ft,a) ~ {1 — (a+ Drs / re + a(at (ts / 2rg)? + aa + (ts / 2r~)7} + 
(1 + B(ts/rg°) +1? + some term in r?) , 
where now, 

B = (a — a(at Ls / 4rg)) / {1 — (at Drs/ ry + a(t 1)(ts/ 2rg)? + a(a+ Ls /2rg)3}. (*) 
Now notice here, that the ‘some term in r*’ isn’t calculated with any precision, and that is because 
when we do a lim r --- 0 analysis on pages 396-7, any terms higher than r° are ignored anyway, so 
that when calculating B, only the terms in r° matter. What is new, though, is the /ast term in (*) 
itself. 

Now again, our expression from page 416 still holds; that is to say 

(2B Ip =3p, 
so that our ‘equation of state’ is attained, without respect to sign conventions, if B = 0 or 1. And 
when B = 0, it is the case that a = 0, so nothing new here. It is, just as before. And if B = 1, with 


the variable y =r. / rg , then (*) becomes 


1 — (a+ Dy + aa+ D(y/2)P + a(at 1)(y/2)8 = a — a(a+ Iy/4).  (~) 


434 


We can write (~) as a cubic polynomial in terms of y, and this is ... 
ay? + 2ay? + 2(a—4)y + 81 -@/(+a)=0. (~) 


When a = %, y = 0.41 in (~), and this compares favorably with the second order estimate, which is 
= 0.40. When a = 0.3, y ~ 0.62 in (~), and this also compares favorably with the second order 


estimate, which is ~ 0.61 [the comparisons are actually better than this, but I’m rounding to two 
digits here]. 


The picture below on the /eft is the overlay for rs ~ 0.62, rg = 1,a=0.3, and0 < r ¢ rg, using the 


third order model, from the last page. The diagram below on the right is the overlay for rs ~ 0.41, 


ty=1,a=1/2,and0 < r ¥ fg, again using the third order model. Blue represents the interior 


metric g = gi1(r,@), as shown on page 433, and gold represents f(r, a), also shown on page 433. 
0.35 


0.30 on 
0.45 


0.407 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


You can see from these pictures, that they agree exactly when r = rg, and very nearly agree at the 
origin O, when r= 0. And they track each other quite well, for all values of r between 0 and rg. 
And this is encouraging, especially in the case where y = rs / rg ~ 0.62, since this is not at all a small 
value. Indeed, one has to wonder if ‘high y values’ like this even have any physical meaning ... 


Finally, notice in (~), and reproduced below, 
ay? + 2ay? + 2(a—4)y + 8(1-a)/(1+0) = 0 (~) 


that when y = 0, it is the case that a = 1, which is our vacuum. On the other hand, when a = 0, it is 
the case that y = 1, which is the case of a star collapsing to its Schwarzschild radius. 


435 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = 1; / fg FOR SECOND AND THIRD ORDER MODELS 


a y (second order) y (third order) 
0 1 1 

0.2 0.730 0.741 

0.4 0.504 0.513 

0.6 0.311 0.314 

0.8 0.144 0.144 

1 0 0 


You can see from the table above that there is very little difference in y, when comparing these two 
models. The difference appears to be no more than about 0.01 for high values of y, and for low 
values of y, they almost match. 

An Interesting Estimator For y = rs / rz In The Third Order Model 


For the third order model, we are left with solving a cubic equation, as shown below, and this can 
be a difficult task. 


1 - (a+ Dy + aa+ DQy/2P + a(at 1)(y/2) = a - a(a+1y/4).  (~) 
However, suppose we were to rewrite (~) above, as an infinite expansion on the left side, thusly, 
1 -— (a+Dy + oat 1)(y/2P + a(a+ D(y/2)> + a(at 1)(y/2)* + a(a+ Dy/2)> + ... 
=a-a(at+ 1/4). (H) 


Then because 0 < y < 1, we would expect the solutions for y in (~) and (+) to be very close. Now 
gathering terms by collapsing the series in (+), on the left side, leads to 


1 - (a+ Dy + aa+ DQy/2) [1 + y/2 + G/2P + ...] = a - aa+ Dy/4), 
or more simply, 
1 -— (a+Dy + aa + I(y/2) [1/C —y/2)] = a — aa + 1)(y/4). 
Now the expression just above is actually a parabolic equation, which evaluates to 
(at 1)(a+4)y + 2(a4+2)(a-3)y + 81-a) = 0, 


and the proper solution to this quadratic is [labelling as (*)] 
1 


———[-(a + 2)(a-3)- 
(a + 1) (a +4) 


V (a +2)? (a - 3)? +8(¢ +4) (a+ 1)(@-1) 


436 


And this becomes our estimator for the cubic (~) on the last page. Now we don’t actually have an 
a-y plot for the cubic, but we do for the second order model, so what you see in the picture below is 
a comparison between the second order a-y, and the cubic estimator a-y (*), just above. 


1.0 
0.8 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


In the picture above, blue represents the second order a-y plot, and gold is the cubic estimator a-y 
plot. You can see how closely they compare to one another. Were we to plot the real cubic chart, 


which follows from (~) on the last page, we would find that it was sandwiched in between the blue 
and the gold ! 


TABLE OF VALUES @ VERSUS Y = rs / fg FOR SECOND AND THIRD ORDER MODELS, 
AS WELL AS THE CUBIC ESTIMATOR 


a y (second order) y (third order) y (cubic estimator) 
0 1 1 1 

0.2 0.730 0.741 0.749 

0.4 0.504 0.513 0.516 

0.6 0.311 0.314 0.315 

0.8 0.144 0.144 0.144 

1 0 0 0 


ska Rsk 


437 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART IX 


For the second and third order models, we can also take the a-y equations, and write them as 
parabolic expressions in a. Recall these equations are, respectively, 


1 — (a+ Dy + oat IQy/2P = a — a(at 1)(y/4) 
1 - (a+ Dy + aa+ DQy/2)P + a(at 1)(y/2)? = a — a(a+ 1/4) 
And the parabolic forms are, for the second and third order models, respectively, 
((y/2P + (y/4))o? + ((y/2P — 3y/4 — Da + (1 - y) = 0 
((y/2 + (y/2) + (y/4))e2 + ((y/2)8 + (y/2P — 3y/4 - Da + Ui - y) = 0 


Now here, we can calculate @ precisely in these quadratics; and the proper solutions are shown 
below [0 < a,y < 1], for second order and third order, as well as the nearly identical plots ... 


(o-2+2-@f-()- 
= [let-E-Oy 
45) GY Soe +P 3) 


0.6 


02 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 


second order third order 


438 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = rs / fg FOR SECOND AND THIRD ORDER MODELS 


a (second order) 


1 

0.858 
0.730 
0.613 
0.504 
0.404 
0.311 
0.225 
0.144 
0.069 
0 


a. (third order) 


1 

0.858 
0.731 
0.616 
0.510 
0.412 
0.321 
0.234 
0.152 
0.074 
0 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = 1; / fg FOR SECOND AND THIRD ORDER MODELS 


y (second order) 


1 

0.858 
0.730 
0.613 
0.504 
0.404 
0.311 
0.225 
0.144 
0.069 
0 


Aedok ok koko 


y (third order) 


1 

0.867 
0.741 
0.623 
0.513 
0.410 
0.314 
0.226 
0.144 
0.069 
0 


439 


SEEING THE CONNECTIONS, PART X 


We wish to continue the discussion in Part VIII of this series, by developing a fourth order 
expansion for g = gi1(r, a), as shown below. 


[* | rr, : 
(a+), /1— —-a, /1 - = 
\V "9 \ 9 


When the dust settles on the calculations, this expansion is [labelling as (+)] ... 


fa) ~ 1 — (a+ Drs/ ty + a(at Its / 21g)? + a(a + LCs / 21g)? + Sa((a + 1)/4) (ts / 21)" 
+ a(ts/t3)-1? — a(a+ W(ts/ 217)? +1? — a(a + 1(ts / 217)> 3 — Sa((a + 1)/4)(r5 / 2r97)4 + 4 
Now it should be pointed out that there really is no true Taylor series expansion of fourth order, 
that gives us agreement between f and g, at r = rg, so the /ast three terms in (f) are actually 
correction factors that fix this problem. Thus fand g do agree at r = 0 [up to fourth order], and also 

agree when r = rg, when we implement the fix. 
Also note that the Taylor series expansion of (1 — x)!” is, out to fourth order ... 
1 — x/2 — °/8 — 7/16 — 5x4/128, 


which explains the existence of the number 5 in two of the terms associated with f(r, a). 


But what we want to do here, as in Part VIII, is ask ourselves what happens to @ when rs / rg ---» 1. 
And in order to do this, let’s rewrite (+) as 


f(t,a) ~ (1 — (a+ Drs/ ry + a(at W(t / 2ry)? + aa + L(y / 21g)? + Sa((a + 1)/4)(15 / 2re)*} + 
(1 + BCs /r,3)-r? + some term in r? + some term in r*) , 
where now, 
B = (a — a(at Irs /4rg))/ {1 — (a+ Drs / ry + a(t (ts / 2rg)? + aa + Wry / 21g)? + 
Sa((a + 1)/4)(rs/ 2rg)*}.  C*) 

Now notice here, that the ‘some term in 1° and in r”’ isn’t calculated with any precision, and that is 
because when we do a lim r ---» 0 analysis on pages 396-7, any terms higher than r° are ignored 
anyway, so that when calculating B, only the terms in r° matter. What is new, though, is the last 


term in (*) itself. 


Now again, our expression from page 416 still holds; that is to say ... 


440 


(2B - 1p = 3p, 


so that our ‘equation of state’ is attained, without respect to sign conventions, if B = 0 or 1. And 
when B = 0, it is the case that « = 0, so nothing new here. It is, just as before. And if B = 1, with 
the variable y =r. / rg , then (*) becomes [labelling as (~)] ... 


1 - (a+ Dy + a(a+ Dy/2)P + a(at 1)(y/2)? + Sa((at 1)/4)(y/2)* = a — a(at 1)(y/4). 
When a = 2, y = 0.411 in (~), and this compares favorably with the third order estimate, which is 


= 0.410. When a = 0.3, y ~ 0.628 in (~), and this also compares favorably with the third order 
estimate, which is ~ 0.623. 


0.45 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 


The picture above on the /eft is the overlay for rs ~ 0.63, rz = 1,a=0.3,and0 < r ¢ rg, using the 
fourth order model, from the last page. The diagram above on the right is the overlay for rs ~ 0.41, 
tg=1,a=1/2,and0 < r < fg, again using the fourth order model. Blue represents the interior 
metric g = gi1(r, @), as shown on page 439, and gold represents f(r, «), also shown on page 439. 


You can see from these pictures, that they agree exactly when r = rg, and very nearly agree at the 
origin O, when r= 0. And they track each other quite well, for all values of r between 0 and rg. 
And this is encouraging, especially in the case where y = rs / rg ~ 0.63, since this is not at all a small 
value. Indeed, one has to wonder if ‘high y values’ like this even have any physical meaning [but 
see also the corresponding third order plots on page 434, which to me, at least, have better balance]. 


Finally, notice in (~), and reproduced below, 
1 — (a+Dy + aa I(y/2) + a(at 1)(y/2)° + Sa((at 1)/4)(y/2)* = a — a(at 1)(y/4) 


that when y = 0, it is the case that a = 1, which is our vacuum. On the other hand, when a = 0, it is 
the case that y = 1, which is the case of a star collapsing to its Schwarzschild radius. 


1.0 


441 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = fs / fg FOR 2", 3" AND 4° ORDER MODELS 


y a (second order) a. (third order) a. (fourth order) 
0 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.858 0.858 
0.2 0.730 0.731 0.731 
0.3 0.613 0.616 0.616 
0.4 0.504 0.510 0.511 
0.5 0.404 0.412 0.415 
0.6 0.311 0.321 0.324 
0.7 0.225 0.234 0.239 
0.8 0.144 0.152 0.157 
0.9 0.069 0.074 0.078 
1 0 0 0 


TABLE OF VALUES 0. VERSUS Y = 1 / tg FOR 2", 3" AND 4" ORDER MODELS 


a y (second order) y (third order) y (fourth order) y (cubic est) 
0 1 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.867 0.872 0.874 
0.2 0.730 0.741 0.747 0.749 
0.3 0.613 0.623 0.628 0.629 
0.4 0.504 0.513 0.516 0.516 
0.5 0.404 0.410 0.411 0.411 
0.6 0.311 0.314 0.315 0.315 
0.7 0.225 0.226 0.226 0.226 
0.8 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 
0.9 0.069 0.069 0.069 0.069 
1 0 0 0 0 


Notice in the tables above, that there is very little difference in the third and fourth order models, 
which means at fourth order, we are approaching convergence. And indeed, in the second table, 
just above, we see that even the fourth order estimates for y are bounded above by the cubic 
estimator developed on pages 435-6. And that is because this cubic estimator was fashioned from 
an infinite series expansion, and thus, might be an upper bound for all order models; that is to say, 


n=1,2,3,4,... 


442 


EVALUATING A FOURTH ORDER EXPANSION FOR g = 8t+ (I, @) 


In this note, we are going to show how a fourth order expansion for g = gix(r, a), as shown below, 
might be developed. 


As we said on page 439, the Taylor series expansion of (1 — x)'” is, out to fourth order ... 
1 — x/2 — °/8 — 7/16 — 5x4/128, 

so this allows us to write g, approximately, as follows [we’ll refer to the expression below as f] ... 

(Cat 1) = ty / 2rg — (6/1) /8 — (ts/ te) 16 — S(ts/te)*/ 128) — a1 = (6 /2re)?)) 
Or, upon rewriting things a bit, we have 

({1 = (at 1(ts/2re) — (a+ D((ts/ tg)? 8 + (ts/te)3/ 16 + S(ts/te)*/ 128)} 
+ {aes/ 214°} 
Now define 
a= 1 — (a+ 1)(ts/2rg) 3 b = (at I)((ts/ tg)? /8 + (ts/tg)8/ 16 + S(ts/ty)*/ 128) 
and let A =a — b, and let B = a(rs / 2rg*)r’.. Then our expansion, just above, becomes 
(A+B) = A?+2AB+B?. 
Now after gathering relevant terms up to (rs /rg)* , A? computes to 
1 — (a+ Urs/ty + (a+ Its / 2rg)? + aa + LCs / 21g)? + Sa((a + 1)/4)(ts / 219)", 


and retaining only the first term in 2AB gives us a(rs/rg*)r’. The term B? is omitted altogether, so 
that finally, after adding back the correction factors, so that f and g agree at r = rg, we have 


f@,a) = 1 - (a+ 1)r/ 1g + a(a+ 1)(ts / 2rg?? + a(a+1)(r;/ 2rg)? + S5a((a + 1)/4)(ts / 2rg)* 


+ a(ts/ 1°) — a(a+ Its / 2re’)? «2? — a(at 1)(rs/ 2re)? 1 — Sa((a + 1)/4)(ts / 2re*)* «14 


443 


AN UPPER BOUND FOR THE INFINITE EXPANSION 


In this note, we are going to develop an infinite order expansion for g = gix(r, a) as shown below, in 
the first term, as per the methodology in the last note [the second term is always to first order]. 


f La } 
(@ nV - ey" = 


When the dust settles on the calculations, a pattern ‘seems to emerge’, so that the first term in g 
above is [providing the pattern below holds or ‘nearly holds’ beyond the penultimate term] ... 


1 — (a+ Drs/t, + a(a+ Drs / 2rg)? + a(at+ I ts / 21g)? + Sa((a + 1)/4)(rs / 2rg)* 
+ Ta((a + 1)/4)(rs/ 21g)? + Ya((a + 1)/4)(rs / 2rg)® +... 
and this can be written as 
1 = (a+ Drs/tg + a(a+ I(ts/2rg)? + a(at 1)(ts/ 21g + 
(/A)a(at 1)(rs/ 2re)* (5 + Trs/2re) + Ors / 2rg)? + ...) 


Now the infinite series, just above, actually has a closed form, so that we may write the expansion 
thusly, 


1 = (at Dry/ty + a(at I(r / 2re)? + aa + 1)(rs/2rg)> + (1/A)a(a + 1)(rs/ re)? wy). 
where y = rs / rg and y computes to 
w = 5/(1-y/2) + y/(-y/2). 


And hence, we can complete the form for f(r, a), in the case of an infinite expansion, and this is ... 


fQ,a) = 1 = (at Drs/te + aa + D(ts/ 21g)? + a(a+ 1)(ts/ 21g)? + (1/4)a(a + 1 (ts / 2ry)* - w 


+ ats /t93)-1? — a(a+ Drs / 21?) +r? — aa + DOs / 2’ — (W/A)a(a + D(ts / 2ry?)4 = ert 


And so, at this juncture, as per our past research notes, we can form the a-y equation, which is, 
labelling as (~), 


1 (at Dy + oat I(y/2)? + vat 1(y/2)3 + (W/A)a(a t 1/2) w = a — aa + 1/4). 


And because (~) is fashioned out of an infinite series, solutions in y will form an upper bound for 
all finite order expansions that precede it. Thus, (~) is the ultimate definition of convergence. 


444 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = 1; / fg FOR 2™, 3", 4" AND 00 ORDER MODELS 


a y (second order) y (third order) y (fourth order) y (080 order) 
0 1 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.867 0.872 0.879 
0.2 0.730 0.741 0.747 0.753 
0.3 0.613 0.623 0.628 0.632 
0.4 0.504 0.513 0.516 0.517 
0.5 0.404 0.410 0.411 0.412 
0.6 0.311 0.314 0.315 0.315 
0.7 0.225 0.226 0.226 0.226 
0.8 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 
0.9 0.069 0.069 0.069 0.069 
1 0 0 0 0 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = ts / fg FOR 2™, 3", 4" AND 00 ORDER MODELS 


y a (second order) a. (third order) a. (fourth order) a. (co order) 
0 1 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.858 0.858 0.858 
0.2 0.730 0.731 0.731 0.731 
0.3 0.613 0.616 0.616 0.616 
0.4 0.504 0.510 0.511 0.512 
0.5 0.404 0.412 0.415 0.416 
0.6 0.311 0.321 0.324 0.327 
0.7 0.225 0.234 0.239 0.243 
0.8 0.144 0.152 0.157 0.163 
0.9 0.069 0.074 0.078 0.083 
1 0 0 0 0 


You can see from these tables, that the infinite order expansion forms an upper bound for all other 
order expansions, and that there really is not that much difference between the infinite order and the 
finite orders. Indeed, the difference between the infinite order and fourth order is less than 0.01 
everywhere. 


But the important takeaway here is that any finite order expansion, as per our methodology [p 442], 
will always be bounded by the infinite order expansion, as per the tables above. 


445 


AN UPPER BOUND FOR THE INFINITE EXPANSION, PART II 


In this note, we are going to develop another infinite order expansion for g = gtx (r, a) as shown 
below, in the first term, as per the methodology on page 442 [the second term is always to first 


order]. 
/ Ts | 
‘a+1) /1—-—-a, /1— 
(( Wty 


While I believe the expansion in Part I has merit, the one we are going to write down here has been 
verified by me out to the sixth order, and so I believe it is the correct form. And here it is [f (1, @)] 


- 
1 — (a+ Drs/ ry + Zola + 1) cn: (ts/2rg)" + a(ts/1y*) +17 
n=2 


cy 


- X ata + 1) cn: (ts / 217)" = 2" 


n= 


And here, for n > 1, 
Cn = 2(22n—3)!!/n!. 


Some verification is in order, so let’s bring back our expansion for the first term in g, from Part I, 
which is [labelling as (*)] 


1 = (a+ Urs/ty + (at (ts / 2rg)? + aa + 1)(ts/ 21g)? + Sa((a + 1)/4) (ts / 2r~)* 
+ Ta((at 1/4) ts / 2te)> + Ya((at 1)/4)(ts/ 2te)® +... 


When n = 2 or 3, cn computes to 1, and this agrees with the coefficient in the third and fourth terms, 
in (*) above, which are correct. When n = 4, cn computes to 5/4, and this is also correct for the fifth 
term. When n = 5, cn computes to 7/4, and this is also correct for the sixth term. Now when n = 6, 
Cn computes to 21/8, which is correct, and this differs from the value of 9/4 above. 


Thus, we have enough evidence now, to conclude that the formula for cn is, indeed, valid. And so, 
at this juncture, as per our past research notes, we can form the a-y equation, which is, labelling as 


(~), 


20 


1 - (a+ Dy + XY a(at 1) cn: (y/2)" = a — aa 1\(y/4). 
1 


n=2 


446 


Now I am not aware of a closed form for this series in (~), which means it won’t be possible to 
form an upper bound on y, as we did in Part I. But, we do have some tables below which include 
values from (~) above, out to an eighth order expansion. And here they are ... 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = 1 / fg FOR 2", 3, 4" AND 8" ORDER MODELS 


a y (second order) y (third order) y (fourth order) y (8" order) 
0 1 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.867 0.872 0.879 
0.2 0.730 0.741 0.747 0.754 
0.3 0.613 0.623 0.628 0.632 
0.4 0.504 0.513 0.516 0.517 
0.5 0.404 0.410 0.411 0.412 
0.6 0.311 0.314 0.315 0.315 
0.7 0.225 0.226 0.226 0.226 
0.8 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 
0.9 0.069 0.069 0.069 0.069 
1 0 0 0 0 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = 1 / fg FOR 2", 3, 4" AND 8" ORDER MODELS 


Y a (second order) a. (third order) a. (fourth order) a. (8" order) 
0 1 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.858 0.858 0.858 
0.2 0.730 0.731 0.731 0.731 
0.3 0.613 0.616 0.616 0.616 
0.4 0.504 0.510 0.511 0.512 
0.5 0.404 0.412 0.415 0.416 
0.6 0.311 0.321 0.324 0.326 
0.7 0.225 0.234 0.239 0.242 
0.8 0.144 0.152 0.157 0.161 
0.9 0.069 0.074 0.078 0.081 
1 0 0 0 0 


Interestingly, if you compare values in the eighth order column, with their counterparts on page 
444, for the infinite order expansion in Part I, they are virtually identical ... 


447 


AN UPPER BOUND FOR THE INFINITE EXPANSION, PART III 


In our a-y equation below [labelling as (~)], the only outstanding issue is the convergence of the 
infinite summation when y = 1. If we can show that we have convergence here, then the model has 
validity for all values of 0 < a,y < 1. 

w~ 

1-(@+Dy + X a(a+ 1) cn: (y/2)" = a — aa + 1)(y/4). 
n=2 

Now if we set y = | in this infinite sum, as shown below, it actually converges to 1. And the picture 
below from the Wolfram site shows this asymptotic convergence, when n runs from 2 to 2000 in 
the summation. 


co 
>> sca (y/2)" 


x 
500 1000 1500 2000 

yal 
Now out to 2000, the value of the infinite sum is ~ 0.97477, so the convergence is very slow. But 


at n = ©, we finally arrive at our destination, and in (~) above, a will evaluate to 0 now, when y = 
1. 


TABLE OF VALUES 1 VERSUS Y = rs / rg FOR 2", 3, 4" AND 100" ORDER MODELS 


Y a. (second order) a. (third order) a (fourth order) a (100" order) 
0 1 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.858 0.858 0.858 
0.2 0.730 0.731 0.731 0.731 
0.3 0.613 0.616 0.616 0.616 
0.4 0.504 0.510 0.511 0.512 
0.5 0.404 0.412 0.415 0.416 
0.6 0.311 0.321 0.324 0.327 
0.7 0.225 0.234 0.239 0.244 
0.8 0.144 0.152 0.157 0.165 
0.9 0.069 0.074 0.078 0.087 


1 0 0 0 0 


448 


You can see in the table above, out to the 100" order, that the values in the rightmost column agree 
very favorably with their counterparts in the second table on page 446. But since we don’t have a 
closed form for the infinite summation, discussed on the last page, we can’t compare with the first 
table on page 446. 

However, in the first table on page 446, because we now have established convergence for this 
model, the 8" order estimates [p 446] should suffice as a reasonable upper bound, just as the 100" 
order estimates do for the table on the last page. 

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


We'd like to offer a more mathematical proof that the series below converges, when y = | ... 


2 
X en: (y/2)" 
n=2 
Now recall here, for n > 1, that 
Cn = 2(2n—3)!!/n!, 
and so for large values of n, we’ll defer to Stirling’s formula, which is ... 
n! ~ V¥2mn-(n/e)" _ ... for any suitably large n 
nl! ~ V2n-(n/e)"!? ... for any suitably large odd n 
Thus, cn / 2 becomes ... 
J2(2n — 3) - (2n—3)/e)*"-9)!? | V2an-(n/e)", 
And since the square root terms in the numerator and denominator won’t contribute anything of 
substance to the infinite summation for n > N, for some suitably large N (since they’re both of order 
Vn ) we can, therefore, focus on the expression 
((2n—3)/e)"-9!? | (ale. 
Now after some mild algebra, the expression above reduces to [labelling as (*)] ... 
2°n® (1 —G/2n))" e3/? | n® (Qn-3))7,, 
and since for large n, 
(1-(@/2n)y = e3?, 


(*) reduces to the following ... 


449 


2°n" [ n® Qn-3)°?, 
or more simply, 
2 /Qn-3y?, 


Thus, our summation, as shown below, for y = 1, 
~ 
yen -(y/2)" 
reduces to a consideration of the series 
© 
x 1/(2n-3)3/? 
n=N 


and this most certainly converges. 


450 


AN UPPER BOUND FOR THE INFINITE EXPANSION, PART IV 


In this note, we are going to develop still another infinite order expansion for g = gi.(r, a) as shown 
below, in the correction factors, as per the methodology on page 442 [the second term below is 
always to first order]. 


From Part II [pp 445-6], our expansion [f (r, a)] was, which we’ll call A ... 


ca 


1 — (@tI)ts/t, + x ave #1) cn* (te/ 2tg)" + alts / te3) +2? 
n= 
~ 
- X ata +1) cn: (ts / 2rg?)" + 

n= 
so that only the first term, in the second infinite series above, participated in the formation of the a- 
y equation, because terms in r", where n > 2, are always discarded. 
And here, for n > 1, 

Cn = 2(2n—3)!!/n!. 


Now we’d like to rewrite f above thusly, which we can, because we are dealing with the correction 
factors, and we’ll call this expansion B ... 


20 


1 — (at I)ts/t, + XZ ava + 1) cn: (ts/ 2rg)" + ats /1y3) 1? 
n= 
~ 
~ XZ aa+ 1) cn- 1/2") (5 / 2) (rg /rg3) «17 
n=2 

In doing so, every term in the second infinite series, just above, participates in the formation of the 
a-y equation, which now becomes [labelling as (~)] ... 

ES 


1 (a4l)y + E aca + 1) cn: (y/2)" = a = Z ala + 1) cn 1/2)" P 


Notice too, that in B, f and g agree at r = rg and compute to | — rs / rg, as they should. 


451 


To show that B may be the superior choice, we’ll offer two plots; the first from A out to fourth 
order, and the second from B, also out to fourth order. 


0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 04 0.6 0.8 


Model A , y = 0.63 Model B , y ~ 0.70 


The picture above on the left is the overlay for rs, ~ 0.63, rg = 1, a= 0.3, and0 < r ¢ fg, out to 
fourth order using model [A], from the last page. The diagram above on the right is the overlay for 
ts ~ 0.70, rg = 1, a =.264, and O < r ¢ fg, again out to fourth order using model [B]. Blue 
represents the interior metric g = gi1(r, @), as shown on page 450, and gold represents f (r, a), also 
shown on page 450, for both models. 


You can see from the pictures above that f and g track each other quite well for both models, but 
from my perspective, anyway, even with a higher y value, model B does the better job. 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS Y = 1; / fg FOR 4” AND 100" ORDER A & B MODELS 


Y a(4" order) A «(100 order) A a (4 order)B a (100" order) B 
0 d 1 1 1 

0.1 0.858 0.858 0.860 0.860 
0.2 0.731 0.731 0.738 0.738 
0.3 0.616 0.616 0.629 0.630 
0.4 0.511 0.512 0.530 0.532 
0.5 0.415 0.416 0.438 0.443 
0.6 0.324 0.327 0.350 0.360 
0.7 0.239 0.244 0.264 0.282 
0.8 0.157 0.165 0.178 0.206 
0.9 0.078 0.087 0.090 0.127 


1 0 0 0 0 


452 


Notice in the table above that the B values are somewhat higher, and this is to be expected, given 
the construction of the a-y equation [~] for B on page 450. Out to the 100" order, however, we can 
conclude with confidence, that the B values in the table form an ultimate upper bound, and indeed, 
any lower finite series will be contained by them. Additionally, since every term in the second 
infinite series in (~), on the right-hand side, participates in the formation of the a-y equation for B, 
this is as far as we can go with an r° model. 


And finally, notice in the A model, that the a-y equation is a special case of (~) in B, in so much as 
the second infinite series in (~), on the right-hand side, terminates at n = 2. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


The true Taylor series expansion of g on page 450, where the second term in g is to first order only, 
computes to [labelling as (*)] ... 


~ 
1 - (a+ Drs/ry + Laas 1) cn: (ts /2rg)" + a(ts/1y5) +17 
n= 
= ofa + I{(1/2)(rs/ rg) + (1/8)(ts/ tg)? + (I/16)(rs/ tg)? + (5/128)(ts / tg)* +... } (ts / 1g3) 1? 
Note that on the second line above, the coefficients are simply the Taylor series expansion of the 
expression (1 —x)!”, beginning at the term x; that is to say ... 
1 - x/2 - °/8 — 3/16 - 5x4/128 - ... 
Thus, when forming the function fas we did for model B [p 450], so that f and g agree at r = rg, it 


behooves us to emulate the second line in (*) above, so that the agreement holds. And this is 
precisely what we did ... 


453 


A PHILOSOPHICAL DISCUSSION OF WHETHER f AND g SHOULD AGREE AT r= rg 


In developing expressions for f that serve as expansions for g, we have imposed the requirement 
that they agree when r = rg. But why would we do this, given that we could take the true Taylor 
series expansion for f on page 452, and use it to build any a-y equation we wanted. 


From my perspective, there are several reasons. First, we want f to mimic g as closely as possible, 
so that the corresponding ay equation is a reflection of this emulation. But secondly, we want to 
develop models that are consistent with one another, as we ‘roll back’ from the infinite order, down 
to the finite order, and finally first order. 


If we take the true Taylor series expansion above, and remove both infinite series, we arrive at a 
first order equation for f [pp 416-17], which is ... 


ft, a) © 1 (at Drs / ty + ats /4g3)-1°. 


Now notice here, by default, that at r = rg, both f and g agree and compute to 1 — 1, / rg. It isn’t 
something we have to work for actually ... it is simply there. And so the natural question to ask is 
if it should be there, going forward, as we build out higher order expansions for f. 


And in my opinion, the answer is yes; for it is hard to ignore this agreement at first order, as 
though, perhaps, it was nothing more than chance. Indeed, the first order analysis may be giving us 
a hint or clue as to how things work, in the higher orders, as we endeavour to unlock the mysterious 
connection between a and y. And so for the time being, anyway, we’ll retain this requirement ... 


NOTE TO THE READER 
This particular release contains a number of cosmetic enhancements [pp 258-305]. A few 


annotations were also made in the previous research note [pp 450-452]. And the original essay [see 
pp 1-52] was, for the most part, moved over to the Times New Roman font. 


Folaioiek aokelaok 


454 


Ed 
A PROOF THAT S = L cw (y/2)" MAY COMPUTE TO | WHEN y = | 
n= 


On page 447 we surmised that S was indeed 1, when y = 1, and here we’d like to offer up a rather 
heuristic proof that this may be true. Recalling our a-y equation from page 450, and reproduced 
below [labelling as (~)] ... 


wo 
1- (a4+l)y + X aca + 1) cen: (y/2)" = a Data + 1D cn A /2%) (yy P 
n= n= 
we can, after collecting terms, rewrite this as [labelling as (*)] ... 
oo 
Lon (y/2)"-) = 2fa-1 + (at Dy} /a(at Diy +1) 
n= 


Now on the right-hand side in (*) above, divide top and bottom by a + | to obtain [again, labelling 


as (*)] ... 
Deen (y/2)"-P = 2{-(.-a)/(1+a) + y}/a(l+y) 


And since we know that as y ---» 1, it is the case that @ ---» 0, write for small a... 
(l-a)/(1+a) = (l-a)?/(1 +0) -@) = 1 - 20. 


Now substituting this result into the previous equation (*), just above, we obtain with y ---» 1 ... 


0 
Zen (1/2)? = 2{-14+2a+1}/2a = 40/20 = 2, 
n= 


and so our sum S must be 1, where again, ¢n = 2(2n—3)!!/n!. 
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


When considering (*) above, it should be noted that as y ---» 1, and hence a ---» 0, @ will have some 
dependency on y, so that a = a(y). However, it is unlikely we will ever know what this dependency 
computes to. Even so, we can still write the right-hand side of (*) as 


lim 2{-1 + 2a(y) + y} /a(y) +) 
yl 


455 


and in the limit, as y ---» 1, the expression above should resolve as 


lim 4a(y) / 2a(y) , 
Yrol 


which computes to 2. 


Now if we bring back our a-y equation from that last page, but replace the infinite expansion on the 
right side by a finite one; that is to say ... 


cy 


N 
1 (a4l)y + X oa 1) cn (y/2)" = a Z ata + 1 cn /2%) (yy P 


where now N is some integer greater than 1; and attempt to compute S as we did above, we could 
and probably will not get the right result, because now a has a dependency not only on y, but also 
N, as does S. 


And this will matter as we let y ---» 1, so that a ---» 0. Such a dependency on N is easily removed 
by letting N ---> co in the summation. 


In fact, if we were to compute S from the expression just above, using the same techniques as on 
the last page, we would find that S computed to 
N 
2 -Z en: (1/2") 
n=2 
Clearly this is not the correct result, but it becomes the right result, in the limit, as N ---» 00. For 
then 


N 


$= lim 2-2 ee (1/2% = 2-8, 
n=2 
N ---) 0 
so that again, S is equal to 1. 
In turn, this means that when choosing a model for the a-y equation, say model A or model B, 
discussed on pages 450-2, it would be wise to opt for B if we want consistency with the derivation 
of S (provided, of course, our methodology here makes sense). Indeed, in model A, the value of N 


is 2 in the a-y equation above, whereas in model B, N = 00. 


But finally, though, our approach is speculative, and so our comments here must be tempered by 
this very fact. 


TABLE OF VALUES 0 VERSUS HIGH Y = rs / tg FOR THE 100" ORDER B MODEL 


The pictures below are from model [B], first outlined on pages 450-2. They show the interior time 
component g = gi,(r, a), also found on page 450, for high values of y in the table above. And here, 
t=1,and0 < r < rg. Note that all three curves are parabolic, as they should be ... 


0.10; 


0.09 | 
0.08 | 
0.07 } 


0.06 | 


0.0 02 04 0.6 0.8 10 


0.010 
0.009 | 


0.008 | 


0.007 
0.006 


D.005 5 
bi 4 


0.0 0.2 o4 0.6 08 1.0 


456 


a (100" order) B 


0.127 
0.118 
0.110 
0.101 
0.091 
0.082 
0.071 
0.060 
0.047 
0.030 
0 


0.050 
0.045! 
oso} 
0.035 | 
0.030! 
0.025} 

3 


0.0 


04 


0.6 


08 


457 


ca 
AN INEQUALITY CONCERNING Y AND S = X cw: (y/2)" FOR THE B MODEL 
n= 
Let us bring back our a-y equation for the B model, which is ... 
~ co 
1-(a+y + X ata +1) en: (y/2)" = a - X ae + Den (1/2(y)*- YD 
n= n= 


and rewrite it as ... 
1— (a+ Dy + aa+)DS =a —- aatl)S/y. 
Note that the equation, just above, is a quadratic in a, which can be written as ... 
(y+ DS-o? + (y+ 1)\(S-y)-a + y(1-y) = 0. 


And since both a and y are between 0 and 1, solutions in @ for this quadratic will be real-valued, so 
that the square root term in the solution must be real itself. That is to say, for the general quadratic 


Av +Bx+C=0, 


B? — 4AC = O applies here. 


Thus, we may write 
(y+ DS-yP = 4y8U-yd+y), 
or more simply, 
(S—yy = 4ySU-y)/(+y), 
which is what we wanted to show. And again, this inequality applies in the range 0 < y < 1. 


And note also that when y = 0 or 1, S — y is exactly 0, so that the inequality above now becomes an 
equality. This statement presumes, of course, that when y = 1, S is equal to | as well. 


oo 2 2a 
From our inequality, just above, we may deduce that 


S$ + Qy¥B-y/U+y):S-Y <0, 


458 


and the inequality above will hold true, provided S is Jess than or equal to Sroor, Where Sroor is the 
proper solution of the quadratic 


-S? + (2y3-y)/U+y):S-y =0. 


That is to say [labelling as (*)] ... 


where Sroot is the right-hand side of the inequality just above. The inequality, itself, is valid for all 
O<ysl. 


Note that if y = 0, then S = 0, as is the right side of (*), and if y = 1, then S = 1, as is the right side 
of (*). And if, for example, y = 0.999, then S computes to ~ 0.93695, out to 4000 iterations, while 
the right side of (*) evaluates to 0.95530. 
A plot of Sroor versus y is shown below ... 


10 


08 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 10 


459 


To demonstrate that our inequality [shown below] only holds when S is /ess than or equal to Sroot, 
-S? + Qy3-y)/(+y)):S-y <0 
we’ll offer two plots of the function below [where S is now a context dependent variable] ... 


f(S) = -S + QYB-y/+y)-S- 7 


In the /eft picture we see what f (S) looks like when y = 1/3. Two roots appear, with one /ess than 
the other, which will always be the case for any 0 < y < 1 [ify =0 or | then the roots are both 0 or 
both 1]. It is the smaller root that we are interested in, which we call Syoot, and that is because S can 
never be greater than the /arger root, as we'll now show. 


From our original inequality on page 457 and shown below, where S is our summation, 
(S-y" 2 4ySd-y/U+y) 


we see that either S > y or S < y for all 0 < y < 1, with equality being reached when y = 0 or 1. 
Now if for some y between 0 and 1 it was the case that S = y (because the sign of S — y had flipped 
in some neighborhood of y), the right-hand side of the inequality, just above, would be zero, which 
is not possible. A simple numerical test now shows that S < y, for all 0 < y < 1, is the correct 
expression. 


460 


The second and larger root for f (S) is shown above, and it is easy to see from this expression, that 
the root [call it Sroor_2] is always greater than or equal to y, for all 0 < y < 1 [simply discard the 
Square root term, and analyze what’s left]. Thus, from our previous result, we have ... 


which shows us that S must be bounded above by the larger root of f (S). Indeed, it is actually true 
that S < min(1, Sroot_2), since we already know S can never be greater than 1. 


So when looking at the pictures on the previous page, we are only interested in the range 
0<S ¥ Sroor2, 


and here the parabolas split, negative up to Sroor, and then positive up to Sroo_2. Thus, f(S) < 0 can 
only hold if S < Stoo, which is what we wanted to show [p 458]. 


0.2 04 0.6 0.8 10 


In the picture above is a plot of the two roots of f(S); the larger is gold and the smaller is blue. 
Along the AB segment, f(S) < 0 holds, and along the BC segment f(S) 2 0 holds. The x-axis is y. 


461 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When (s) ~ o/s 


On pages 321-3, we came up with a form for the field equations in the coupled case, for the two 
dimensional plane, which is ... 


G"" = o[g"’’(0) + 2cosh(rcos(6))Jo(rsin(@))g"’(cos(8))] — (§) 


Here, we wish to put forth another argument that the correct parametrization for g"’Y is cos(0), as 
shown above, and we’ll start with the following diagram. 


g°*(0) 
— (Py 
v 
g“(1) 
(-1, 0) [e) (+1, 0) 


The diagram above shows the location of the dark energy singularities associated with (§), and 
these are at the origin O, and at (+1, 0). Additionally, we know that (§) is exact when @ is equal to 
0 or x, and believe that arg[g"”] diminishes as we move away from the singularity at (+1, 0), and 
head northward to P. Indeed, we believe arg[g"’’] = 0 at P. 


If we make the assumption that arg[g"’’] reaches a minimum value at P [pp 323-5], irrespective of 


where the singularity is on the x-axis, and call this minimum value 0 < 6 < 1; then it must also be 
true that if the singularities at (+1, 0) are now relocated to (+5, 0) [where 5 > 0], arg[g"’] must 
now be less than 8 at P [because arg[g"’] = 6 at (+8, 0), is exact]. That is to say, at P we have 


0 < arg[g"’] < 8  (acontradiction, from our assumptions, unless we let 5 ---» 0) 


By letting 5 ---» 0, we see this forces arg[g"”’] = 0 at P, so that whatever the parametrization of g"” 
is, it must be such that g’(1) holds at (+1, 0) and g"’Y(0) holds at P, as in the diagram above. Other 
arguments [p 321 ff.] now suggest that cos(6) is the correct parametrization for g"’’, which becomes 
g'’*(Scos(@)), if the singularities are at (+5, 0). And recall too, that g“(+8) are equal to one 
another, because of symmetry. 


462 


g°*(0) 
P 
4 
oie 
g"(6) 
(-6, 0) ° (6, 0) 


THE SINGULARITY INVARIANCE POSTULATE [6 2 0] 


This postulate simply states that arg[g"’’] reaches a minimum value of zero at P, irrespective of 
where the dark energy singularities lie on the x-axis. In the picture above, the singularities are at 
the origin O, and at (+8, 0). In the picture below, arg[g'”’] is still zero at any other point Q on the 
y-axis, because the radius of the circle is arbitrary. 


I believe this principle will be important in terms of understanding how the gravitational tensor g""Y 
interacts with dark energy, itself. 


g*(0) 


26) 
(6, 0) 


463 


Finally, the field equations in two dimensions, with dark energy singularities at the origin O and at 


(+6, 0), become, for the coupled case ... 


GY = ofg"() + 2cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(6))g"’(Scos(®))]_— (§) 


Note that the simplest way to calculate the second dark energy component above, is by examining 
the dark energy contour integral in the uncoupled case, and reasoning that it [the component] must 


be the same, as in the coupled case. 


For in the uncoupled case, our dark energy contour integral becomes, for the physical singularity at 


(8,0)... 


coePeos!0) f° e*"/ /(s— idsin(®))(s + iosin(®)) ds (f) 
¥ 


where y is the contour shown below. And when evaluated along tl 


ie branch lines, and combined 


with the singularity at (—8, 0), we recover the second dark energy component in (§) above. 


idsin® 


-i6sin® 


Also note that as 6 ---» 0, (§) reduces to 


G'Y = 30-g""(0), 


and this is what we would expect, because it is the ‘equivalent’ of three dark energy singularities 
now present at O. And finally, generalizing to three dimensions would work the same way [p 323]. 


464 


oo 
AN INEQUALITY CONCERNING Y AND S = X cw (y/2)" FOR THE B MODEL, PART II 


n= 


Some brief remarks are in order concerning the methodology used in Part I [pp 457-60]. On page 
459, we define the function 


f(S) = -S? + QB-Y/ldt+y)-S-¥ 


and offer two plots, one of which is shown above for y = 1/3. But we also know that S is defined to 
be the summation, as shown in the fitle to this note, so how do we reconcile this fact with the 
argument to f(S) ? After all, for a given choice of y, S will compute to a certain value. 


In my opinion, the best way to see this, within the context of f(S), is to allow S to become a fluid 
variable, which can take on any value as shown in the picture above, in a hypothetical sense. That 
is to say, we know what S really is, from the summation; but let’s pretend, hypothetically, that it 
can take on any non-negative value, along the x-axis, relative to f(S), and then form a constraint on 
what its range must actually be. 


If we then follow the arguments through to completion on pages 459-60, it should now be a little 
easier to see how the inequality we developed for S, comes about. 


465 
Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 


Part IT 


Let us recall our equivalency theorem from pages 332-3, and reproduced here, where a = cos(@) 
and ¢ = sin(9), in the coupled case ... 


(1) = g""*(a) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true (*) 
Here, the following expression is (1), 


00 


aS {cos(yr)[g'""(a + iy) — g"*(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g"(a—iy)]} dy //y? = € 


€ 
and the expression below is (2), where the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0) ... 

G"Y = of[g"(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)e""*(a)) « 
Now from Part I [pp 461-3], we now know that (1) is equal to g”“(a) - Jo(re) in nwo cases; and these 
are when a = 1, ¢ = 0, and when a = 0, € = 1. Note that because the dark energy component can be 


calculated from the dark energy contour integral, in the uncoupled case, all that really matters in the 
statement 


(1)=g""(a) -Jo(re)  (~) 
is the parametrization of g"’’, just above, on the right-hand side. 
Now if we look at (~) a little more closely, in the two cases where it is true, we see that arg[g"”] is 
equal to a, on the right-hand side of (~), which just happens to be the average value of the two 
arguments associated with ey in (1). That is to say, when a = 0 or I, it is the case that 


a = {(a—iy) + (a+iy)}/2 = arg[g"”] in (~) [right-hand side] 


I suspect this is true in general, for any choice of a and ¢, where 0 is between 0 and 7, say. If so, 
then from (*), (2) is also true for all such 0. 


466 


at iy 

y 

aN a =cos(@) 
B 

e=sin(6) 
€ 
0) 
oO a A * 
(1) = g(a) * Jo(re) 

| ° 

a—iy 


In the picture above is a unit circle, and here the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0). 
Superimposed on this picture is the a-line (blue) in the complex plane, where the integration in (1) 
takes place, implicitly. It starts at B and travels northward to @ + ico, and similarly, goes from C to 
@.— ico in the opposite direction, when looking at the arguments associated with gY in (1). 


We surmise that this integration, for all 6 between 0 and 7, is actually equal to 
g(a) - Jo(re) , 
where a is the segment OA, and ¢ is the segment AB, which is equal to AC. And the variable r in 


Jo above, is the radius of a circle in an (r, 8) layout, which shows up in (1) in the cos() and sin() 
terms. 


aedok kok 


467 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part IIT 


In considering our dark energy contour integral below (*), in the coupled case, where the 


singularity is at (+1, 0), we note that as @ ---» 0, the branching points in the contour y below merge 
into a simple pole, so that it is easy to calculate the residue. 


coe!) f° eg"(s + cos(0)) /,/(s — isin(®))(s + isin(®)) ds (*) 
¥ 


Indeed, our expression (*) becomes, where y is now a simple contour that omits the branch lines 
above, 


lim coe" f {eg""(s + cos(6)) /s} ds 
0---0 Y 
and this resolves as ... 
lim_ oe" - g"Y(cos(0)) 


0-0 


Thus, arg[g’’] in the coupled equations, already presents itself as cos(®), even as the angle @ ---» 0, 
thereby only bolstering our view that (2) [p 465] is the correct form we are looking for ... 


468 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part IV 


Let us consider (1) and (2) again [pp 465-6], with a = cos(@) and ¢ = sin(@), in the coupled case, 
where (1) is ... 


aS {cos(yr)[g"’ (a + iy) — g?"(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g(a —iy)]} dy //y?= € 
& 


and (2) is... 
GY = o[g"(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"(a)) . 
Recalling our equivalency, it is probably more correct to say 
(1) = g""(a, 8) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true, — (*) 


because for the second dark energy component in (2), g"’’(a) will depend on 0, since a itself, is a 
radial measure [pp 323-5, 369-70]. 


a=cos(6) 


e=sin(6) 


(1) = g(a, 8) - Jo(re) 


Thus in the picture above, when calculating g(a), it must be done along the radial line &, where a 
is now OD, which is equal to OA. Here, the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0), and 
the black circle above has a radius of 1. And in Cartesian coordinates, g"(a, 0) = g"""(a’, ae). 


469 


Now let’s consider the three dimensional coupled equations, as shown below, in a mathematical 
coordinate system, 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(«))Jo(rsin(a))g" (cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(reos(B))g""*(sin(B)). + 
2cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin())g""*(cos())]_ (*) 


with physical singularities at the origin O, and at 

(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 
And here, we know from previous research, that cos(a) = sin($)cos(®) and sin(B) = sin()sin(@). 
In this case, where we are on a unit sphere centered at O, the arguments cos(a), sin(B) and cos() 
above, associated with g"'’, are radial measures on the line yp, so that if we want to convert these 
arguments to Cartesian coordinates, we repeat the exercise on the previous page. 
Since we know, in a mathematical coordinate system, that 

x = rsin(p)cos(8) ; y = rsin(p)sin(@) ; z = rcos() 

all we need to do is let r become cos(a), sin(B) and cos(), for the corresponding terms associated 


with gy in (*), and calculate x, y, and z, accordingly. And, of course, use absolute values for r, if 
need be. 


Mathematical Coordinate System 


470 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part V 


Let us consider (1) and (2) again [pp 465-6], where a = cos(®) and ¢ = sin(8), in the coupled case, 
with singularities at the origin O and (+1, 0). Then (1) is ... 


aS {cos(yr)[g'""(a + iy) — g"*(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g"”(a—iy)]} dy //y? = € 
& 
and (2) is ... 


GY = ofg"(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"’(a)) « 
Recalling our equivalency, 
(1) = g"*(a, 9) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true, — (~) 


let us set ¢ = 0, and allow the singularities at (+1, 0) to converge at the origin O. Then (1) becomes 


co 


ef {cos(ynle"liy) — e!Ciyy] + isin(yr) [2""Giy) +e Giy))} dy/y 
ie) 


which is always equal to g"’(0), provided g'’’ is well-behaved in the complex plane, real-valued 
on the x-axis, and we can secure convergence along our contour y [p 467]. Indeed, we showed it to 
be true when g"(s) = C(B — s), where B > 1 [pp 330-2]. 
Thus, from our equivalency (~) above, it must also be true that 

GY” ~ 36-g""(0), 
since a is now 0 in (*), as is ¢. And, of course, this agrees with our original calculations on pages 
197-9, using the dark energy contour integral for a singularity at O. Thus, we have a confirmation 


of our harmonic expression (1) in this case, as well as our equivalency (~). 


afeokake aco 


As another confirmation, suppose g"’Y = c, where c is some constant. Then (1) computes to 


oo oo 
4kic S sincys) dy/ Jy?=& = c-2n S sin(yr) dy / Jy? = € = c-Jo(te), 
& & 


so that from our equivalency (~), g(a) in (2) is equal to c, which is, indeed, the case. 


471 


But the question of how to solve (2), reproduced below, is still rather puzzling ... 

G'Y = of[g"(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)e"*(@)] (2) 
For in (2), there are two terms on the right-hand side that we need to deal with. First, g"’(0), which 
is associated with the first dark energy component o, and then g"’’(a), which is associated with the 
second component 2ocosh(ra)Jo(re). 
Now g'’*(0) doesn’t depend on 0, because it is associated with the singularity at the origin O, but 


the second term g'’’(a), associated with the singularities at (+1, 0), does depend on 0, because a is a 
radial measure. 


Perhaps the best approach is to look at the equation 

G"Y = 26 - cosh(drcos(@))Jo(Srsin(®))g"""(Scos(0)) —(§) 
associated with the dark energy singularities at (+5, 0), where 6 > 0. The solution to (§), namely 
g'’, will be a function of (r, 8, 6, 5), but if we let 5 ---» 0, it becomes the equivalent of the solution 
to 


GY ~ 26-g"%(). 


Thus, if we take the solution to (§), namely, g"(r, 0, 6, 5), and replace o by 6/2 in it, as 8 --> 0, 
we should, in theory, arrive at a solution to 


GY’ x o-g""0), 
which will only depend on (r, 6), because of radial symmetry associated with the singularity at O ... 


That is to say, the solution g"’’(r, 6) to the equation just above, will not depend on 6, and perhaps 
by adding the two solutions together; namely g"’(r, 0, 6, 5) and g"’(r, 6), we might arrive at a 
solution which incorporates all three singularities; that is to say, the one at O and the two at (+6, 0). 


NOTE TO THE READER 


In (2) above, when a = 0, the temptation is to factor g’(0) out of the bracketed expression, which 
we actually did on pages 321-9, purely for symbolic reasons. In reality, g“’(0) and g"’’(a) are two 
very different gravitational tensors — the first being associated with the singularity at O, and thus 
having no dependency on 0 at all, while the second [g"’’(a)] does very much depend on 0, because 
it is associated with the singularities at (+1, 0). Thus, no such factorization is really possible ... 


Also note, that when talking about g"’(r, ) having no dependency on 9 or 9, it is implied that we 


are referring to the primary directions of r and t. 


472 


Unit Circle 


atiy 


a=cos(8) 


eé = sin(@) 


g(1) 
x 


(1) = g*(a@) * Jo(re) 


a—iy 


In the diagram above, in the coupled case, where a. = cos(9) and ¢ = sin(@), with singularities at the 
origin O and (+1, 0), we recall that (1) is ... 


aS {cos(yr)[g'"¥ (a + iy) — g"*(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g"*(a—iy)]} dy //y? = € 
& 
and (2) is ... 


G"Y = o[g"(O) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"’*(a)] . 
Recalling our equivalency, 
(1) = g(a) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true, (~) 
we can picture the argument associated with g"(a) in two ways: as the segment OD meeting the 
blue circle at D or, as the segment OD meeting the gold circle at D, where the gold circle is the 


polar plot of a = cos(@), running from @ =—2/2 to m/2. 


As 8 moves from 0 to 2/2, the radius of the blue circle will shrink to zero, while the polar plot in 
gold will remain the same ... 


473 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When (s) ~ o/s, 
Part VI 


In this note, we want to talk briefly about how we might solve the coupled equations in two 


dimensions, when there are singularities at the origin O, and at {(+1, 0), (0, 1)}. Notationally, the 
form for these equations is ... 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(0))Jo(rsin(6))g"’(cos(0)) + 2cosh(rsin(@))Jo(rcos(8))g"’’(sin(®))] , 
but in reality, it only makes sense to deal with it component by component, as we’ll see below ... .. 
Starting with the first component, for the singularity at O, we have 

GY x o-2%O), 
and however we arrive at a solution to this equation, we’ll call it g"’“(r, 6), since it doesn’t depend 
on §. The second component, associated with the singularities at (+1, 0), was already dealt with in 


the last research note, and so again, we’ll call the solution to the equation below g"’*(r, 0, 6), since 
it does depend on 8... 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(reos(@))Jo(rsin(®))¢""*(cos(0)).  (*) 


To find the solution for the third component, simply rotate g"’(r, 0, 6) by 90 degrees, since the 


singularities here are at (0, +1). We’ll call this solution g"(r, 0, o | rotate). Now we can obtain a 
total solution by adding together g"*(r, 6), g(r, 8, 6) and g"’(r, 6, 6 | rotate). 
In three dimensions, with singularities at the origin O, and at 

(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1), 


the coupled equations are, notationally, in a mathematical coordinate system ... 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"’(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(p))Jo(rcos(p))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos())Jo(rsin())g"*(cos())] - 


And here, we know from previous research, that cos(a) = sin(p)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(@), so 
that, roughly speaking, we can use the same approach as above. For the singularity at O, we solve 
the equation 


GY = og"), 


and call this solution g"’“(r, 6), since it doesn’t depend on 0 or $. 


474 


For the second component, associated with the singularities at (+1, 0, 0), one would now solve the 
equation 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"’’(cos(a)) , 
and call the solution g"“(r, 6, 6, 6). And for the third component, the solution is simply a 90 
degree rotation of g""’(r, 0, @, 6) in the x-y plane, since we are now dealing with the singularities at 
(0, £1, 0). Let’s call this solution g"(r, 0, $, 6 | rotate). 
That only leaves us with the /ast component, associated with the singularities at (0, 0, +1); namely, 
G"Y = 26 - cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin(p))g"”(cos()) , 
and this is no different than solving (*) on the last page, where 0 has been replaced by @. We’ll call 
this solution g(r, , 0), since it doesn’t depend on 0 — a manifestation of our coordinate system, 


actually, which is the (r, 8, ) layout. 


Now we can obtain a total solution, by adding all four solutions together; that is to say, 2", 0), 
along with g"’’(r, 0, $, 6), g(r, 8, , 6 | rotate) and g(r, , 0) ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


It might just be that at or near a singularity, a ‘whorl effect’ appears in g"’’, in the coupled case. 
For example, we know already that with singularities at the origin O and at (+1, 0), approaching O 
along the x-axis is not the same as approaching O along the y-axis, when looking at the coupled 
equations in two dimensions. And this could lead to whorls in g”Y as shown in the diagrams below. 


475 


An Interesting Decomposition Concerning The Primes 


Let n > 3 be any integer. Then there is always a finite sequence of increasing primes {Px}, 
according to our construction below, such that 


n=Pi+Pot...+ Pe ; Pr SPo<...< Px > Pr =2or3 (*) 


To show that this is so, we’ll prove it by going in the reverse direction. So let’s start by letting pi 
be the largest prime at least 2 below n, and let A=n— pj. If A=2 or 3, we are done. If not, find 
the largest prime P2 at least 2 below A, and now let A=n—- pi — po. If A = 2 or 3, then again, we 
are done (note that p2 < pi). 


Otherwise, continue the process until eventually we have A = 2 or 3, and let px = A, to complete the 
summation. Finally, by reversing this summation, our theorem is proved. 


As an example, if n = 29, it would resolve as 29 = 23 + 3 + 3. On the other hand, 28 = 23 + 3 + 2, 
and by reversing these summations, we see how they validate our theorem. 


What makes this somewhat fascinating to me, at least, is that it holds for any n > 3. Thus, even for 


a number like 10'°, (*) will be true, even though we may never know what the sequence {Px} 
really is, according to our construction. 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) ~ o/s, 
Part VII 


In the diagram below, on the following page, we want to consider the dark energy over two circles 
[A and B] and compare charts. Here, we are dealing with a three dimensional model, with 
singularities at the origin O, and at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1), 


where the coupled equations are, notationally, in a mathematical coordinate system ... 


G"” = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"” (cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(p))Jo(rcos(p))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos())Jo(rsin())g"(cos(p))] . C*) 


And here, we know from previous research, that cos(a) = sin($)cos(®) and sin(B) = sin()sin(@). 


416 


For circle A above, where r= 11, = 1,0 < 0 < a, and 6 =7/4, the total dark energy in (*), on the 
semi-circle ecg is shown in the picture on the /eft below. For circle B, where k = (V2 /2) -r,o=1, 
m/4<0< 3n/4and2/4 < $ < 2/2, the total dark energy on the semi-circle ach is shown on the 
right below. The constant k is the center of circle B. 


1000 1000 


900 | 900 
800} 800 
700 } 700 
00} 600 


500 500 


400 f 400 
a ie 
t 


0.0 05 10 15 2.0 25 3.0 08 1.0 12 14 1.6 18 20 


Circle A ecg ,0=x Circle B ach ,0=x 


477 


One would think that the two energy profiles above would be the same, given the location of the 
singularities, and given that circle B is simply a 90 degree rotation of A. However, because of 
where circle B is situated, the y component k does not change, so that the equation below must hold 
for this circle [B]. 


y =r-sin(p)sin(@) = k 


In turn, this creates a non-linear relationship between 6 and 9 in circle B, which skews or distorts 0 
in the right diagram above, versus @ in the /eft diagram above, where no distortion occurs, because 
in the /eft diagram above, 0 is independent of >. 


Thus, the two diagrams really are the same, up to this distortion effect, and I think this is the correct 
way to interpret pictures like this, when a dependency between 0 and @ exists. Below is a plot of 0 
versus > when k = (V2 /2)-r,anda/4<@<2/2,0/4< 6 <2/2. 


8 =arcsin 1 / (V2 + sin(®)) 


Finally, when considering solutions to coupled forms, like those shown below, it should be kept in 
mind that G"’Y must be constructed in a manner consistent with the right-hand side of these forms. 
Here, GY’ = CY — kT", where C"'’, T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively ... 


GY = o- gO), 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin())g""*(cos(o)) . 


sks Rsk 


478 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part VIII 


In the diagram above, the total dark energy € from (*) on page 475, at points e and g on the dashed 
circle, maps uniquely to these same points on circle A. Similarly, € at points a and b on circle B 
maps uniquely to these same points on circle C, and at the point c on circles A and B, where they 
touch, & is also the same value. 


In general, then, for any point p on any circle B, we can always map (or associate) € at p with some 
circle A, uniquely, so that ultimately, the entire sphere is covered off in this fashion. 


Thus, when calculating the total dark energy € over the sphere S of radius r, it does not matter 
whether we choose to integrate over the sum total of all circles of type B, moving from the east 
pole of S to the west pole of S, or circles of type A, moving from the north pole of S to the south 
pole of S. Either way, we will get the same result for €. 


The only difference is one of simplicity. If we choose to go with circles of type A, moving from 
north to south [pp 374-5], the calculations will be much simpler because 0 is independent of 6 ... 


479 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part IX 


Some brief remarks are in order concerning the coupled field equations. When we write an 
equation like 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"”(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B))g"*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos($))Jo(rsin())g"*(cos())] , (*) 


with singularities at the origin O, and at 
(,0,0)  (-1,0,0) 0, 1,0) ©,-1,0) ,0,1) 0, 0,-1); 


where GYY = C"Y — kT", and C"’, TY are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, 
respectively; we are saying that G"’’ is the remainder after subtracting out tangible matter from the 
space-time fabric. And here, cos(a) = sin(p)cos(®) and sin(B) = sin()sin(®), in a mathematical 
coordinate system. 


Thus, while dark energy appears in (*), it does so on the right-hand side of (*), and is to be thought 
of as intangible matter, which still has an influence on the gravitational tensor g"’’. It therefore has 
no presence in the stress tensor T"’’, in my opinion. 


So in the simple case where we only have the vacuum in our space-time fabric, plus one dark 
energy singularity at the origin O of our coordinate system, T'’Y would be zero, and our coupled 
field equations would look like 


ch’ = o-g"(0), 
where CY = RUY - “Rg, and R"’’ is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. And if there was 
also a static, perfect star centered at O, Tin the comoving frame, would be comprised of pressure 


and density in the star, along the diagonal components, and the coupled field equations would now 
look like 


GY = og"). 


And the same formulation applies to (*) above, where now the dark energy singularities have been 
extended to include 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 


In my view, this is the correct way to interpret the left-hand side of the coupled field equations, but 
there may be other interpretations as well. 


480 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When (s) = o/s, 
Part X 


Suppose we are looking for a total solution ‘in one go’ to the coupled equations below, 


GY = o6[2cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g""*(cos(a)) + 
2cosh(rsin(B))Jo(rcos(B))g"’*(sin(B)) + 
2cosh(reos($))Jo(rsin(o))g""*(cos(o))],. C*) 
with singularities now at 


(,0,0) (-1,0,0) (0,1,0) (0,-1,0) (0,0,1) (0,0,-1). 


Because this is being done ‘in one go’, we are abandoning the ‘component by component’ approach 
discussed in previous research notes in this section [p 461 ff.], and we’ll call this total solution, 
which we believe exists, g"’’(r, 0, , 6 | total). 


Now suppose we remove the singularities along the y and z axes, so that only the singularities along 
the x-axis [(+1, 0, 0)] remain. Question: will it be possible to reduce g"(r, 6, , o | total), 


mathematically speaking, so that it now reflects the solution we would have gotten, had we solved 
the equation 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(rcos(a))Jo(rsin(a))g"’”(cos(a)) , 
associated with (+1, 0, 0) ? 
Either such a reduction is possible or it isn’t. If it is, then the ‘in one go’ approach might work, but 


if it isn’t, then the ‘component by component’ approach may be our only option, since here such a 
reduction is obvious [pp 473-4]. 


oko 2 ae a 
We'll now offer a rather heuristical proof that any total solution for the coupled equations, with 
singularities at the origin O, and at S = {(£8x, 0, 0), (0, +8y, 0), (0, 0, £52)}, where 8x, d5y, and 6, are 
all greater than zero, is always reducible. It should be said that whether there is or isn’t a perfect 
star centered at O, does not matter here. 


Let us assume the solution at O is separate and apart from the solution for S, so that our total 
solution may be written as 


TF = ghX(r,6) + g(r, 0, , 6, dx, dy, 3) - 


Now let 6, ---> 0, so that the solution becomes 


481 


3-gh"G, 6) + g!V(r, 8, $, 0, 8x, 8y), 
which, up to the constant 3, is a subset of F. If we now let dy ---» 0, the solution becomes 
5g!" 0) + g'(r, 0, 6, 6, 85), 


which again, is a subset of J. And finally, letting 5x ---» 0, we obtain 7 - g(r, 6), and the theorem 
is now proved. 


So no matter how we arrive at a total solution F for the coupled equations, it must, in the end, be 
reducible, if our logic above holds true. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
Let 5; ---» 0, so that the solution becomes (because the two z-axis singularities converge at O), 
g(r, 0) + g(r, 20) + g"(r, 0, >, 6, 5x, dy). 
Tf we now let dy ---» 0, the solution becomes 
g(r, 0) + 2g""G, 20) + gC, 8, >, 6, ds), 
and finally, letting 5x ---» 0, we obtain 
g'"(G,0) + 3g", 20). (~) 


Were we to let 5x, dy, and 6, converge to O simultaneously, we could argue the reduction would 
lead to 


g'(t, 0) + g(r, 69), 
so that from (~) 
3e"%(r, 26) = g(r, 60) . 
Tn turn, this must mean that 
2gh"(r, 0) = g!(r, 20), 
so that (~) above becomes 7 - g"'(r, 6). 


afeokake aco 


We'll now demonstrate this result, using a slightly different approach. So let us begin by 
considering the coupled equation below ... 


482 


GY = o[g**(0) + 2cosh(drcos(@))Jo(Srsin(@))g"*(Scos(8))], — C*) 


with singularities at O, and at (+5, 0), for some 6 > 0. And let us presume, as we did above, that 
the total solution to this equation is of the form 


5 = g"%r,0) + g"(r, 0,6, 8). 
Letting 6 ---» 0, the solution will become 
g'"(r,0) + g(r, 20), 
but also, the form for (*) now becomes 
GY = 36-g"%(0), 
with a solution g”’(r, 30). Thus, it must be the case that 
g'(r,6) + g(r, 26) = g(r, 30), 


and so, an associative principle concerning 6 emerges; namely that if a and b are non-zero, and 
real-valued numbers, then it must be the case that 


g(t, ao) + g'(r, bo) = g'G,(atb)o).  (H) 
Extending (*) so that it includes the singularities at (0, +5), we find that as 6 ---> 0 
g'(r,0) + 2g"(r, 20) = g(r, 50), 
and thus, using our associative principle, we have 
2¢"(r, 26) = g(r, 50) — g(r, 6) = g(r, 56) + g*(r,-0) = g"(r, 40). 
Replacing o by o /2 now gives us the desired result; namely that 
2g"%(r, 6) = g(r, 20). 


We could have discovered this result simply by letting a and b equal | in (+), but it’s nice to see too 
that it can be produced by extending (*), as we did above. 


22K 2 2a 
Let’s now reconsider (*) above, but this time assume a total solution J where we don’t split off the 


solution at O. Again, as 5 ---» 0, J becomes g(r, 3c), and we’ll call this Fo. Now let’s consider 
the total solution J’ to the following equation ... 


483 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(6))g""’(Scos()) , 


and let 8 ---» 0, so that J’ becomes g(r, 26), and we’ll call this F’o. We now want to consider the 
meaning of the statement 


Fo — Fo. 


It is, in fact, the total solution at O, after removing two of the three singularities that were there, 
once we let 6 ---» 0 initially, to arrive at Jo. As such, we may write 


Fo — Fo = g(t, 6), 
or equivalently, 
"V(r, 0) + g(r, 20) = g(r, 30), 


which is exactly what we concluded on the last page, by first assuming a split in the total solution F 
to (*). 


Thus, it does not matter whether we do or don’t assume a split in J, for either way, we arrive at the 
same conclusion, and so our associative principle concerning o, holds in general. 


NOTE TO THE READER 


When talking about g"’’(r, o) having no dependency on 6 or 9, it is implied that we are referring to 
the primary directions of r and f, in these notes. 


ak a a 2 ok 
It might just be, for a coupled equation like 
GY = o[g**(0) + 2cosh(drcos(@))Jo(Srsin(@))g"*(Scos(8))], — C*) 


with singularities at O, and at (+5, 0), for some 6 > 0; that the total solution to this equation is of 
the form (at least for the radial and time components) 


F = g(r) + gh"(r,0) + Y(t, 8,0, 8). 
Letting 6 ---» 0 gives us 
g'() + g°“C, 30), 


and letting o ---» 0 yields g"*(r), since from our associative principle below [p 482], g(r, o) = 0 if 
o=0. 


2e"(r, 6) = g(r, 20) 


484 


Using J as the template, we would then calculate GY = CY — kT", where CY, T'Y are the 
Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively; given that in a comoving frame, T"Y 
will be comprised of pressure and density along the diagonal, for a perfect two-dimensional star, 
centered at the origin O. 


We might start by looking for a diagonal solution to g'’’, and thus would calculate CY and T“Y 
along the diagonal, using the whole of J, and solve (*) above, accordingly. 


And in this case, because we are dealing with an (r, 6, t) layout, it is reasonable to suppose F 
should look the same for all (u,v), where u = v, and u = 1, 2, 3. 


There can be no assurance that this method will work, but at this point, anyway, I believe it’s worth 
considering. And if we decide to take a ‘component by component’ approach to solving (*) on 
page 483, assuming our associative principle holds true [pp 482-3], we'd start with the expression 


and solve it by using the first term in F below, as our template for calculating C" and T"’, 
assuming a perfect star S*, centered at O ... 


F = g'%(r) + g"%G,0) + g'C, 00,8). 
To solve for the singularity at O; namely, 
GY = 6g"), 


we would use the second term in J for doing our calculations, and to solve for the singularities that 
are at (+6, 0); namely, 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(Srcos(@))Jo(Srsin(8))g""*(Scos(@)) , 


we would use the /ast term in JF for our calculations. Adding all three component solutions 
together would give us a total solution for (*), that allows for o ---» 0, when S* exists. 


The only other option would be to try and solve (*) in its entirety, ‘in one go’, by using the whole 
of J to calculate C"’Y and T"’, but I’m not so sure this is a good idea. For more on this, you can 
also consult the previous research notes [p 461 /f.] ... 


feof seo 


So to see how this works for the second component in J, which is g(r, 6), associated with the 
singularity at O; let us assume a perfect star S* centered at O, which is filled with dark energy [o] 
everywhere, but nothing else. From this, we can calculate an intangible stress tensor T", 
comprised of pressure and density along the diagonal, just as we would in the tangible case, when 
dealing with the first term in J, where o = 0. So we’re imagining dark energy to be a fluid here. 


485 


The assumptions concerning g"’(r, o) would be similar to those made for the tangible case, except 


that here we know o is present and that g"’(r, c) must vanish if there is no dark energy; that is to 
say, g(r, 6) = 0 if o=0. Therefore, it is reasonable to suppose 


go) = o-g""), 


for such an assumption also preserves our associative principle mentioned above [see also the notes 
on pp 482-3]. But there may be other ways to decode g'’’(r, 6), as well. For example, we might 
write, for some function f, that preserves associativity under addition with respect to o ... 


g'r,0) = fo)", 


or we could even let f (o) = 1, and hope that the solution g"“(r, o) to the equation below preserves 
associativity. 


Now we can calculate both C"’ and T"”, using our template from g"’’(r, 6) above [which might be 
g(x), itself]; where here C"’’ , T"’’ can be thought of as intangible tensors, and solve the following 
equation for the coupled case ... 


GY’ = g-g4%(0). 
We then take this solution g"’’(r, 0), valid for all r > 0, and add it to the solution g"*(r) obtained by 
using the first term in J, when o = 0; and so have a fotal solution in the case of a perfect star, 
centered at O, and filled with tangible matter, plus one dark energy singularity at O; where the dark 
energy [o] itself, permeates the whole of space-time. As such, there is no such thing as an interior 
or exterior solution for g"’’(r, 0), as there is when dealing with tangible matter in the star. 


Almost like an overlay, if you will, where we are considering two perfect stars; one filled with a 
tangible fluid, and the other filled with an intangible fluid, which we call dark energy, that spreads 
throughout the whole of our space-time fabric. 


The case of the third term in F is much harder to deal with, as it is associated with the singularities 
at (+6, 0), where the equation now takes the form 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(Srcos(@))Jo(Srsin(8))g"" (Scos(@)) . 
It’s still intangible matter, but calculating CY and T"’ will be much harder. Perhaps we can 
invoke a mean-value theorem here [pp 374-5], to simplify things. I hope to say more in a future 
note, on this subject ... 
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
In dealing with the two dimensional perfect star S* of radius r, and filled only with dark energy and 


nothing else, the dark energy at each point in S* is o, and the average value of dark energy over S* 
is also o [pp 374-5]. 


486 


Thus, by letting r ---» 0, we see the average value of dark energy is still 6, and so can define energy 
density [p] in S* to be o. And since dark energy is an intangible fluid, it is reasonable to suppose 
that the following ‘equation of state’ holds for S*, where p is pressure in the star [p 383 ff.] ... 


2p+p=0. 


Thus, along the diagonal, we can populate the intangible stress tensor T"’, in the comoving frame, 
with real values for pressure and density, and so calculate the intangible CY and TY’ in a 
relativistic setting. 

As to our template g"’’(r), which is used to calculate C"’ and T"”, it is a function of r in the radial 
and time directions [u = v, u = 1 or 3], and for u = v = 2, which is the @ direction, we can let gu,.(r), 
in its covariant form, be equal to r? [p 383 ff.]. 


These are just my ideas and opinions on how we go about solving 
GY’ = o- gO), 


for the intangible case, where we are dealing with the singularity at the origin O, and S* is filled 
only with dark energy. 


feof 


Note that if a component, such as gr in the intangible case, does not depend on o, then we would 
not add it to its counterpart in the tangible case, when developing a total solution. We would only 
do this if in the intangible case, g"“(r, 6) did depend on o. 


Now looking at (*) below again, we could try to solve it ‘in one go’ by essentially incorporating the 
right-hand side into the stress tensor. But what will happen when we try to calculate CY and T"’, 
using a template like g”(r, 0, o, 5) 2 For example, when 6 = 2/2, am I referring to the first 
component in the bracketed expression below, or am I referring to the second, since both are 
g"%(0). They are, in fact, two very different gravitational tensors, since the first does not depend on 
@ at all, but the second does. 


Furthermore, if we were to incorporate only the first component o- g"*(0) into T“’, where now 
we’re dealing with a perfect star [S*] filled with tangible matter, it’s rather like saying we’re going 
to pair the pressure and density [p and p] associated with S*, along the diagonal, with o. Yet, from 
our analysis above, of the perfect star filled only with dark energy, we have seen that it may have 
its own intangible stress tensor, that follows a certain ‘equation of state’. How then, would we 
reconcile this difference, were we to incorporate in this way ? 


For these reasons, and others too, I think the ‘component by component’ approach is more realistic, 
and we may have more to say about it in future notes ... 


G'” = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(8))Jo(Srsin(8))g"*(Scos(®))]. (**) 


487 


Now we’ll deal with the third term in F below, which is associated with the singularities at (+6, 0), 
SF = gr) + g(r, 6) + g(r, 0,6, 8) 
where the equation takes the form 
G"Y = 26 - cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(6))g""*(Scos(0)). (7) 


Our perfect star S*, of arbitrarily large radius r, is filled only with dark energy from the 
quantumilike fluctuations that come and go in an instant of time, defined by the function 


— = 20- cosh(Srcos(8))Jo(Srsin(8)) . 


Since € satisfies Laplace [pp 374-5], the average value of & over S* is 20, and so we can define the 
energy density [p] in S* to be 20. And again, since € is intangible matter, it is reasonable to 
suppose that the ‘equation of state’ for S* is 


2p+p=0, 
where p is average pressure in the star. 


Thus, along the diagonal, we can populate the intangible stress tensor T"”, in the comoving frame, 
with real values for pressure and density, and so calculate the intangible C"’ and T"’ in a 
relativistic setting. 


As to our template g"’(r, 6), which is used to calculate CY and T“", it is a function of (r, 8) in the 
radial and time directions [u = v, u = 1 or 3], and for u = v = 2, which is the 6 direction, we can let 
uv(r), in its covariant form, be equal to r° [p 383 ff]. 


The reason we can do this for g22 is because while there are quantumlike fluctuations along any 
circle C in S*, centered at O; it is the case that for any point q on C, the dark energy at that point 
belongs to the radial fluctuation along some line & which intersects C at q (for pictures of radial 
and angular fluctuations, see for example, page 240 and pages 346-7). 


Now we can solve (+) [for u = v, u = 1 or 3], and call this solution g"'“(r, 0, 0, 5). By adding all 
three solutions together, we arrive at J. And again, the first term in J is the solution when o = 0, 
and we are dealing with a perfect star comprised of tangible matter, with pressure p and density p. 


The second term in J is the solution when we are dealing with a perfect star of arbitrarily large 
radius r, comprised only of dark energy, for the singularity at O. And the third term in J is like the 
second, but now the singularities are at (+5, 0). The hope is that al/ three solutions, added together, 
will give us what we’re looking for ... 


feo ake 


488 


Recall that in a mathematical coordinate system [labelling as (*)], the coupled field equations are ... 


G"Y = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))g"’(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B))g"”*(Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(Sreos())Jo(Srsin(o))g"*(Scos(o))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin($)cos(@) and sin(B) = sin()sin(0), and the physical singularities associated 
with A(s) = o/s, are at the origin O, and at 


S = {(+6, 0, 0), (0, +5, 0), (0, 0, +5)} . 


As well, G'Y = C¥Y — kT’, where CY, TY are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively; and CY = R"Y - %Rg"’, where R"* is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


Now since we are going to be working in a physical coordinate system [PCS], we’ll want to let 0 
and @ trade places, so we’ll keep this in mind, going forward, with respect to (*) above. 


In an (r, 8, >, t) layout, using PCS, our total solution to (*) is 
F = gh") + g'"G,0) + 2°", 0, $,9,8), 


where g''(r) is the solution when o = 0; g"’(r, o) is the solution associated with the singularity at 
O, and g""(r, 8, 6, 6, 5) is the solution that corresponds to the singularities associated with S. 


For g"’(r), this is the case of a perfect star [S*], centered at O, and filled with tangible matter, with 
pressure p and density p along the diagonal of T"’, in the comoving frame. The interior / exterior 
Schwarzschild solution applies here, as it’s commonly called ... subject to a reconsideration of the 
time component [pp 383-460] for the interior case. 

For YC, 6), this is the solution associated with the singularity at O, in the case of a perfect star 
[S*] of arbitrary radius r, and filled with intangible matter, only. By intangible, we mean dark 
energy [&], and the form for the equation we are solving is (because € is o at any point in S*) ... 


GYY = o-g™(0). 
Just as in our previous notes, the average value of o over S* is 6, itself, so that we can define the 
energy density [p] in S* to be c. And again, since € is intangible matter, it is reasonable to suppose 
that the ‘equation of state’ for S* is 

3p+p=0, 
where p is pressure in the star. 


Thus, along the diagonal, we can populate the intangible stress tensor T'’’, in the comoving frame, 
with real values for pressure and density; and so, calculate the intangible C"Y and T"’ in a 


489 


relativistic setting, using a generic function g(r) as the template for our calculations, for the 
radial and time components. 


As to the inner block [7’, 7 sin? 4] in the g-matrix, as shown below in covariant form, we leave it as 
is, so that our solution g"’(r, o) only applies to the first and last entries in g. 


We then add to to the Schwarzschild solution g"’*(r) in J, and shown below, the solution g"*(r, 6) 
for our dark energy singularity at O, in the radial and time components, only. The inner block is 
always left alone. 


F = g(r) + g(r, 0) + g(r, 0, $, 6,8). 


Now we’re on to the quantumlike components, the first of which is associated with (+6, 0, 0) in S, 
and shown below ... 


& = 20-cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a)) . 
Our perfect star [S*], of arbitrary radius r, is filled only with €, and because € satisfies Laplace [pp 
374-5], we can populate the intangible T"’, in the comoving frame, with pressure p and density p 
along the diagonal; where p = 20, and average pressure in the star can be calculated from our 
“equation of state’ 
3p+p=0. 
We now go ahead and solve the equation below, for the radial and time components only, 
G"Y = 26- cosh(drcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))g"” (Scos(a)) 

by first using a generic template T = g"’’(r, 8, ) to calculate C"'Y and T“", in a relativistic setting. 
And here, it should be clear that the properties of t will be driven by €, and thus, we should 


probably assume T is some kind of Fourier series expansion, at a minimum. 


The solution to the equation will be of the form g"(r, 0, }, 6, 5), which is then added to the nvo 
previous solutions that form part of J, as shown below, again in the radial and time directions ... 


5 = g(r) + g(r,0) + g(r, 0, b, 0, 8). 


The inner block [r’, 7° sin? 4] is always left alone. 


490 


The solution to the next quantumlike component, that is associated with (0, +6, 0) in S, needn’t be 
calculated from the equation below, in my opinion ... 


GY = 26-cosh(drsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B))g"”" (Ssin(B)) . 


For because of symmetry, it should be nothing more than a 90 degree rotation of the previous 
solution above, in the x-y plane. Again, this solution is added to the other three we’ve already 
discussed above, in the radial and time directions only. 


That only leaves us with the /ast piece associated with (0, 0, +6) in S, and in a PCS setting, the 
equation is to be written as 


G"Y = 26 - cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(6))g""’(Scos(@)) . 


The solution will be of the form g”“(r, 0, 6, 5), and again, the radial and time components are to be 
added to the other four solutions we’ve already discussed here. We’re still working in three 
dimensions, but in this case, the dark energy component does not depend on ¢$ — a manifestation of 
our coordinate system, actually ... ... 


~ 


® > 
= NN] 


~ 


Physical Coordinate System 


491 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When (s) ~ o/s, 
Part XI 


When solving the equation below, in the intangible space, for the radial and time directions, where 
o>0 


GY = 6-80), () 


so that our perfect star S*, of arbitrary radius 1, is filled with dark energy only; it is perfectly fine to 
use a template like g(r) to calculate the intangible CY and T"'’, and thus find a solution to (1); 


but, the solution g"’(r, 6) itself, must be such that it is zero when o = 0. 


We have demonstrated this idea in different ways in Part X of these research notes, yet here’s 
another approach. Suppose we consider the following equation ... 


GY = -6-g%(0). 2) 
The solution to (2) will be g(r, -o), and we can consider this to be a form of anti-gravity, equal 
and opposite to the solution for (1), which is 2%, 0). Thus, adding the two solutions should 
produce zero — gravity, in the intangible space, would disappear altogether; which is the same thing 
as saying the dark energy singularity at the origin O no longer exists, so that o = 0. Thus we may 
write, in the intangible space 


ero) + g'G,-0) = 0 = gr, 0), 

which is consistent with our associative principle under addition for o [p 482]. 
And the same logic applies to other quantumlike components, associated with dark energy 
singularities, in the intangible space. It is perfectly fine to use a template like tT = g"'(r, 0, ) to 
solve the equation below, for the radial and time directions 

G"Y = 26 - cosh(drsin())Jo(Srcos(p))g""(Ssin(B)) , (3) 
but the solution g"’(r, 8, ), o, 5) must always be such that it is zero if o = 0, in the intangible space. 

oo 2 2a 


And as we said earlier, we could also try templates like o - g(r) or o - g(r, 0, ) when solving 
(1) or (3) above, respectively [p 485], but we won’t know what works and what doesn’t, until we 


finally get a solution on paper. 


492 


Here are some pictures of the [quantumlike] radial fluctuations for a two-dimensional star, centered 
at O, with dark energy singularities at O and at {(+1, 0), (0, +1)}. It is these fluctuations, in the 
intangible space (dark energy), that are responsible for the expansion and contraction of the 
universe. Notice that the fluctuations are both positive and negative, and that here o has been 
normalized to | [see also pp 346-7]. 


2000 500000 


1500 400000 


1000 
300000 
500 


200000 
100000 


500 


1000 


These particular pictures show the fluctuations along the line é , where 0 is 45 degrees. Note that 
in the second picture, it is a continuation of the first, using different scaling. In reality, the two 
graphs, merged together under the same scaling, would form a smooth picture, because the function 
that portrays these fluctuations is continuously differentiable. 


Examining The Equation GY ~ o- g"(0) Again When X(s) = o/s 
Let us re-examine the equation below, where a dark energy singularity exists at the origin O, 
GY = 6-40) (*) 
and consider the case where our perfect star [S*], is centered at O and filled with both tangible and 
intangible matter. The latter is dark energy [o], while the former is some perfect fluid, typically 


associated with pressure and density. 


If we now set o = 0, then dark energy ceases to exist, and the equation above becomes G"'’ ~ 0; 
that is to say, 


chY— TY = 0 
where C"', T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively; k is the 


Einstein proportionality constant, and C*Y = R"Y - “2Rg", where R"’ is the Ricci tensor and R the 
Ricci scalar. Notice that in this case, the tangible C""’, T"’ do, in fact, exist. 


493 


The solution to the equation above is vintage Schwarzschild, subject to a reconsideration of the 
time component, in the interior case [pp 383-460]. The exterior solution stays, as is. 


Now let’s do the opposite, by getting rid of the tangible matter altogether and reconsider (*) above, 
and shown again below ... 


ChY TY = oo). 


In this case, all that remains is intangible matter [o], so that our perfect star [S*] is filled with dark 
energy [o] only, whose source is the singularity at O. 


There are two cases to consider; either no such intangible stress tensor T" exists here, or it does. 
If it doesn’t, we calculate the intangible C"’Y using a generic template like g(r), or even o- g(r), 
and solve the equation below, for the radial and time directions [see also pp 480-91] ... 

ch’ = og") 
If the intangible T"’ does exist, we can calculate it using the methods outlined on pages 480-91, 
and then proceed to solve (+), subject [perhaps] to a reinterpretation of the constant k, since this 
constant was really developed by Einstein when dealing with tangible matter. 
Either way, we arrive at a total solution (through addition); that is to say 


F= or) + g(r,0), 


where g"’’(r) is vintage Schwarzschild in the tangible case, and g'’’(r, 6) is the intangible solution, 
subject to the condition that g(r, 6) =O if o =0. 


If we don’t like the idea of splitting S* up into tangible and intangible matter, as we did above, 
then (+) can be solved by seeing the /eft-hand side of (+) as purely tangible, even though a dark 
energy singularity exists at O, as reflected in the right-hand side of (+). This is probably the easiest 
interpretation to deal with, and in fact, the constant k almost forces us to adopt this view of things. 


Loosely speaking, (+) would then be read as ‘the remainder, after subtracting out tangible matter 
from the space-time fabric.” 


Thus, when calculating T"’ in the comoving frame in (+), we would simply diagonalize it with 
pressure p and density p, from the perfect star filled with tangible matter. 


Similar comments apply when there are singularities associated with the [dark energy] quantumlike 
components, but the concepts above still hold. So if, for example, we were looking at the following 


equation, with singularities at O and at (+6, 0) ... 


chY— kT’ = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(0))Jo(Srsin(®))g""(Scos(®))], (4) 


494 


and decided to interpret the /eft-hand side of ({) as purely tangible; then whether we were looking 
at the first or second component on the right-hand side of ({), we would always diagonalize T"” in 
the comoving frame with pressure p and density p, from the perfect star filled with tangible matter. 


However the issue of templates for g"’” when calculating the relativistic C’’, T"’ in ({), and shown 
below, remains ... 


CchY— kT"Y = o[g"%(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(9))g"*(Scos(®))]. (t) 


For the first component o - g’*(0), on the right-hand side, a generic template such as g"(r) is 


sufficient for the radial and time directions, since g"’’(0) does not depend on 0. 
For the second component; namely 
26 - cosh(drcos(8))Jo(Srsin(@))g"’’(Scos(0)) , 
the generic template changes to g""’(r, 0), again in the radial and time directions. It is difficult to 
see how we could combine the two calculations into a single operation, in which case they would 
have to be done separately, and the solutions then added together. 
Thus, in the radial and time directions, we would be solving 
ce kT = oO), 
with a solution g"’“(r, 6), and we would be solving 
CY’ — kT"Y = 26 - cosh(drcos(8))Jo(Srsin(@))g"*(Scos(9)), — (f) 


with a solution g”(r, 8, o, 5), again in the radial and time directions. In both cases, however, the 


left-hand sides of (+) and ({) would be seen as purely tangible, so that we would always diagonalize 
T"” in the comoving frame with pressure p and density p, from the perfect star filled with tangible 
matter ... 


oo 2 2a 
‘there is no such thing as the perfect research paper ... unless, of course, all the pages are blank’ 


afeokoke seo 


495 


In the picture below, is a perfect, two-dimensional star [S*], filled with both tangible matter and 
intangible matter (outside the star is dark energy, itself). The tangible matter (perfect fluid) is to be 
associated with pressure p and density p. 


The intangible matter is dark energy, associated with the singularities at O and at (+8, 0); and is 
made up of o from the first term on the right-hand side of ({) below, and also the quantum 
fluctuations [&], shown as an oscillating line in the picture. 


CY — kT™Y = o[g"(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(6))g"“(Scos(®))]_— 
& = 20 - cosh(Srcos(@))Jo(Srsin(8)) 


When calculating the relativistic stress tensor T"Y, we would always diagonalize T’Y in the 
comoving frame with pressure p and density p, for either component on the right-hand side of ({), 
as per our previous remarks, if we interpret ({) as ‘the remainder, after subtracting out tangible 
matter from the space-time fabric.’ This is an important notion, when solving ({) for g'"’ in the 
radial and time directions ... 


Some comments on page 493 were rewritten in this release, to reflect more accurately, what I was 
trying to say at the time ... 


496 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part XII 


Up until now, we’ve spoken mainly about solving the coupled equations in the radial and time 


directions, but there are also quantumlike fluctuations in the angular directions of @ and @, that we 
may wish to incorporate into our modelling down the road [see, for example, pp 272-3]. 


y 


Ja tye . || 


| > 


| || || | 5 io is\. / 20 + 45 } 


| attr AHA 5 \ | | 


r=11,0=x,2Dstar, angular r=x-axis , 0 = 80°, radial 


In the pictures above (o = 1), for a two-dimensional star, with singularities at the origin O, and at 
(+1, 0), the diagram on the /eft shows the angular fluctuations along the circle of radius r = 11. The 
diagram on the right shows the radial fluctuation emanating from the origin O, at an angle of 80 
degrees to the x-axis. Notice that the radial fluctuation grows in amplitude, as r increases, and that 
the angular fluctuations are really a cross-sectional view of the radial fluctuations, for a given 
radius r. 


If we now bring back our coupled field equations below, that reflect this scenario, where 6 = 1; then 
chY— kT’ = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(0))Jo(Srsin(@))g""(Scos(®))]— (E) 


we see that in an (r, 0, t) layout, there may be justification for including u = v = 2 (the @ term) in our 
calculations, when solving ({). In doing so, it could lead to a better understanding of how g”Y 
behaves, particularly in the primary direction of 0, itself. Indeed, since these are quantumlike 
fluctuations that come and go in an instant of time, perceiving them through g"’ in the angular 
sense, may be just as valuable as perceiving them through g"” in the radial sense. 


Similar remarks apply for the three-dimensional star; but in this case we would include u = v = 2 or 
3 (the 6 and terms) in our calculations, when solving the coupled equations, using a physical 
coordinate system in an (r, 6, ¢, t) layout [see page 488 for the notational form for these equations, 
where there, they are written using mathematical coordinates]. 


497 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part XIII 


We’d now like to offer up an interpretation of the ds? metric for the solution to our equation shown 
below, with singularities at the origin O, and at (+5, 0). We'll assume our two-dimensional perfect 
star [S*], is filled with both tangible matter (perfect fluid) and intangible matter (dark energy). 


CY — kT™Y = o[g"Y(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(6))g"“(Scos(®))]_ 


For the first component on the right-hand side of (£); namely o - g"’’(0), the solution t = g"’(r, 6) 
does not depend on 9, so that only the radial and time components in ds’ will be affected by t. 


Thus, if relative to O, I were to traverse the circle [C] in the diagram above, I would see no change 
to distance or time on C, but I would along any radial line é emanating from O. And so in 1, it is 
acceptable to let gu,.(r), in its covariant form, be equal to r, where u =v =2. 

For the second component on the right-hand side of ({); namely, the quantumlike expression 


& = 20-cosh(Srcos(0))Jo(Srsin(®))g"’(Scos(6)) , 


the solution t = g"’’(r, 0, 6, 8) does depend on 9, so as in the first case above, I will see a change to 
distance or time along any radial line & emanating from O; but also now, along C, relative to O. 


498 


Thus, my perception of the distance OA may be different than the distance OB, and my perception 
of time at A may be different than time at B. And furthermore, because there are guantumlike 
fluctuations along C, as shown in the picture below [p 496], it’s quite possible that the angle a 
subtended by the are AB will change, relative to O, as I traverse C (in other words, @ might be sub- 
tended by a different arc A’ B' that is not equivalent to AB, as I make the traversal). 


eae 
It 


r=11,0=x,2D star, angular 


Tf this is so, then as we said earlier — in an (r, 0, t) layout, there may be justification for including 
the component u = v = 2 (the @ term) in our calculations for €, when solving ({); as opposed to 
letting g"'Y default to r? in t, in covariant form, in this case. 


ch’ — kT"Y = o[g"%(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(6))Jo(Srsin(O))g"*(Scos(8))] Cf) 
And finally, similar remarks apply in three dimensions for the @ and @ terms in the g-matrix, but 
again, I wish to remind the reader that this is simply an interpretation of ({) above. 
It should be mentioned as well, that we expect o to by very small — perhaps on the order of the 
cosmological constant, so the kind of discrepancies we are talking about here, very likely wouldn’t 
show up, except at very large distances from O. 


On the other hand, if o = 0, this is vintage Schwarzschild, which is part of the total solution F to 
(£), and here, it is well-known that discrepancies in the radial and time directions are measurable. 


Indeed, the total solution J, as per our earlier research notes, may be written as ... 
TF = g(r) + g'(,0) + g(r, 0,6, 8), 


where the first term on the right-hand side is Schwarzschild, subject (perhaps) to a reconsideration 
of the time component for the interior case [pp 383-460]. 


499 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part XIV 


Recall that in a physical coordinate system [labelling as (*)], the coupled field equations are ... 


GY = o[g"(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))g"’(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B))g" (Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(Sreos(@))Jo(Srsin(@))g"*(Scos(6))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin(®)cos() and sin(B) = sin(9)sin(), and the physical singularities associated 
with the underlying dark energy density function A(s) = o/s, are at the origin O, and at 


S = {(+6, 0, 0), (0, +6, 0), (0, 0, +5)} . 


As well, GY = C®Y — kT"’, where C"’, T"Y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively; and CY = R"Y - %2Rg"’, where R"" is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


Now suppose, in our g-matrix, and shown below in covariant form (again, using physical 
coordinates), 


8, 9 0 0 
or oO 0 
0 0 rsin'o 0 
0 oO 0 “8x 


we decide to include u = v = 2 or 3 in our calculations, when solving (*) for the three quantumlike 
components; so that for the time being, we are excluding the term o- g'’’(0) on the right-hand side 
of (*). 


We'll assume our three-dimensional perfect star [S*], is filled with both tangible matter (perfect 
fluid) and intangible matter (dark energy), and that the /eft-hand side of (*) is to be interpreted as 
‘the remainder, after subtracting out tangible matter from the space-time fabric.’ 


Thus, when calculating T"’ in the comoving frame in (*), we would simply diagonalize it with 
pressure p and density p, from the perfect star filled with tangible matter. 


Our solution t = 2%, 8, $, 6, 5), however we arrive at it [component by component, or ‘in one 
go’] now applies to all four entries in the g-matrix, so that the default inner block [7’, 1° sin? 6] is 
now replaced. 


We don’t know what this solution looks like [other than it will, most certainly, be based on 
harmonics of one type or another]; but if we adhere to our associative principle under addition, 


500 


relative to o, then as o ---» 0, we should expect t ---» 0 as well, in the radial and time directions; 
that is to say, u=v=1 or 4. Let’s assume this is so. 


The thorny issue of what happens to the inner block in t, as o ---» 0 [uw = v = 2 or 3], can’t be known 
until we do get a solution on paper, but clearly t does not tend to zero here. A more reasonable 
guess is that t reverts to the default inner block [7°, 7? sin? 6], but this is just a hunch, on my part. 


To solve for the first component on the right-hand side of (*) above; that is to say, 
cv kT!’ = og"), (tH) 


we can do it directly, again interpreting the /eft side of (+) as ‘the remainder, after subtracting out 
tangible matter from the space-time fabric’. Our solution t, in this case, will now be of the form 
g(r, 6), since it doesn’t depend on 0 or @; and here we can let the inner block in t be equal to the 
default, which is [7?, 7? sin? 6], in covariant form, using physical coordinates. 


Thus, t becomes a solution in the radial and time directions, and again, we expect that as o ---» 0, it 
will be the case that t ---» 0 also, according to our associative principle, when u = v = | or 4. 


We can also take our first solution g(r, 0, , 6, 5), for the three quantumlike components, and let 
the parameter 6 ---» 0 here. The solution should then reduce to g"“(r, 60), since the strength of the 
singularity at the origin O, has now increased six-fold. By mapping 66 to o, we would, in theory, 
obtain a solution to (+); but the thorny issue of what happens to the inner block for our first solution 
g(r, 0, , 6, 5), as the parameter 5 ---» 0, remains. 


The total solution to (*) [p 499] is now of the form 
F = %) + go) + gC, 8, 6,5,8), 


where 2%) is vintage Schwarzschild [o = 0], subject to a reconsideration of the time component 
in the interior case [pp 383-460]. And let us remember too, that when performing the addition, 
only terms in g"(r, 6) or g"’(r, 8, , 6, 5) that actually contain the parameter o, or are uniquely 
different than the default inner block, are to be added to g'’’(r) in FJ above [we’re mixing covariant 
and contravariant forms here, but clearly when the work is actually done, we’ll have to settle on 
one or the other]. 


So if, for example, the inner block of g"’(r, 6) was [7, 7° sin? 4], in covariant form, it would be 
excluded from the addition, altogether. And if the inner block of g"“(r, 8, , 6, 5) contained terms 
attached to o, like for example, the expression (1 + ©) - r’, in covariant form, when u = v = 2; only 
the piece o - 1’ would be included in the addition. In other words, terms that are uniquely different 
than the default inner block, as we said above. 


501 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When (s) = o/s, 
Part XV 


Let us bring back our form for the coupled field equations, with a dark energy singularity at the 
origin O, of our physical coordinate system, in an (r, 0, o, t) layout ... 


Ch aT = og). 


If we decide to interpret the /eft-hand side of (7) as ‘the remainder, after subtracting out tangible 
matter from the space-time fabric’, then in the case where o = 0, the right-hand side above 
vanishes, and there is no such remainder at all. The coupling is broken, and (+) reduces to 


Chen kT = 0, (*) 


so that the only internal source for the gravitational tensor is the perfect star [S*] itself, filled with 
tangible matter (typically, a perfect fluid). The corresponding internal solution to (*) is vintage 
Schwarzschild [interior / exterior], subject to a reconsideration of the time component, inside S* 
[pp 383-460]. 


On the other hand, if we add in a dark energy singularity at O, then (+) holds, and the right-hand 
side of (+) becomes the remainder, after subtracting out tangible matter from the space-time fabric. 
The coupling is restored, and the right-hand side of (+) thus becomes the only external source that 


has an influence on g"”. 


The corresponding external solution to (}) is t= g"’“(r, 6) in the radial and time directions, where 
the inner block [7°, r° sin? 6], in covariant form int, is the default. 


So the question, philosophically speaking, is whether or not the internal solution [Schwarzschild] is 
a subset of t, which can be extracted from t by letting o ---» 0, given our interpretation of (+). 


Remember, we have already dealt with the internal solution by setting o = 0, so that (+) can be seen 
as ‘that solution t which exists and is driven by the right-hand side of (+), after subtracting out 
tangible matter from the space-time fabric’. Such an external solution [t], should not contain the 
internal solution [Schwarzschild], on philosophical grounds alone, in my opinion ... 


502 
Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) ~ o/s, 
Part XVI 
Let us bring back the covariant form for our equation shown below, with singularities at the origin 
O, and at (+6, 0). We’ll assume our two-dimensional perfect star [S*], is filled with both tangible 
matter (perfect fluid) and intangible matter (dark energy). 
Cuv — kTuy ~ o[gu,(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(@))Jo(Srsin(8))gu,v(Scos(@))] — (£) 

What we want to do here, is design in more detail, a template that may be used to solve ({) above, 
so let’s begin by interpreting the /eft-hand side as ‘the remainder, after subtracting out tangible 
matter from the space-time fabric’. Thus, when calculating Ty, in the comoving frame, we would 
simply diagonalize it with pressure p and density p, from the perfect star filled with tangible matter. 
Next, we’ll define r to be dr, so that our equation above may be written as ... 


Cuy — kTuy ~ ofgu,v(0) + 2cosh(rcos(8))Jo(rsin(8))gu,(Scos(8))], — (*) 


and we’ll begin by looking at the second component on the right-hand side, in the expression (*) 
above. 


Now from page 349, we know that 
26 - cosh(rcos(®))Jo(rsin(®)) = 20- Xr” Pa(cos(9)) /T(n+ 1) ,n=0, 2,4... 

where Py is a Legendre polynomial; so that for the second component, we may write 

Cu ~ kTuy ~ {20-2 r*Py(cos@)) /T(n + 1)} guScos@)), C+) 
where the sum is over all even n = 0, 2, 4, ... and so on. 
Now the first thing to notice about (+), is that the summation on the right-hand side separates the 
variables r and 8. Also notice that the term dcos(0), associated with guy, is actually a radial 
measure that does not depend on r [p 461 ff]. So in fact, the right-hand side of (+) is actually a 


complete separation of the variables r and 0. 


Thus, if I want a template T for gu,v, from which I can calculate the Jeft-hand side of (+), I should 
write T in such a way that it reflects the right-hand side of (+). For example, I might write for T, 


ZX ca(u, v)r" Pa(cos(®)), 1 =0, 1, 2,3, ... 
where the cn(u, v) are coefficients we are solving for, in each line of (+); that is to say, where it is 


the case that u = v = 1, 2, 3. Such a solution might be obtained by matching powers of r on both 
sides of (+), for example; but regardless, G is just one of many templates we might design for gu,v. 


503 


Now as to gu,v(Scos(8)) in (+), since the argument here is a radial measure, we would calculate 
gu,v(Scos(8)) by letting r = dcos(@) in G. Thus, (+) becomes, remembering that r= dr ... 


Cuv — kTuy © {20+ (r)" Pa(cos(0)) /T(n + 1)} - (ZX enw, v) (Scos())" Pa(cos(0))},  (~) 

where the second summation above corresponds to gu,y(Scos(8)). 
Letting 5 ---» 0, we see that because Po(cos(8)) is always 1, the first bracketed expression above is 
20, while the second bracketed expression above is co(u, v), which is equal to gu,(0). And so, (~) 
reduces to 

Cuy — kTuy ~ 26> guv(0), 
which is what we would expect, when looking at ({) on the previous page. 
The template TG, and shown below, 

& en(u, v) (Sr)" Pa(cos(®)), n=0, 1,2, 3,... 


can now be used to calculate the /eft-hand side of (~), and perhaps by matching powers of r on both 
sides of (~), we may be able to solve (~) for u = v = 1, 2, 3. 


The solution t to (~) will be of the form gu,(r, 8, 6, 5), subject to the condition that as o ---» 0, t 
will tend to zero also, in the radial and time components (u = v = 1 or 3). And as o ---» 0, t should 
tend to r for u = v = 2; a requirement we can probably enforce through the template T. 


As to the first component on the right-hand side of ({), from the previous page, and shown below, 
the template TG for gu,» is much simpler because there is no dependency on 0. And here we can let 
T be some generic function of gu,(r), when u = v = | or 3. For the inner block (u = v = 2), we let 
2u,v(t) be equal to r’, which is the default. 


Cuy — kTuy = 0+ guv(0) (A) 
The solution t to (4) will be of the form gu,(r, 6), subject to the condition that as o ---> 0, t will 
tend to zero also, in the radial and time components (u = v = | or 3). And as we said above, gu,v(r) 
is equal to r? in 1, by default, if uw = v = 2. 
The total solution to (£) [p 502] is now of the form 
F = guv(t) + gur(t, 5) + guv(t, 0, 6, 5), 
where gu,v(r) is vintage Schwarzschild [co = 0], subject to a reconsideration of the time component 


in the interior case [pp 383-460]. We only add to the inner block if the entry here is uniquely 
different than r?. This will apply to gu,v(r, 9, 6, 8), but not gu,v(r, 6) in F above. 


504 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) ~ o/s, 
Part XVII 


Scaling up to three dimensions, from our work in Part XVI, presents no great theoretical difficulty. 
Now recall that in a physical coordinate system [labelling as (*)], the coupled field equations are ... 


G"” = o[g"*(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))g"’’(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B))g"”* (Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(drcos(9))Jo(Srsin(@))g"’’(Scos(8))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin(®)cos() and sin(B) = sin(9)sin(), and the physical singularities associated 
with the underlying dark energy density function A(s) = o/s, are at the origin O, and at 


S = {(+6, 0, 0), (0, +6, 0), (0, 0, +5)} . 


As well, GY = C®Y — kT"’, where C"’, T"’ are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress 
tensors, respectively; and C"’ = R"’ - Rg", where R"" is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


Using the same approach, as in the previous research note, we find for the quantumlike components 
in (*), that 


Cuy — kTuy © {26- (r)"Pa(@)/T(n + 1)} - {XZ en(u, v) (S@)"Pa(o)}, (~) 


where @ is one of cos(a), sin(B) or cos(8); and gu,.(Sw) is the second bracketed expression on the 
right-hand side of (~) above. The template T for gu,y is (where r = 5r) 


Len(u, v)" Pao), n=0,1,2,3,... 
and as 6 ---> 0, we see that (~) becomes 
Cuyv — kTuv ~ 26+ guv(0). 


Thus, co(u, v) is equal to gu,.(0), no matter the choice of w, but in general, the coefficients cn(u, v) 
will depend on the choice of o. 


The solution t to (~) for each component will be of the form gu,v(r, 8, , 6, 5), subject to the 
condition that as o ---» 0, t will tend to zero also, in the radial and time directions (u = v = | or 4). 
And as 6 ---» 0, t should tend to [7°, 7° sin? 6] for u = v = 2 or 3; again, a requirement we can 
probably enforce through the template G. We'll label these solutions teos(a) , Tsinip) aNd Teos(o) 5 
respectively, for the guantumlike components. 


And notice again, as in previous notes, that the solution for the second component [@ = sin(B)] is 
probably just a 90 degree rotation of the solution for the first component [@ = cos(a)], in the x-y 
plane; and similarly for the third component [w = cos(@)], where the first component is rotated by 
90 degrees in the x-z plane. The third component does not depend on >, now. 


505 


As to the first component on the right-hand side of (*), from the previous page, and shown below, 
the template TG for gu,y is much simpler because there is no dependency on @ or d. And here we can 
let T be some generic function of gu,)(r), when u = v = | or 4. For the inner block (u = v = 2 or 3), 
we let gu,v(r) be equal to [7?, sin’ 6], which is the default. 


Cuv — kTuy © 6+ guv(0) (A) 
The solution t to (4) will be of the form gu,(r, 6), subject to the condition that as o ---» 0, t will 
tend to zero also, in the radial and time directions (u = v = 1 or 4). And as we said above, gu,v(r) is 
equal to [7°, 7 sin? 6] in t, by default, if w = v = 2 or 3. 
The total solution to (*) [p 504] is now of the form 
TF = Suv) + guv(t, 6) + Teos(a) + Tsin(p) + Teos(6) 
where gu,v(r) is vintage Schwarzschild [co = 0], subject to a reconsideration of the time component 


in the interior case [pp 383-460]. We only add to the inner block if the entry here is uniquely 
different than [7°, 7 sin? @]. This will apply to Teos(a) , Tsin(p) ANd Teos(a), but not gu,v(r, 6) in F above. 


itr 
® an 
— — 


~ 


Physical Coordinate System 
And let us recall [pp 365-8], that our quantumlike dark energy components satisfy Laplace, so that 
in a physical coordinate system, for example, it is the case that 
P2(sin(@)cos(o)) = —1/2 - P2°(cos@) + 1/4 + P2?(cosO)cos(2¢) , 


and that 


506 


Px(sin(®)cos($)) = 1/4 - P3!(cos@)cos(¢) — 1/24 - P33(cos6)cos(3¢) . 


Such decompositions will exist in general, so that we shouldn’t be surprised if solutions to (~), and 
shown below, 


Cuv — kTuy = {20-2 (r)" Pao) /T(n + 1}: (ZX en(u, v) (S@)" Pa(@)} — (~) 


ultimately involve spherical harmonics, just as we see at the atomic level; where @ is one of cos(a), 
sin(B) or cos(0), and cos(a) = sin(8)cos(¢) and sin(B) = sin(@)sin(), using physical coordinates. 


And again, the template TG for gu,v is, in this case (where r = 6r) 


Lenu, v) Palo), n=0,1,2,3,... 


In the picture above, we see some spherical harmonics, often referred to as orbitals. The center 
column corresponds to Legendre polynomials with no superscript. or equivalently, a superscript of 
zero. Away from the center column, are the associated Legendre polynomials, where the super- 
script is non-zero. 


507 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 

For the two-dimensional star, let us bring back our expression for gu,y(Scos(®)), which is ... 

{ ca(w, v) (6cos(0))" Pa(cos(@))}. 
where n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... in this summation. 
Tf we let 6 ---» 0, then (*) reduces to co(u, v), as we said in previous notes. On the other hand, if we 
let 0 ---» x / 2 with > 0, then (*) again reduces to co(u, v), if we define 0° to be 1. In both cases, 
this value is gu,v(0). 
Thus, relative to gu,.(0), approaching the origin along the line &, where 0 = 7/2, with singularities 
at (+6, 0); is no different than approaching the origin along any radial line, where the singularities 
have now been relocated to O, and thus have no influence on gu,,(0) at all [relative to 8]. 
In turn, this must mean that in the first case, where 0 = 1 / 2, the singularities at (+6, 0) have all but 
Jost their influence on gu,(0), along &, which is consistent with our Singularity Invariance 
Postulate [p 461 ff.]. 
And so, this can only bolster our view that the template T for gu,y, and shown below (where r = dr), 


L cn(u, v)r" Pa(cos(®)) nn =0, 1, 2,3, ... 


is probably a reasonable choice for our coupled field equations below, when calculating the left- 
hand side; in the case of the quantumlike dark energy components ... 


Cuv — kTuy © {20-2 r" Pa(cos(0)) /T(n + 1)} gu,v(Scos(®)). — (F) 


feof 


The argument above, while interesting, might only be valid if co(u, v) was a constant. In reality, 
though, for the guantumlike dark energy components, cn(u, v) ought to be a function of (8, 6, 5) for 
all n = 0, since here we are solving for these coefficients by matching powers of r on both sides of 
(H). 

Thus, letting 5 ---» 0 in co(u, v), may not give us the same result we would obtain by letting the 
angle @ ---» 2/2 in co(u, v); and indeed, the series expansion for gu,y(5cos(®)) above is really only 


valid for 6 > 0 anyway, as is the template T. 


Similar remarks apply in three dimensions, where here, we expect cn(u, v) to be a function of the 
variables (0, , 6, 5) for all n > 0, for the guantumlike dark energy components. 


afeoeake seo 


508 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When (s) = o/s, 
Part XVIII 


More and more, I am coming around to the idea that when dealing with dark energy, and the 
coupled field equations, the tangible stress tensor T"” is irrelevant. For if we revisit Part XV on 
page 501, and look again at the equation below; namely 


chy kT =o sO), 
which has a dark energy singularity at the origin O, what is this equation really saying ? 


From page 501 ... ‘it is that solution t which exists and is driven by the right-hand side of (+), after 
subtracting out tangible matter from the space-time fabric’. Well, this means a few things; firstly, 
that tangible matter plays no role in the external solution, since the only external source that can 
influence the gravitational tensor g"’’ is the right-hand side of (+), itself. Only when the coupling is 
broken by letting o = 0, do we have an internal source that can influence g"’’, and that source is the 
perfect star itself, filled with tangible matter (typically a perfect fluid). Hence the need for a 
tangible stress tensor T“’’, and thus the proportionality constant k as well, in this case (it’s a kind of 
loopback condition where curvature and stress balance one another, up to some constant k). 


Now I restore the coupling, and look for an external solution to (f), realizing that the internal 
solution (c = 0) has already been dealt with. Why, in searching for this solution, would I even care 
about tangible matter, since by definition, it is to be removed from the space-time fabric, anyway ? 


Wouldn’t it be better to write (+) as 
cY = o-8%0, C4 


if o is no longer zero ? We've certainly removed tangible matter from the space-time fabric, but 
we’ve done this now by eliminating the tangible stress tensor T"”, altogether ! 


And if we suppose that intangible matter (dark energy) does not have an associated intangible 
stress tensor, then (*) would indeed be the right formation [intangible stress tensors have their own 
set of problems, such as how to diagonalize them in the comoving frame, and what the 
proportionality constant k might actually be, in this case — problems that are only amplified when 
dealing with the guantumlike dark energy components]. 


So while we can leave (+) as is, we can also start to think about (*) as perhaps a better alternative 
for the dark energy components, in the coupled case. 


509 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) = o/s, 
Part XIX 


Imagine an empty space-time fabric S, as shown in the diagram below, with a circle C of radius r, 
say, centered at O. 


Now suppose there is a dark energy singularity at O, so that dark energy [€] itself, pours into $ via 
O, according to the underlying dark energy density function \(s) = o/s [blue arrows]. This 
should cause the circle C to expand out to D, say, so that the angle @ that was subtended by the arc 
AB on circle C, is now subtended by a larger arc on circle D. 


Bringing back our coupled equation for this two-dimensional setup, which is 
ch aT = 6 sO). CH) 


we may now ask, when contemplating a solution t to (+), whether we should or shouldn’t let the 
inner block in t default to r?, in covariant form. Up until now we have, but because the original 
circle C has now expanded, perhaps we should include the inner block [u = v = 2] in our calcu- 
lations, when solving (+) [see also the notes on pages 395-6]. 


And similarly for the three-dimensional setup, where the default inner block is [?, 7° sin? 6] in 
covariant form, using physical coordinates [u = v = 2 or 3]; but see also pages 497-8 for more on 
this subject. 


510 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When (s) = o/s, 
Part XX 


Let us bring back our equation from the last page, and write it as ... 
ch’ = kT’ 45-2"). 


In this form, we see there are two sources that can influence the space-time fabric [S$], by way of 
the gravitational tensor g"’’. Here, S is to be associated with the Einstein curvature tensor C"’’. 


The first source is kT"’’, where the tangible stress tensor T’’ is to be associated with the perfect 
star [S*]. The second source is o - g'’‘(0), which is associated with dark energy [an intangible 
form of matter], where the dark energy singularity is located at the origin O. 


I now want to solve (+), realizing that these two sources are very distinct from one another. But I 
also know the curvature tensor C"’Y doesn’t care at all which source I am dealing with, since it is a 
purely mathematical object. How then shall I proceed ? 


In looking at (+), we'll rule out the possibility of an intangible stress tensor, since in (+) it doesn’t 
appear at all. So I decide to break the coupling, by setting o = 0, and solve what’s left of the 
equation above; which gives us vintage Schwarzschild [interior / exterior], subject to a reconsidera- 
tion of the interior time component [pp 383-460]. We’ll call this solution g"’Y., where M means 
‘tangible matter’. 


I now restore the coupling, by setting o to some non-zero value, and want a solution to (+) in the 
intangible space, realizing again that CY doesn’t care which space I am operating in. So all I have 
to worry about is the right-hand side of (+); and knowing now that there is no such thing as an 
intangible stress tensor, reason to myself that the tangible stress tensor TY must go, if I am to 
operate in the intangible space. I therefore set k to zero, and solve what’s left of (+). We’ll call this 
solution g's , where & means ‘intangible matter’. 


Adding the two solutions together gives us a total solution J, where we only add to the inner block 
if the entry here is uniquely different than the default [7°, 7° sin? 6], in three dimensions, using a 
physical coordinate system. The process can be extended to include all quantumlike dark energy 
components, in the intangible space, and this is how I think we should approach the broader 
problem of solving the coupled field equations, in general, like those shown at the top of page 504. 


In short, I don’t believe in the intangible space, a stress tensor of any kind plays a role in solving 
the coupled field equations, for the dark energy components, but do believe the curvature tensor 
C"’ is impartial to the space we are working in. 


S11 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) ~ o/s, 
Part XXI 


Let us bring back our equivalency from page 470 and rewrite it, where there are singularities at the 
origin O and at (+6, 0), for the tvo-dimensional star, in the coupled case. Here, a = cos(@) and ¢ = 
sin(6). 


Then (1) is ... 
aS {cos(yrle** a+ iy) — a" Ga—iy)] + 
de isin(yr) [g"’(Sa+ iy) + g”’(Sa—iy)]} dy / Jy? - (e)? 
and (2) is ... 


GY = ofg"*(O) + 2cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)g"”"(Sa)] « 
Recalling our equivalency, for this case ... 
(1) = g"'"(8a) - Jo(dre) if and only if (2) is true,  (~) 


we see that as 6 ---» 0, (1) becomes 
co 


Af {cos(ynle"liy) — et! Ciy)] + isin(yr) [2""Giy) +e Giy))} dy/y 
fe) 


which is always equal to g"’Y(0), provided g"’’ is well-behaved in the complex plane, real-valued 
on the x-axis, and we can secure convergence along our contour y [p 467]. Indeed, we showed it to 
be true when g"(s) = C(B — s), where B > 1 [pp 330-2]. 
Thus, from our equivalency (~) above, it must also be true that 

GYY = 30-40), 
since a is now 0 in (*), as is ¢. And, of course, this agrees with our original calculations on pages 


197-9, using the dark energy contour integral for a singularity at O. Thus, we have a confirmation 
of our harmonic expression (1) in this case, as well as our equivalency (~), when 6 > 0, say. 


As to the template G for gu,», and shown below (where r = dr), we might want to sum only over all 
even values of n 2 0, since Legendre polynomials are even if n is even, but odd if n is odd. 


 en(u, v)" Pa(cos(®)) nn =0, 2,4, ... 


512 


This will allow us to better align with the quantumlike dark energy components, which are always 
even functions, as shown below ... 


2c - cosh(rcos(@))Jo(rsin(®)) = 20- X 7 P,(cos(6)) /T(n+ 1) ,n=0, 2,4... 
And in doing so, this will preserve the symmetrical properties of the gravitational tensor g'’’ itself, 
over a circle or a sphere, when searching for solutions to the coupled equations, such as those 
shown below [p 502 ff.] ... 
Cuv — kTuy = {20- (5r)" Pa(cos(@)) / P(n + 1)} - {X en(u, v) (Scos(0))" Pa(cos(®))}.  (~) 
Here, the second summation above corresponds to gu,y(dcos(8)); and let us recall too, from the last 


research note [p 510], that we ought to set k = 0, when working in the intangible space (dark 
energy), and we would set 6 = 0 when working in the tangible space. 


--P —P —--F 
-PR -PBh —P 


T t T T ; r 
—1.00 -0.75 —0.50 —0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 


The picture above shows some Legendre polynomials, and you can see from the diagram, which 
are even functions (n = 0, 2, 4) and which are odd (n = 1, 3,5) ... 


513 


Revisiting Our Form For The Field Equations of General Relativity When X(s) ~ o/s, 
Part XXII 


Let us bring back our form for the coupled field equations, in two dimensions, with singularities at 
the origin O and at (+1, 0). Here, we are looking only at the guantumlike component, and both 
sums below are to be taken over all even integers (n = 0, 2, 4, ...). 


Cuv — kTuy = {20- (0)" Pa(cos(@)) /T(n + 1)} - {X en(u, v) (cos(®))" Pn(cos(8))} .  (~) 


Now since we are working in the intangible space (dark energy), we'll set k = 0, and using our 
template T below, for gu,v, 


ZX en(u, v)r" Pa(cos(0))  n=0,2,4,... 
we’ll define (hypothetically), for all even n = 0 and y any real number ... 
cen(u, v) = 2oy/T(n+ 1). 


Defining the first term in curly braces, on the right-hand side of (~) to be E(r, 8), we see that the 
second term in curly braces, on the right-hand side of (~) is 


26y - X (cos(@))" Pa(cos(®)) / (n+ 1), 
and that G =y - &(r, 6). 
Thus, from (~) we have 
Cuyv (y 8, 0)) = 2oy- &r, 0) - X (cos(0))" Pa(cos(@)) /T(n+ 1), 
and letting y ---» 0, we see that the curvature tensor in (}) is to be evaluated against a function 


which is everywhere zero, so that Cy,» = 0. As well, the right-hand of (+) is also zero as y ---» 0, 
and so, we have a confirmation of (~) and T in this rather hypothetical case. 


514 


Some notes, which may be useful, and served as a precursor 
to the essay — a work in progress ... 


515 


Time, Space, The Spiritual and The Physical 


Because ~[time] and ~[space] are attributes of the Godhead G, and thus the set of laws T in the 
spiritual world, no law dependent on (s, t) makes much sense here, since ~[s, t] belongs to T. It’s 
rather like trying to describe the north pole, where your language of choice does not contain the 
words 'north' or 'pole'. Here, ~ is the logical ‘not’ and G is made from a form of exotic anti-matter 
that is unfamiliar to us. We know nothing about it. 


What is time ? What is space ? They are equivalent to one another, perhaps symmetrically so, and 
thus manifestations of the same thing. What about theorems like GR (General Relativity) or SR 
(Special Relativity) that relate the two ? Losing one component means losing the other, and 
conversely, if one component emerges, so does the other. Rather like a reflection of yourself in the 
mirror — it vanishes if you vanish or the mirror vanishes. In the anti-matter world, where the 
spiritual laws live and operate, there can be no time or space, so (s, t) as a pair only emerges in the 
matter world, for our benefit [in the case of a neutron star collapsing to a black hole, say, we may 
lose the time component altogether, as per the a-y equations developed on pages 383-460]. 


Remember, according to James T's NDE, the laws are antimatter !! In our reality, then, should we 
be looking for a mirror to GR in the anti-matter world, and if so, what is it ? Does it come about 
through analytic continuation, or a Laplace transform, for example ? Is there an all-encompassing 
theory of GR that takes account of both (GR, matter) && (GR, anti-matter) ? Is this what I saw the 
hooded monks talking about in the first dream or OBE, where they mentioned using the Laplace 
transform, on what looked like an extension to the GR equations ? 


In the second OBE, I saw more in the book of laws, maybe around page 500, but the monk told me 
these were ‘tensor skeins’ embedded in what appeared to be braided equations, written in a type of 
hieroglyphics. GR in the physical world certainly has a spiritual counterpart, so one could argue 


(GR, anti-matter, ~s, ~t) <~ some transform ~> (GR, matter, s, t) 


Thus, there must be a mechanism which takes you from one world to the other and back. Perhaps 
this is what the Laplace transform does, or maybe it's more complex than that. Also, the FTOC 
(Fundamental Theorem Of Creation) is probably anti-matter, since the laws are, inherently so. 


How To Interpret The g-Matrix 


Here are some thoughts I had on the g-matrix, long ago. Imagine a sphere, say M = S(2), 
embedded in E3, with a tangent plane T at a point p on M. At this point there are no coordinate 
systems [charts], no policies in place for moving between these charts, and so on. So any vector V 
in T could be attached to any policy P, once T was endowed with any number of charts. 


Thus if A and B are two distinct policies for moving between charts, V can belong to either A or B, 
so long as the existence of these policies can be justified. And so, we can view T in the A frame of 
reference or the B frame of reference, once we decide to choose. 


516 


The contravariant [A] and covariant [B] frames are two such policies, and both exist in T quite 
naturally. The first, by simply studying run-of-the-mill vectors and the second, by studying the 
gradient of any scalar field on M. Each transforms differently between charts, for any vector V in 
T, and you could probably use or find other policies as well, but these two are solid. 


So suppose V is a vector in T following policy A. Since any vector in T can belong to either 
policy, there must exist an operator g which takes V in the A frame to W in the B frame. 
Effectively, I am saying I can choose to view V in the A or the B frame by way of g. And g can't 
be the identity, for if so, then V is itself in either frame; which means that if V ---» V' is a move 
between charts in A, say, then V ---» V' is the same move between charts in B. Thus, the 
contravariant and covariant rules become one and the same thing, so-to-speak, which means the 
two spaces are really one and the same thing. 


So g is a viable operator, and is responsible for moving between the contravariant and covariant 
frames of reference on T, and it does this smoothly and everywhere for any p in M. This is also the 
g-matrix found in relativity. 


Now let V be a contravariant vector in T, and operate on it via g so we are in the covariant space, 
Le. Suv + Vv". This gives us the dual to V in the covariant frame; a vector, to be sure, but different 
than V. And we'll label it Vy. Now dot this with V” , and lo and behold, you have a scalar, which 
is the same value regardless of which chart you choose, or which frame you are in !! 


That is to say, the scalar gu,v + V“ V" is invariant, and this is the beginnings of relativity theory, 
since this scalar is simply the measure of distance when looking at differentials. But remember, we 
got here by operating on a vector V in the contravariant space via g, to produce a vector in the 
covariant space, and then dotted this second vector with the first, to get our scalar. Without the 
dual contravariant and covariant spaces, you couldn't do this. 


‘for every contravariant vector there exists a covariant vector and conversely' 
Now that we have an invertible g-matrix that takes us between these two spaces on T, a meaningful 
curvature tensor can be established which behaves like a tensor. That is, it follows contravariant or 
covariant rules. And that tensor is, as per our previous research notes ... 


ChY = R™Y_ Rg’ 


Now marry this up with a stress tensor T"’Y and try to solve for the g-matrix, so that you can 
measure the distance between points on the manifold, that is to say ... 


ds* = guy dx" dx” 
And so, a theory is born, which we call general relativity; but in reality, it begins and ends with the 


policies we put in place for managing vectors in the contravariant and covariant spaces, as we noted 
above. 


517 


An Interesting Property Concerning Unit Spheres 


If I embed a unit circle S(1) in E2, the ratio of volume to surface area is 1/22, which is 1/2. 
Similarly, if ] embed a unit 2-sphere in E3, the ratio of volume to surface area is (42 / 3) / 4, which 
is 1/3. 


For a 3-sphere embedded in E4, the Riemann metric is 

ds? = dr? + r°d0? + rsin?(6)dq? + r’sin?(0)sin2(@)dw 
where 6 ranges between 0 and a, and @, y range between 0 and 2x. And realizing that these four 
dimensions are independent, it can be shown that the volume to surface area for a unit 3-sphere 
embedded in E4, is actually 1/4. 
So if this trend were to continue, the ratio of volume to surface area for a unit n-sphere embedded 


in E(n + 1) would be 1 /(n + 1). In other words, as n ---» 0, the volume is insignificant compared 
to the surface area that contains it. 


On The Existence and Uniqueness of The Field Equations of GR 


Everything in GR begins and ends with the g-matrix, which is the mechanism by which distance 
between two points is measured. For g to be consistent, it must be unique relative to the embedding 
and its covariant derivative must always be zero. 


And, indeed, this is the case for the embedding of a manifold M in Euclidean space, where the 
metric is Riemannian. By covariant derivative being 0, we really mean the covariant divergence 
for any of the g basis vectors (i.e. column or row vectors) computes to 0. 


If cov(g) wasn't zero, it would be the equivalent of saying 'the ruler itself is changing as I try to 
measure the distance between two points, using infinitesimals'. Covariance, then, is a measure of 
consistency, when set to 0. 


Vug'” = 0 


So think of g as a matrix of ‘4 rulers’, the column vectors say, all of which contribute to the overall 
norm of a vector, say dx’, which we call ds*. The covariant divergence of each of these 'rulers' is 
0. We want the same thing, ultimately, for curvature and stress tensors, if we are to have a 
consistent model of GR. 


Ironically, the Riemann Curvature Tensor existed long before the Einstein Stress Tensor, and from 
it, of course the Einstein-Ricci Curvature Tensor C, which is covariant. So if you think of C as a 
basis of column vectors, the covariant divergence of each vector is 0. That is to say, the basis of 
vectors for C is neither 'expanding' nor 'shrinking' as curvature measurements are being made, at 
any point in M, in the infinitesimal sense. The basis itself is an invariant, just like it is for g. 


518 


I can now define a new 'norm' using Cy,v instead of gu,v. It is to curvature what g is to distance, and 
it should be an invariant. To wit, 


de? = Cyy dx" dx” 
Musings On The Law of Conservation of Sectional Volumes 


If Cy,» is the Einstein curvature tensor, we can, notationally, employ it however we wish. So we'll 

consider AC(u,v)/Ax, in the direction of x, across the cube’s infinitesimal interface perpendicular to 

x. In actuality, this is really the partial derivative + connection terms at this point; that is to say, 
0C(uvex+T (Ff) 


for some element of the row vector [C(1, 1), C(1, 2), ...]. In other words, the covariant derivative, 
which we’ll abbreviate as cov, on occasion. 


Now in differential notation, if we multiply (+) through by the volume of the cube AxAyAzAf, and 
we're operating on C(1,1), say; we would get the following, where I’ is the connection coefficient 
for this element C(1,1), and @C(1,1) is the partial differential in the direction of x: 


AC(1,1)AyAzAr + TAxAyAzAr = {6C(I,1) + PAx}AyAzAr  (*) 


So the covariant differential AC(1,1) is the expression in curly braces above, and since we can 
rewrite OC(1,1) as [6C(1,1)/Ax] Ax, the right-hand side of (*) then becomes 


{[OC(LL/ax]Ax + PAx}AyAzAr 


= {{@C(1,l)/ax] + P}AxAyAzAr 


{[@C(1,1)/éx] + T} * Veube 


AC(L,1)/Ax * Veube 


cov{C(1,1)} * Veube 


You can repeat this exercise for C(1,2), C(1,3) and C(1,4), so that for this vector, the the total net 
change is going to be [see also pp 178-80]: 


[AC(1,1)/Ax + AC(1,2)/Ay + AC(1,3)/Az + AC(1,4)/At] * Veube = 0, 
because of the Bianchi identities. That is to say, if we interpret the pieces in the bracketed 


expression above as sectional volumes, when multiplied by Vcube, then as a whole, they are 
conserved, because from Bianchi, (where Vu means covariant derivative), it is the case that 


we’ = 0. 


519 


Thus, AC(1,1)AyAzAt is the sectional volume loss/gain along the (1, 1) direction, and similarly for 
the other components. Note that if there is no connection term, then AC(1,1) is actually 
[eC(1,1)/dx]Ax, which is what you'd expect. The differential of C(1,1), in the direction of x, is 
simply the partial derivative in x, multiplied by Ax. 

The sectional volume loss/gain, if ! = 0, computes to [6C(1,1)/Ax]AxAyAzAt, so if there is no 'bend' 
to the interface perpendicular to x, then this expression is zero, provided there is no shearing [i.e. 
the cube becomes a rhombus, say]. But whether there is or isn’t any shearing, the following will 
always be true, in the inertial frame, meaning, in the absence of gravity ... 

[6C(1,1)/dx + 6C(1,2)/ey + 6C(1,3)/dz + OC(1,4)/At] * Veube = 0 


Calculating The Invariant Curvature Over a 2-Sphere of Radius r 


From our curvature norm on page 518, and reproduced below, using physical coordinates, 
de? = Cuydx" dx’, (4) 


it is the case that from the literature, Ro,o = 1, Rog = sin?(0), and that the Ricci scalar is 2 / 7°. Thus, 
the Einstein curvature tensor, which is covariant; namely, 


Cuv = Ruv — 2Rguv 


computes to zero for u = v = 0 or @, since here goo = 7° and go, = 77 sin°(@). And so, if over the 
sphere we were to integrate the square root of our norm in (f), for u= v = 8 or g, where 0 < 0 <2 
and 0 < @ < 2a, we'd obtain a value of zero for the invariant curvature. That is, for our sphere [S], 


an 1 


1 
SS [Coo - Coo]? d8dq =0. 
oOo 


So invariant curvature over S is to dc? what invariant area over S is to ds”, where the latter is our 
distance metric 


ds? = guy dx" dx’ . 


520 


On The Nature of Tangible and Intangible Vacuums 
Let us bring back our equation from page 510, which is ... 
Ch = kT 4 6-0). (H) 


In this form, we see there are two sources that can influence the space-time fabric [S$], by way of 
the gravitational tensor g"’. Here, S is to be associated with the Einstein curvature tensor C"’. 


The first source is kT", where the tangible stress tensor T’’’ is to be associated with the perfect 
star [S*]. The second source is o - g'’‘(0), which is associated with dark energy [an intangible 
form of matter], where the dark energy singularity is located at the origin O. 


Now suppose we let o = 0, so we are in the tangible space, and our equation (+) becomes 
Cus Kpey 


Setting k = 0, we reach a vacuum state induced by the tangible space, which we’ll call Vic, where 
M means ‘tangible matter’. And here the metric becomes 


Cdr = -cCdP + dr +r (dP + sin’?Od¢’?), (4) 
so that even in Vn , the notion of space and time exists. 
Now let’s repeat the exercise, by first setting k = 0, so that (+) becomes 
c= 6-80, C4 


and by letting o = 0, we again reach a vacuum state induced by the intangible space, which we’ll 
call Ve , where means ‘intangible matter’. 


Now from our associative principle under addition, relative to o in the intangible space [p 491], we 
believe the solution g"’’(r, 6) to (*) must be zero in the radial and time components, as 6 ---» 0; so 
that in V¢ , the notion of space and time does not exist at all. 


But if this is so, then the metric ({) cannot be correct for V~ , for without the constructs of space 
and time, the right-hand side of ({) vanishes altogether ! And if this is true, then it means that 
when forming solutions to (*), the inner block [8, @ components] must also vanish as o ---» 0. And 
this is now a departure from our earlier view [p 479 ff], where we discussed the idea of preserving 
the inner block in V—. In hindsight, we may not be able to do this ... 


So when solving (*) for the dark energy singularity at O, or when solving for the guantumlike dark 
energy components, it might be best to use a template TG for g”’, which incorporates a vanishing 
inner block in the intangible space, as o ---> 0. 


521 


Calculating The Invariant Curvature Over a 2-Sphere of Radius r For a Tangible Source 

For a tangible source, which we’ll assume to be a perfect star [S*], the field equations are 

Cuv ~ kTuv, (4) 
and here, Too = pr? and To, = pr’ sin?(0), where p is pressure in S*. The pressure p is some fixed 
value at a radius r < rg , where rg is the radius of S*. Notice that like the curvature tensor Cy,», the 
stress tensor Ty,» is also fully covariant. 
Thus, when calculating the invariant curvature @ over the 2-sphere for r < rg; namely 

de? = Cyy dx" dx”, 
we can simply use the Ty,» equivalents ifr < rg, and this leads to a value of 


2n 1 


1 
ff [Teo - To]? d9do = 4knr°p 
0O0oO 


Note that if r > rg, then we can’t calculate @ using this method, because (+) only holds true inside 
S*. On the other hand, if p = 0 or k = 0, then @ is zero, from the expression just above; and this 
agrees with our calculation on page 519, as it should, since in both cases, we are now in a tangible 
vacuum Vc. 


Notice too, that in the intangible vacuum Vs, there is no such thing as space or time [p 520], so that 
calculating the invariant curvature over a 2-sphere in Vg makes no sense. Said another way, the 
associative principle under addition, relative to o in the intangible space, applies to all components 
of the g-matrix here. Again, see the previous research note for more on this interesting idea. 


oe 2K 2 ae a 
Is there an ideal pressure p(r), for all r between 0 and rg, such that @ is equal to the Ricci curvature 
scalar R for the 2-sphere, which is 2/2 There is, for if we set @ = R, this ideal pressure computes 
to 


p(t) = 1/2kar*, 


and may have some physical significance. 


A small note was added to the bottom of page 504 in this update, as it was never mentioned 
explicitly in any of the previous releases. The third component mentioned there could also be 
derived by a 90 degree rotation of the second component [@ = sin(f)] in the y-z plane. 


522 


Some More On Solving The Equation C"’Y ~ o- g“(0) When A(s) = o/s 


Let us bring back this equation, in the intangible space, where we have a dark energy singularity at 
the origin O ... 


Cuv ~ 6+ guv(0). (*) 


Recalling one of our results from the associative principle under addition, relative to o in the 
intangible space [p 482], where gu,v(r, 6) is the solution to (*); that is to say 


2guv(t, 5) = guv(t, 20) , 

we can extend the result, just above, to any real number y by writing 
yguv(t, 6) = guv(t,yo).  (F) 
Now let o = 1, so that we are solving (*) in this normalized case, where our template in the radial 
and time directions is simply gu,,(r), when u = v = | or 4. And for the inner block, we’ll choose the 
default this time, namely [7° 7° sin?(6)], for u = v = 2 or 3, using physical coordinates. 
Thus, our normalized solution [o = 1] to (*), is going to be 
Lenr@.?, Psin°(0) gr], 

and in this case, (+) becomes 

Suvt, ¥) = yguv(r, 1). 
Now let y = 6 for any choice of o, and we see that 

Sut, 6) = oguv(t, 1), 


so that the solution to (*), for any arbitrary choice of 6, is equal to o times the normalized solution 
4). That is to say, 


gut, 6) = o-EgnrQ), 7, Psin’(®),-gir()].  (~) 


Thus, when solving the coupled equations in the intangible space, for a dark energy singularity at 
O, or for the quantumlike components [see, for example, p 502 ff.], we might want to first find 
normalized solutions and then the more general solution, according to the methodology in this note. 


The result (~) above, applies in both cases, and notice too in (~) that as o ---» 0, gu,v(t, 6) ---» 0 for 
all elements of the g-matrix — in line with our conclusions on page 520. That is to say, the 
intangible vacuum V¢ has nothing in it, or said another way, Ve = { ® }, the empty set. 


523 


From this, we see that the inner block needn’t be included in the calculations [p 509], for while it is 
true that a sphere of radius r will expand or even contract in the presence of a dark energy 
singularity at O, this is now actually handled by the methodology above. Thus, for the normalized 
solution, it is acceptable to choose the default inner block [7? , 7° sin?(@)] when solving (**) above, 
and then employ (~) to obtain the more general solution. And so, the remarks on page 509 are to be 
superseded by the comments here. 


For the guantumlike components, the remarks on pages 497-8 still hold, in my opinion, where it is 
recommended that we do include the inner block in our calculations for the normalized solution, as 
opposed to using the default, which again, is [7° , 7° sin?(0)]. The general solution will then be 
patterned after (~) on the previous page. 


Finally, it should be mentioned that if we are observing space-time events in a vacuum, then 
necessarily this is the tangible vacuum V.4. For no such events can occur in the intangible vacuum 
Ve, as we now know. 


Suppose now, we have a perfect star [S*] centered at O, where the solution in the tangible space is 
derived from the field equations 


Cuy * kTuy. 


The solution below is going to be vintage Schwarzschild, subject to a reconsideration of the time 
component, for the interior case [pp 383-460], 


[grr(t),17, Psin*(®),-g,r()] 8) 


and a fotal solution, which incorporates the dark energy singularity at O, can now be produced by 
adding (~) to (§). And recall again, that o in the expression (~) on the previous page, is likely to be 
an extremely small constant — perhaps on the order of the cosmological constant. 


Thus, our perception of the space-time fabric, via the gravitational tensor, is influenced by two 
sources — S* in the tangible space, and the dark energy singularity at O, in the intangible space. 


And similarly for the dark energy guantumlike components, and their associated dark energy singu- 
larities, in the intangible space. It is these components, in particular, that are responsible for the 
expansion and contraction of the universe, as we have said in previous research notes [e.g. pages 
491-2, 496]; but we actually perceive this event in the space-time fabric, by way of sources 
[singularities] in the intangible space. 


524 


Some More On The Underlying Dark Energy Density Function A(s) ~ o/s 


The underlying dark energy density function [A(s)] is associated with the dark energy singularities, 
through which dark energy itself, is pouring into our universe, as per the pictures below [p 282]. 


400000 


300000 


200000 


dark energy tunnelling into our reality our perception of dark energy, obtained 
via the singularities associated with A(s) from X(s), via the Laplace inverse transform 


Now dark energy, for a singularity at O, is the Laplace inverse of A(s) ~ o/s, for p > 0, and 
computes to 
o{1/TQy} 4!" P, 


where r is our radius and I'(1) is the gamma function; and you can see from (*) that when p = 1, (*) 
equates too. And from our dark energy contour integral, in the intangible space, 


Cer « fe" rxsyetas 
Y 


we arrive at the coupled field equations, in this case, for the dark energy singularity at O; that is to 
say 


Cuy ~ + gur(0). 


Now the Laplacian in physical coordinates, is the expression below [labelling as (+)], and clearly 
(7) is satisfied by (*) if w= 1. 


ed 


r or r2 sin? 9 Oy? 


525 


On the other hand, if 1 > 0 is any real number other than 1, then it is also clear that (+) will not be 
satisfied by (*), and so our only hope for an underlying dark energy density function [A(s)], whose 
Laplace inverse satisfies (+), for all dark energy singularities, is when p = 1. 


But from pages 365-9, we also now know that the guantumlike dark energy components satisfy (+), 
when 1 = 1, and so the entire gravitational model becomes fully covariant, in this case. Here again, 
is the layout for the field equations in the intangible space, taken from page 504, using physical 
coordinates, for the density function A(s) ~ o/s. 


CYY = o[g"'(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))g”*(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B))g"”(Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(Srcos(8))Jo(Srsin(@))g"’’(Scos(9))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin(®@)cos() and sin(B) = sin(9)sin(), and the physical singularities associated 
with the underlying dark energy density function A(s) = o/s, are at the origin O, and at 


S = {(+6, 0, 0), (0, +6, 0), (0, 0, +5)} . 


As well, C"Y is the Einstein curvature tensor, and C“Y = R"Y - %Reg", where R“Y is the Ricci 
tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


~ 


~ 
. a 
_— | 


® 


~ 


Physical Coordinate System 


It is a minor miracle to me, at least, that we are even able to find such a density function [A(s)], 
which ultimately leads to a fully covariant model in the intangible space, described by the 
equations above ... 


526 


Some More On The Inner Block In The Intangible Space When X(s) = o/s 


Bringing back our coupled equations from the previous page, in the intangible space and labelling 
as (*), 


Cc'Y = o[g"*(O) + 2cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))g"’(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B))g"”(Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(Srcos(8))Jo(Srsin(6))g"(Scos(6))] 


we see, as in previous notes, there are two approaches to solving (*). We can try the ‘in one go’ 
method, where the template for g"’’ encompasses all the components on the right-hand side above; 
or we can try the ‘component by component’ method, which is the better approach, in my view. 


If we go with the first method, and opt for the default inner block B = [7° ° sin?(6)], in covariant 
form, then this is what we will have as part of the total solution to (*); that is to say 


guv = o-[ grr(t, 9, >, 8), 77, Psin’(0) ,—grr(r,9,,8)],  (~) 
where the bracketed part in (~) is the normalized solution W to (*) [pp 522-3], when o = 1. 


On the other hand, if we go with the second method, and again opt for the default inner block 8, 
then we arrive at a total normalized solution W' to (*), by adding the normalized component 
solutions together. And here, each normalized component solution will contain B, but because B 
in NW must now agree with B in W’, we see in the second method, that we only add to the inner 
block when summing normalized component solutions, if the entry here is uniquely different than 
8B, which is the default, in this case. 


In other words, the sphere of radius r is still a sphere of radius r, for both methods, when looking at 
normalized solutions; because the sphere is B, if B= [/?, 7 sin°(6)]. 


And this is a general principle we developed in previous notes, when looking at the second method. 
However, a total solution W’ will almost surely include the inner block in its calculations, for the 
quantumiike terms in (*); so that the uniqueness of B for each term [which is no longer the default], 
is virtually guaranteed, when summing the normalized component solutions together, in this case. 


And from pages 522-3, we noted there that for the first term on the right-hand of (*), we could let 
B default to [77, 7 sin?()] in MW’. 


527 


Still More On The Inner Block In The Intangible Space When A(s) ~ o/s 


Let us bring back our coupled equations in two dimensions, for the intangible space, where there 
are singularities at O, and at {(+6, 0) , (0, +3)}. 


Cc’Y = o[g"'’(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(@))Jo(Srsin(®))g"’’(Scos(0)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(@))Jo(Srcos(@))g"*(Ssin(®))}—(*) 
For the normalized solution (o = 1), we'll set the inner block [] to r°, in covariant form, for the 


first component on the right-hand side of (*), and we’ll presume 8 is included in the calculations 
for the guantumlike terms, again for the normalized solutions to (*). 


Now for the first quantumlike term [@;], the radial fluctuations are strongest at 6 = 0 and z, as per 
the picture below [p 496], 


seo 


angular fluctuations for a given radius r 
so geometrically, @ might look more like an ellipse, in this case, as shown below in blue, on the 
next page. Thus, @ will inevitably have a dependency on @ here. 


The black circle is our default inner block [r?], associated with a radius r, and we’ll suppose here a 
total solution can be obtained, by summing over component solutions in (*) [see page 526]. 


Note that the radial fluctuations grow in amplitude, as r increases, and that the angular fluctuations 
shown above, are really a cross-sectional view of the radial fluctuations, for a given radius r. 


528 


To add the two inner blocks together, in the picture above, we only add to the default inner block 
[r’, black circle @], if the entry [blue ellipse €] is uniquely different than r. Thus, at E in the 
diagram, we would add DE to r, according to the formula (at least symbolically) 


OE? — OD? = (OD + DE)’ — OD? = 20D-DE + DE’, 


since terms are squared in B, and OD =r. Note that if DE = 0, then we add nothing to the default 
inner block — it remains at r.. Thus, the expression just above is added to r°. 


And similarly at B in the diagram, but here we are subtracting from 1°, because the ellipse is below 
@. Thus, we would subtract BC from r?, where OC = r, according to the formula (symbolically) 


OC? — OB? = (OB + BC)? — OB? = 20B-BC + BC?, 


and again, if BC = 0, then we subtract nothing from the default inner block — it remains at r. Thus, 
the expression just above is subtracted from r’. 


A similar exercise can be carried out for the second quantumlike component [@] in (*), but now 
the inner block associated with this term will be the blue ellipse in the diagram above, rotated by 
90 degrees. 


This simple exercise seems to indicate that adding the inner block for @ [blue ellipse, €] to the 
default inner block [black circle, @], leaves us solely with the blue ellipse ! The default inner block 


529 


has been subsumed by €, as it were, according to the rule of uniqueness, by which we add inner 
blocks together. And if we were to add the inner block for @ to @, which is simply the blue ellipse 
rotated by 90 degrees [€'], we'd obtain the same result; namely €'. 


In the picture above, we add the blue ellipse [@:] to the black circle uniquely, which leaves us with 
just the blue ellipse. We then repeat the exercise for [@2], which leaves us with just the purple 
ellipse. The inner block for the total normalized solution to (*) [p 527] thus becomes the two 
ellipses, and the black circle [default inner block] vanishes. 


This is all seems somewhat counter-intuitive, but if we adhere to our principle of uniqueness under 
addition, using this method, then this is what we end up with. 


On the other hand, if we treat the three inner blocks in the picture above as being unique, relative to 
each other, then under this definition of uniqueness, we could argue that all three should be added 
together, when looking for a total normalized solution to (*), by summing normalized component 
solutions together. Such an argument follows, on the next page ... 


530 


Bringing back our field equations from page 527, in covariant form, 


Cuv ~ 6[gu,(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(@))Jo(Srsin(9))gu,v(Scos(@)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(8))Jo(Srcos(8)) gu,v(Ssin(8))]}_— (*) 


we see that as 6 ---> 0, this resolves as 
Cuyv = 50+ guv(0). (fF) 


And setting o = 1/5, we obtain a normalized solution to (+), which will contain the default inner 
block B =r? [pp 522-3, 526]. 


So if we opt for a total normalized solution J to (*), by summing over the normalized component 
solutions for the right-hand side of this equation; we see immediately that if the guantumlike 
solutions are removed from J, then necessarily the default inner block B = r? must remain, by what 
we just said above. 


Thus when forming J, we must include the default inner block B = r, when computing the total 


inner block for J; or said another way, the black circle and the two ellipses, in the diagram on the 
previous page, matter. 


Some clarification is needed, concerning the normalized solution to (+) above. We already know 
the general solution to (+) is going to be gu,v(t, 50), and by our associative principle under addition, 
relative to o [pp 522-3], becomes 


gut, 56) = 5+ gur(t,o) = 50° guv(r, 1). 


Now notice that gu,v(r, 6) is the general solution to (+), when So has been replaced by o; that is to 
say 


Cuv ~ 6+ gur0),  (£) 


so that, in fact, the normalized solution N to (+) is gu,v(r, 1) in ($), when o = 1. And the general 
solution to (+) is then 50 - W. 


We alluded to this by setting o = 1/5 in (+) at the top of the page, but I don’t think that was enough 
to clearly explain what is actually going on here. Hopefully this additional note clarifies things ... 


531 


Still More On The Underlying Dark Energy Density Function A(s) ~ o/s 


From page 524, we stated that for a singularity at O, the Laplace inverse of A(s) ~ o/s", for pt > 
0, computes to 


o{1/Tqy} "2, 
where r is our radius and I'(\1) is the gamma function. Here, we’ll show that this is indeed true. 


Now from our general treatment of Laplace inversion techniques [pp 274-77], we showed that for 
densities of type A(s) ~ o/s", with > 0, the following is a true statement, 


T(v + %)u2’~1 ---» Laplace Inverse ---» V1 (2a) rYv(ar), u = Vs? + a?, Re(v) > -1/2 (*) 


where I'() is the gamma function, Jy() is a Bessel function of the first kind, of order v, and we have 
p=2vt1. 


And from page 233, we also know that 

Juz) ---» (2/2) /T(v + Iasz--»0, (4) 
so letting a ---> 0 in (*), and making use of (+), we find that (*) becomes 

T(v + Yu"! ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Vm (r/2)”/T(v+1),u=s. () 
And since t= 2v + 1, we can rewrite ({) as 
1/s# ---» Laplace Inverse ---» Vt r@~) / {2-D rqu/2)T(w+D/2}; A 
and now, using the Legendre duplication formula for the gamma function; which is 
T(z) T(z+%) = 29-7) VrT(2z), (~~) 
we see that by letting z = 1/2 in (~), it is the case that on the right-hand side, (“) computes to 
(1/ TW} 18). 


And this is the desired result. 


532 


A Summary Of Where We Are With The Coupled Field Equations, When A(s) ~ o/s 


S <=> Cy» space-time 


Tu Te 
perfect star S* expansion /contraction of universe U 


In the diagram above, the fabric of space-time [S], which is to be identified with the Einstein 
Curvature tensor Cy,y, is comprised of two spaces; namely, the tangible space T and the intangible 
space Te. An observer @ in S can witness events sourced from either Tx or Te, like a perfect star 
[S*] influencing our perception of space and time in Tx, or dark energy singularities in Te, that are 
ultimately responsible for the expansion and contraction of our universe U. 


The complete notational form for the coupled field equations, taken from page 504, in physical 
coordinates, is [labelling as (*)] 


Cuv = kTuy + ofguv(0) + 2cosh(Sreos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))gu,r(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(6rsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B)) gu,v(Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(Srcos(0))Jo(Srsin(®))gu,v(Scos(8))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin(®)cos() and sin(B) = sin(9)sin(), and the physical singularities associated 
with the underlying dark energy density function A(s) = o/s, are at the origin O, and at 


S = {(+6, 0, 0), (0, +6, 0), (0, 0, +6)} . 


As well, Cu,y and Ty,y are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively; and 
Cuyv = Ruy - YaRguv, where Ruy is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


To operate in Tx, set 6 = 0 in (*) and solve for gu,y, where the tangible source is S*. This will yield 
the vintage Schwarzschild solution, subject now to a reconsideration of the time component, for the 
interior case [pp 383-460]. The inner block & is the default [7?, 7? sin?(0)], in this scenario. 


533 


To operate in Tg, set k = 0 in (*) and solve for gu,y, component by component, with o = 1, to obtain 
four normalized solutions. The first normalized solution is associated with gu,y(0), on the right- 
hand side of (*), and here the inner block 8 is the default; namely [77 , 7 sin?(0)]. 


For the remaining three quantumlike components in (*), you can choose the inner block & for each 
to be the default, or you can include the inner block for each, in the calculations. If you choose the 
former, then the inner block for the total normalized solution W to (*), across all four normalized 
component solutions, added together, will also be the default; that is to say [77, 7 sin?(0)]. 


If you decide to include the inner block in the calculations for the three quantumlike components, 
then these inner blocks will be rotations of one another, just like the normalized component 
solutions; and thus uniquely different, relative to each other, and relative to the default inner block, 
also. As such, all four inner blocks are to be added together, in this case, when calculating W, and 
the general solution to (*) in Tg is now o- WV. 


Several principles were developed along the way, to help with interpreting (*) correctly in T:. 
Among them, the Singularity Invariance Postulate [p 461 ff], the associative principle under 
addition relative to o [p 480 ff], normalized solutions (o = 1), the principle of uniqueness when 
adding normalized inner blocks together in T¢, the Laplace inverse of the dark energy density 
function (s) ~ o/s, which must satisfy the Laplace operator (as it does, pp 524-5), the intangible 
vacuum V¢, which has nothing in it, and the generalized solution, which is o - W, as noted above. 


And perhaps most significant of all, a recognition that (*) must be solved separately in both T4 and 
Te, and that in T¢, a sum over normalized component solutions is probably the best approach ... 


534 


Let us bring back our coupled field equations below, in physical coordinates [p 532], and label 
them as (*). In the intangible space we have, 


Cuyv ~ ofgu,(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))gu,(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B)) gu,(Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(Srcos(0))Jo(Srsin(9)) gu,v(Scos(8))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin(®)cos() and sin(B) = sin(0)sin(), and the physical singularities associated 
with the underlying dark energy density function X(s) = o/s, are at the origin O, and at 


S = {(+6, 0, 0), (0, +6, 0), (0, 0, +5)} . 


As well, Cu,y and Ty,» are the Einstein curvature and relativistic stress tensors, respectively; and 
Cu,v = Ru,v- YRgu,v, where Ru,» is the Ricci tensor and R the Ricci scalar. 


Now we want to emphasize again, that the gravitational tensors on the right-hand side of (*) are 
uniquely bound to their corresponding dark energy components, and that the argument to gu,y is a 
radial measure along the line gp . The /ast quantumlike component in (*) has no dependency on 
, which is actually a manifestation of the coordinate system we are working in. 


Physical Coordinate System 


If the normalized component solutions (6 = 1) for the quantumlike terms in (*) are W;, V2, and Ws, 
respectively; then NW» is a 90° rotation of W; in the x-y plane, and M3 is a 90° rotation of MW in the 
x-z plane or a 90° rotation of W2 in the y-z plane. The same is true for their inner blocks. 


535 


An Interesting Identity Concerning W Solutions 


The normalized [WN] solution for the equation below, in the intangible space, is obtained by setting 
o=l. 


Cuv © 5+ guv(0)  (*) 


We write this solution as gu,v(r, 1), and the general solution to (*) is simply o - VW. Now from page 
522, we know from the associative principle under addition, relative to o, that 


Suri, ¥) = yguv(r, 1). 
Thus, for any | y| > 0, it must be the case that 
guv(t, Y)- guv(t, 1/y) = gu, DP = V2, 
or said another way, for all | y | > 0, 
Guy) * JuvO 1) - 
If we define 
guv(t, 0) = lim gu,v(r, y) as y ---> 0 and gu,(r, ©) = lim gu,v(r, 1/y) as y--- 0, 
then it is also the case from (+), that for all r > 0, 
guv(t, 0) - guv(t, ©) = WN? . 
In particular then, and from (*); for the normalized (o = 1) default inner block B = r in a two 
dimensional model, where u = v = 2; since we already know gu,y(r, 0) = 0 and gu,v(r, ©) = %, we can 
translate the expression just above, as 
Oo =r = Be. 
Such non-standard operations may prove to be useful down the road, as we learn more about how 


to solve these coupled equations in the intangible space, and how we might interpret ‘in the limit’ 
operations, as well ... 


536 


A Little More On Rotating W Solutions 


Let us bring back our coupled field equations below, in physical coordinates [p 534], and label 
them as (*). In the intangible space we have, 


Cuv = o[gu,(0) + 2cosh(Srcos(a))Jo(Srsin(a))gu,(Scos(a)) + 
2cosh(Srsin(B))Jo(Srcos(B))gu,v(Ssin(B)) + 
2cosh(Srcos(8))Jo(Srsin(9)) gu,v(Scos(8))] . 


And here, cos(a) = sin(®)cos() and sin(B) = sin(0)sin(), and the physical singularities associated 
with the underlying dark energy density function A(s) = o/s, are at the origin O, and at 


S = {(£6, 0, 0), (0, £6, 0), (0, 0, +5)} . 
And again, from page 534 we said ... 
If the normalized component solutions (o = 1) for the quantumlike terms in (*) are V7, V2, and V3, 


respectively; then NW» is a 90° rotation of Wj in the x-y plane, and M3 is a 90° rotation of MW; in the 
x-z plane or a 90° rotation of W2 in the y-z plane. The same is true for their inner blocks. 


~ 


oo-> 


~~ —_— “| 


Physical Coordinate System 


The rotation of W; into W2, in the x-y plane, is actually a rotation of the @ variable in VW; — the @ 
variable in MW; is left alone. The rotation of W; into W3 in the x-z plane, necessarily means that 
must be set to zero in W7, since W3 has no dependency on 9, and the rotation itself, must map the 
singularities located at (+6, 0, 0) to (0, 0, £5). This can only happen if > = 0, and similarly, the 
rotation of M2 into Ws in the y-z plane, requires that we set = 90° in M2. 


537 


Dark energy singularities likely come in pairs, save for the origin O of our coordinate system [see, 
for example, pages 168-96]; so in the diagram below imagine a ring of singularities, symmetrically 
positioned on the circle @ of radius 6, for the two dimensional model. 


circle of radius 6 


The pair of singularities at [A, A’), for example, would correspond to (+6, 0), and we could suppose 
there are n such pairs on @, where n is any integer greater than zero. 


The question now becomes one of how to solve the coupled equations in the intangible space, when 
n becomes large, or even very large. If we decide to use the ‘in one go’ method, we’ll soon find out 
that it becomes an intractable problem in this case, because in the equation below, there will be n 
terms for the quantumlike entries that have to be incorporated into a single template for gu,v. 


Cuv = ofgur(O) + E1- guv(argi) + &- guv(arg2) +...) (H) 


On the other hand, if we opt for a sum over normalized component solutions for the quantumlike 
terms [where €; is the i-th dark energy component]; then we only need solve for i = 1 in (+) [which 
we'll call W7], since all other solutions will be a rotation of M1, in the two dimensional plane. And 
here, we can let i= 1 correspond to (+6, 0). 


And to me, at least, this makes much more sense, and is a strong argument for choosing the second 
method over the first, especially if n is very large. 


538 


Rotating Our Harmonic Expression For The Equivalency Theorem In The Coupled Case 


Let us recall our equivalency theorem, in the intangible space, from pages 468-9, and reproduced 
here; where a = cos(0) and ¢ = sin(@), and € = g"’"(a) - Jo(re) ... 


(1) = g"'(a) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true (*) 


Here, the following expression is (1), 


aS {cos(yr)[g""’ (a + iy) — g"*(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g"*(a—iy)]} dy //y? = € 
& 


and the expression below is (2), where the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0) ... 


CYY = ofg"(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"*(a)] 


a =cos(@) 


e=sin(0) 


(1) = g°*(a) - Jo(re) 


OF =OA 


a—iy 


From our diagram above, if we rotate B into E on the unit circle, then a = | and ¢ = 0 in (1), and 
logic tells us we should see it the same way for the arguments associated with expression €. 
Similarly, if we rotate B into D, then a = 0 and ¢ = 1 in (1), and again, logic tells us we should see it 
the same way for the arguments associated with €. Seen this way, within the context of rotations, it 
becomes easier to see how the argument to ev in €; namely a, becomes a radial measure [OF] 
along the line &; whilst in (1), a and y are always Euclidean coordinates in the complex plane. 


539 


Calculating The Harmonic Expression For The Equivalency Theorem When 0 = 1/2 


Let us recall our equivalency theorem from the previous page, in the intangible space, where a = 
cos(0) and ¢ = sin(6), and € = g(a) - Jo(re) ... 


(1) = g"'(a) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true (*) 


Here, the following expression is (1), 


aS {cos(yr)[g"Y (a + iy) — g"(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [g""(a + iy) + g"*(a—iy)]} dy fy? = € 
& 


and the expression below is (2), where the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0) ... 
ChY = ofg"*(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)g"*(a)] . 


And from page 502, let us choose our template T for g“’” to be the following, where the sum is over 
all even integers, and cn(u, v) is a function of the variable 0, only. 


L en(u, v)r" Pa(cos(@)), n=0,2,4,... 


Setting 9 = 7/2, we see that a = 0 and ¢ = | in (1), and that G becomes co(u, v) when r = cos(@), 
since this is now g"*(a) we are calculating in the equivalency (*), and Po(0) = 1. But in (1), where 
again, a = 0 and ¢ = 1, we are actually calculating g"’’(+iy) in G, and this computes to 


L cn(u, v) iy)" PaO), n=0,2,4,... 


Now since we’re summing over all even integers in (+), the first bracketed term in (1) associated 
with cos(yr), vanishes, leaving us with the expression (a = 0, € = 1, «= 1/27) 


co 


4«i S entu, v) (-1)"”? PaO) y" sin(yr) dy //y2- @, n=0,2,4,... 
& 


Integrals of this type, just above, will only converge if cn(u, v) = 0 for all even n > 0, in which case 
the expression above evaluates to co(u, v) - Jo(r), and this agrees with € in (*) whena=0,e=1. A 
validation of our template G, you might say. Otherwise, no such validation of T is possible, in 
which case we have to look for other forms for T. 


When 6 = 0, so that a = 1 and ¢ = 0, we know from past research that (1) computes to g"“(a), and 
using our template TG above, this is 


540 


L en(u, v)" Pa(cos(®)) = Len(u,v), n=0,2,4,... 


since r = | here, and P,(cos(8)) = 1 for all n = 0, when @ = 0. And in the complex plane, for our 
template T, r computes to (a? + (iy)*)'”, so that (1) becomes (a = 1, € = 0, k= 1/2ni) 


4«i X S entu, v) Pa(1) (o2 — y*)"”? sin(yr) dy A/y?- &, n=0,2,4,... 


€ 


Just as on the previous page, integrals of this type will only converge if en(u, v) = 0 for all even n > 
0, in which case the expression above evaluates to co(u, v), and this agrees with ({) when a = | and 
¢=0. Again, a validation of our template G, you might say. Otherwise, no such validation of T is 
possible, in which case we have to look for other forms for T. 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
When considering a template like 
TG = Len(u, v) 1" Pa(cos(@)) , 


it is probably more correct to take the absolute value (or modulus) of r, when doing our 
calculations, because the argument to g"’’ in (*), on the previous page [namely a = cos(@)], could 
well be negative. So if we rewrite our template as 


TG = LYen(u, v) |r|" Pna(cos(®)), (8) 


and now carry this over to the complex plane, then for an expression like g””’ (a + iy) in (1) on page 
539, the modulus of r in our template computes to (@? + y*)!?. But either way, whether we do or do 
not use the modulus of r for G, our conclusions do not change — convergence in the integrals can’t 
be achieved if n > 0. 


STILL MORE CONSIDERATIONS 


If we suppose that 0 tracks r in the complex plane @, as it does in the two dimensional plane £2, 
since r is a radial measure along the line é; then for our guantumlike component in (2) [p 539], 
using the template (§) above, the swm over integrals at the top of the page becomes (a = 1, ¢ = 0, 
andx=1/2ni)... 


C) 


4xi Z S en(arccos «./ (a2 + y°)") Pala (0? + y?)!) (a? + y°)™? sin(yr) dy A/y?= &,  (~) 


& 


where the sum extends over n = 0, 2, 4, ... and cn under the integral sign is cn(u, v) in (§), which 
we'll suppose, is an even function of 0. 


541 


Now suppose also that in (~), cn is zero for all even n > 0. Then (~) reduces to 


co 


aif co(arccos a/ (a2 + y?)"7) Po(a/ (o2 + y’)!”) sin(yr) dy A/y2 = 2, (A) 


& 


and this must compute to co(u, v) in ({), where 6 = 0 [p 540]. Reducing (4) even further, by noting 
that Po is always 1, and 4«i = 2/7, we see that (“) becomes (a = 1, € = 0)... 


oo 
ai f co(arccos a./ (a? + y*)'”) sin(yr) dy /Vy? = &. (I) 
€ 


Now since we also know that (a = 1, ¢ = 0) 


00 
ai f sin(yr) dy //y? = €? = 1, 
é 
it is thus, reasonable to conclude, that arccos a / (a + y’)'” in (|]) must be 0 as well, since again, 
(|) must compute to co(u, v) in ({), where 8 = 0. But if this is so, then 
a/(a?+y’)'? = cos(0) =1, 


and since a = 1, it must be the case that y = 0. In other words, we are actually in the two 
dimensional plane &? along the x-axis, so that 6 does not track r in the complex plane @, after all. 


So when computing the template below in @ 
G = Len(u, v) |r|"Pa(cos()), ($) 


all we have to worry about is mapping the argument associated with g"’’ (a + iy) to |r|; that is to 
say,atiy..... 


542 


A Few Additional Notes On The Harmonic Expression For Our Equivalency Theorem 


Let us recall our equivalency theorem from page 539, in the intangible space, where a = cos(@) and 
¢ = sin(0), and here we’ll recast it in covariant form ... 


(1) = gu,v(a) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true (**) 


Now the following expression is (1), 


af {cos(yr)[gur(a + iy) — guv(a—iy)] + ésin(yr) [gur(at iy) + guv(a—iy)]} dy //y? = & 
& 


and the expression below is (2), where the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0) ... 
Cuv ~ olgu,v(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)gu,v(a)] - 
The first thing to note is that (1) only applies to the guantumlike component in (2); that is to say 
Cuy = 20+ cosh(ra)Jo(re)gu,v(a) , 


and the second thing to note is that in (1), a + iy is to be interpreted as a radial measure in the 
complex plane @, calculated from the template T for gu,v in R2, like the one shown below. 


T= Len(u, v) |r| "Pa(cos(®)), 2 =0,2,4,... () 
For example, if G was (§) above, then in €, gu,(a + iy) would become (§), where |r|= (0? + y?)!”, 
since we now know that 6 does not track r in the complex plane [p 541]. Thus, when calculating 
(1), we are always doing so in the direction of r, for any gu,y, where here, in the two dimensional 
model, u = v = 1, 2, or 3 (r, 0, 2). 


Now if we associate u = v = 2 with the inner block &, and choose the default, so that gu,v = r, then 
in @, gu,v(a + iy) equates to |r|? = (a? + y°), and we know in this case that (1) will nor converge. 
We do this, of course, when calculating the normalized solution, where o = 1. 


Thus, (1) is telling us, perhaps in a rather indirect sense, that the default for @ may not be the 
correct choice, which means, in turn, that the inner block should be included in the calculations, 
according to some template G, just as we do for u = v = 1 or 3. And similarly for the three 
dimensional model, for the guantumlike components. 


As to the first component in (2), on the right-hand side, the equation is 
Cuv = 0+ guv(O), 


and this has nothing to do with the equivalency theorem (*), above, as we said earlier. Thus, 
choosing the default inner block for the normalized solution (c = 1), is acceptable. 


543 


A Few Additional Notes On The Harmonic Expression For Our Equivalency Theorem, 
Part II 


From Part I [p 542] let us allow a and ¢ ---» 0, so that (1) is equal to gu,.(0), and our equivalency 
reads, where initially the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0) ... 


(1) = gu,»(0) if and only if (2) is true. (*) 
Here (2) is 
Cuy ~ 30+ guv(0), 
since the dark energy singularities at (+1, 0) have now converged to O. 


Now (1) is (a =0, £=0, «= 1/2ni), 


wf {cos(yr)[guv(a + iy) — guv(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [guv(a + iy) + guv(a—iy)]} dy //y? = € 
& 


so that for the case of the inner block &, if we allow this to become the default; namely r, in the 
case of the normalized solution W to the following expression, where o = 1 ... 


Cuy ~ 6+ gu); CF) 


then (1) will not converge for guy =r, u=v=2. Again, from the last page, gu,v(a + iy) equates to 
|r|? =y° here, and (1) becomes (a = 0, = 0, k = 1/2ni) 


co 


ani fy + sin(yr) dy. 
€ 


On the other hand, it seems most reasonable to let B default to 1? in (+) when o = 1, using our 
physical intuition, so this could well be a case where the physical overrides the mathematical. In 
other words, while we would like (1) to converge as much as possible, where more generally, « = 
cos(9) and ¢ = sin(@); there may be times when we can’t make it happen, and have to defer to our 
intuition, instead. The example in this note may be such a case ... .. 


544 


Seeing The Harmonic Expression Via The Laplace Inverse Of a Generating Function f(s) 


Consider the following template G for gu,v in (*) below, where again cn(u, v) is an even function of 
9, and from page 542, a = cos(@) and ¢ = sin(®) [the dark energy singularities for (*) are at (+1, 0)]. 


Cuy ~ 26+ cosh(ra)Jo(re)gu,v(a) — (*) 
T= Len(u,v) |r], 2=0,2,4,... (8) 


Then the harmonic expression (1) from page 542 becomes the following, and these integrals do 
converge for every even integer n > 0 (k= 1/2n%)... 


4xi S entu, v) (02 +?) ”? sin(yr) dy Vy?- &, n=0,2,4,... 
& 


Now define the function f(s, m) below, where s is a complex variable, and let us calculate the 
Laplace inverse of f along AB, using the contour that follows ... 


fls,n) = 1/{(s?—a2)"? Vs™4 &}, n=0,2,4,... 


a=cos(8) 


e =sin(6) 


Adopting the methods on pages 274-77, we find that the Laplace inverse of f(s, n) computes to 


cy 
4xi (-1)"”? S@ +y°) onl. sin(yr) dy //y?- €2 + Rn n=0,2,4,... 


& 


545 


which we’ll define to be £- (f(s, n)). The term Rn is the residue calculation from the poles at the 
points (+a, 0), and for n = 0, Rn = 0; and for n = 2, Rn = sinh(ar) / ava? + €?. 


Thus, when n = 0, £7 (f(s, n)) agrees with the first term in (+) [omitting Ra and cn(u, v)], and when 
n= 2, £7 (f(s, n)) agrees with the second term in (+), up to sign [again, omitting Rn and cn(u, v)]. 
And, in fact, this will be true for all even integers n > 0. 


And so, we see how we can develop a generating function f(s, n), and operate on it with the 
Laplace inverse [£7] to reproduce the integral components in (+) on the previous page. Such a 
technique may be useful to us down the road, as we search for templates that may work for (*) ... 


546 


Understanding The Template T In £2 Versus The Harmonic Expression In @ 


Let us bring back our hypothetical template in R?, which is the two dimensional plane, and shown 
below, where cn(u, v) is an even function of 8 only [pp 539-41] ... 


TG = Lenlu, v) |r | "P,(cos(0)),  n=0,2,4,... (8) 


And let us recall our harmonic expression in the complex plane @, in the intangible space, where 
here, a = cos(8) and € = sin(0), and we’ ll label this as (1) ... 


wf {cos(yr)[guv(a + iy) — guv(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [gun(a+iy) + guv(a—iy)]} dy //y? - & 
& 


a+iy 


s a=cos(@) 

fo B 
=sin(0 
4 : e=sin(6) 


| fo) s AT * 
/ 
i (1) = g(a) * Jo(te) 
/ 
c 
Pe Me nee 
a-iy 


On the unit circle in the picture above, the template G applies equally well, whether we are in R? or 
@, because, for example, at the point B, |r|= 1 and the angle is 0, in both spaces. But as we move 
away from B (or its counterpart at C), along the imaginary line éq in @, heading north or south; and 
use the template T to perform the integration in (1); the argument to gu,y in (1) becomes the radial 
expression |r| = (a? + y?) '/?, as we know. Thus, the argument @ = a + iy to gu,v, inherits this piece 
quite naturally from T in 2, from a radial perspective. 

But the corresponding angle y = arccos a./ (a? + y*)!” associated with @, cannot be inherited from 
T, and is actually separate and apart from the angle @ you see in ‘G, unless you are on the unit 
circle in the picture above [pp 540-41]. 


So when interpreting gu,y(a + iy) in (1), where we are in the complex plane, it is to be thought of as 
Suv(t, y) in R2, where here, r= («7 + y*) !/? and y = arccos a/ (02 + y°)!. And this is the best we 
can do with the interpretation, yet it sti// allows us to comment on whether or not (1) converges. 


547 


Understanding The Template T In £2 Versus The Harmonic Expression In @, Part II 


Let us begin this note, by making an observation concerning r versus |r|, using the Riemann zeta 
function [C(s)]. To wit, from pages 330-32, using a variant of our harmonic expression (1), from 
the previous page, we have from Wolfram ... 


is i(-cos(y) (-{(2-i y) + (2+ i y)) + ésin(y) (C(2-iy)+C(2+iy))) F 
~ a 


0 ny 
1.64477 


y= 


ag i(-cos(y) (—¢(|2—i y|) + (2 + i y))) + ésin(y) (C2 -— iy) + (2+ é yp) 


0 ny 
dy = 1.51926 


The first expression above is the evaluation of (2) = 17/6 ~ 1.64493, and you can see how closely 
the two match. However, in the second expression, where we take the modulus of the argument to 
Cs), you can see that we do not get a match with C(2), even though €(2) = ¢(|2|). 


From page 542, let us allow @ and ¢ ---» 0, so that (1) is always equal to gu,v(0) [pp 330-2], and our 
equivalency reads, where initially the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0) ... 


(1) = gu,»(0) if and only if (2) is true. (*) 
Here (2) is 
Cuv = 30° guv(0), 
since the dark energy singularities at (+1, 0) have now converged to O. 


Now (1) is (a =0, £=0, «= 1/2ni), 


wf {cos(yr)[guv(a + iy) — guv(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [guv(a + iy) + guv(a—iy)]} dy //y? = €? 
é 


and the normalized solution N to (2) [Cuv ~ 6+ gu,(0) and o = 1] will be a function of r only; so 
that when evaluating gu,y(a + iy) in (1), in this case [a = 0, ¢ = 0, k = 1/2z/ ], it behooves us to take 
a lesson learned from the ¢ integrals, at the top of the page. 


For just like C(s), which is a function of one variable and real-valued along the x-axis, so is the g- 
matrix associated with W. That is to say, any element gu,y in g will also be real-valued, and a 
function of r only. 


548 


Thus, when evaluating gu,»(a + iy) in (1), in this case [a = 0, ¢ = 0, « = 1/2ni], we should calculate 
2u,v(+iy) as is, as opposed to calculating gu,»(|+iy |). For to do the latter, would be a mistake in my 
view, given what we’ve learned in this research note. 


And gu,y(+iy) can be calculated from the the elements of g directly, which is W, or if we were using 
a template G, we could use that too, where the variable r in G becomes +iy. 


Now if we move on to the more general form of (1), where a = cos() and ¢ = sin(@), and decide to 
use a hypothetical template in R? such as 


G=Lcalu, vr" Pa(cos(®)), n=0,2,4,... (8) 


where cn(u, v) is an even function of 8 only; then the same principles will apply, so that in (1) we 
evaluate gu,)(a + iy) by letting r = a + iy in (§). 


Or if we found a normalized W solution (o = 1) to 
Cuyv © 20+ cosh(ra)Jo(re)gu,v(a) , 


we could use that too, when evaluating (1); where again, it is r = a + iy in the W solution gu,v(r, 9), 
that we are calculating in (1), just as it is when using T. 


And this is now a departure from previous notes in this section [p 539 ff], where we suggested 
using r= |a + iy|in our calculations. Again, I think it would be a mistake to do so, based on what 
we have learned in this research note. 


But does this mean our study of convergence issues for (1) [p 539 ff] must be tossed, just because 
we opted for|r| versus r in (1) ? No, in my opinion, because there is still some residual value in 
studying convergence of these integrals, in the former case. 


549 


A Harmonic Expression For | /r 


Consider the following function, where we are evaluating f over the contour shown below, using 
the Laplace inverse ... 


f(s) = 1/ {(s +0) Vs? + &}, 


For the time being, we'll presume a > 0, so that a simple pole exists at —a in f. Using the methods 
on pages 262-4, we find that our harmonic expression computes to ( = 0, K = 1/2z7), 


00 


af {cos(yr)[1/(a+iy) — 1/(a—iy)] + ésin(yr) [1/(a+iy) + 1/(a—iy)]} dy //y?- & + R (*) 


€ 


where R = 2e™/ a, is a doubling of the residue from the simple pole, itself. Here is a snapshot 
showing the integral above, when a = | and r= | in the cos() and sin() terms, as well as R, but r can 
be any real number > 0... 


1 1 
gence 7 i 


5) +ésimcy) (= +1) 


y_il-iy 


; dy= 
0 (imy 
i Ci(— 100 + é) — i Ci(100 + #) + Si(— 100 + #) + 2 e Si(100) — Si(100 + #) 


ex 


= 0.264274 


550 


In this case R ~ 0.735759, and when added to the number just above [.264274], the result is 1. But 
you can see from the integrand in (*), that we are dealing with the harmonic expression 


wf {cos(yr)[guv(a + iy) — guv(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [guv(a + iy) + guv(a—iy)]} dy //y? = € 
é 


where now, gu,v = 1/r, where r represents the radial direction in gu,» . From this, we conclude that 
when r= 1, gu,v(r) computes to 1, which is equal to gu,y(a@), which in turn, is equal to (*). That is to 
say (a=1,¢=0,r=1,r=1,«=1/2mi, R=2e/ 4), it is the case that 


Su,v(a) = 
wf {cos(yr)[1/(a + iy) — 1/(a—iy)] +ésin(yr) [1/(a+iy) + 1/(a—iy)]} dy lfy?-2 +R, 
€ 


and this demonstrates clearly, that when going over to the complex plane @ from £2, the radius r in 
u,v Maps to a + iy, which we spoke about in the previous research note [pp 547-8]. That is to say, 
gu,v(@ + iy) = 1/(a + iy) in this case, since gu,y = 1/r in R?. 


Let’s take another snapshot, which we see below ... 


oo # ((- _ + aay} C0812) +i(S5 + say) sin y)) 
‘i - : : ay : : dy = 0.481712 


In this case (a = 2, ¢ = 0,r=2, r=2,« = 1/2, R = 2e ™/ a), we find that R evaluates to ~ 
-0183156, and when added to the number above, the result is 0.5. And this is precisely gu,v(r), 
which is equal to gu,»(@), since again, a = r = 2, and guy = 1/r. Yet another confirmation of our 
harmonic expression, you might say. 


Finally, let’s look at another snapshot, where a < 0 (a =—-3,¢=0,r=1,r=-3,«K=1/2n%)... 


1 os 1 


7100 a((- 3-iy  -344 5) costy) . i( Ba ;) sin) 
| aby = -0,333298 + 08 
0 ny 


In this case, the simple pole is at —a > 0, and we can omit it by setting 0 < Re(AB) < —a in our 
contour. Thus, R is now zero, and only the harmonic expression above matters. It is approximately 
—¥3, which agrees with gu,.(r), which is equal to gu,v(a), since again, gu,y = 1/r, and a= r=-3. 


551 


A Harmonic Expression For | / r? 


This case is similar to the previous research note, so we’ll be more brief here and quote the results. 
And here, we are evaluating f over the same contour as in the previous note, using the Laplace 
inverse, where fis ... 


fis) = 11 {(s +0)? Vs? F &} . 


Now with a > 0, a pole of order 2 exists at —a in f, and using the methods on pages 262-4, we find 
that our harmonic expression [labelling as (*)] computes to (¢ = 0, « = 1/2zi), 


00 


wf {cos(yr)[1/(a + iy)? — 1/(a—iy)?] + isin(yr) [1/(a+iy)? + 1/(a—iy)"]} dy A/y?- 2 +R 
. 


where R = 2e“ (1 + ar) / a2, isa doubling of the residue from the pole, itself. Here is a snapshot 
showing the integral above, when a = 1 and r= | in the cos() and sin() terms, as well as R, but r can 
be any real number > 0... 


1 1 5 1 1 : 
soo (pt age) 080 +(e * rye) 800) 
ig CET sr at 4 
/0 


my 


-0.471517+0i 


In this case R ~ 1.471517, and when added to the number just above [—.471517], the result 
computes to 1. 


Now here, guy = 1/ r’, where r represents the radial direction in gu,y . From this, we conclude that 
when r = 1, gu,v(r) computes to 1, which is equal to gu,y(a), which in turn, is equal to (*). Now 
let’s look at the next snapshot ... 


cos(2 y) +i ( ist * Gaye ) sin(2 y)] 


i((- . ) 
~100 (-iy? ~ (vi yi? 
peat an ai 
Jo 


mY. 
0.204211 


In this case, @ = 2 and r = 2 in the cos() and sin() terms, as well as R, and R computes to .045789. 
And when added to the number just above [.204211], the result is 0.25, which agrees with gu,v(r) 
and gu,v(@), since again, gu,v = 1/r, and a =r. Now for the last snapshot, which follows on the 
next page ... 


552 


‘ 1 1 1 1 : 
re i(-; iy? * rape) cosy) +i iy * cape} sin) } 


0 my 


dy =1. 


In this case, a =—1 and r= | in the cos() and sin() terms, and the pole is now at —a > 0; so we can 
omit it by setting 0 < Re(AB) < —a in our contour. Thus, R is now zero, and only the harmonic 
expression above matters. It computes to 1, which agrees with gu,v(r), which is equal to gu,v(a), 
since again, guy = 1/7, anda=r=-l. 


Let us recall our equivalency theorem, in the intangible space, where a = cos(@) and ¢ = sin(®), and 
E€= guv(a) - Jo(re) ... 


(1) = gu,v(a) - Jo(re) if and only if (2) is true (*) 


Here, the following expression is (1), 


wf {cos(yr)[guv(a + iy) — guv(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [guv(a + iy) + guv(a—iy)]} dy A/y? - & 
€ 


and the expression below is (2), where the dark energy singularities are at O and at (+1, 0) ... 


Cuv = o[guv(0) + 2cosh(ra)Jo(re)gu,r(a)] . 


In general, when quoting an equivalency theorem, like the one above, the assumption has always 
been that gu,y is well-behaved in the complex plane @. But it may not be, as we have seen in this 
research note, and the preceding one. In such cases, a residue R will show up in the calculations, 
and it now becomes part of the harmonic expression. But even so, the equivalency theorem still 
holds ... 


553 


Testing The Template 1 /r In Our Harmonic Expression For A Quantumlike Component 


In this case, we use the same methods as outlined on pages 549-50, for the function below, where 
the equivalency theorem, as stated on the last page, applies. 


f(s) = 1/ {(s +0) Vst@ + &}. 


However, the difference now is that a = cos(®) and ¢ = sin(@) are both variables, so when 
calculating the residue in the Laplace inverse for f, at the pole —a [where a > 0]; it will compute to 
e'/ Voz + €2. It is this residue that we double, and add to the harmonic expression above, and so 
obtain, for the complete expression, in the case of the quantumlike component, 


0 


ax f {costyn[1/(a+iy) —1/(a—iy)] + isin(yr) [1/(a + iy) + 1/(a—iy)]} dy A/y?- & + R (*) 


& 
where R = 2e™, since a? + e? = 1. 


Now let’s look at a snapshot of the integral in (*), when @ = 2/4, so that a and ¢ are v2/2 
(approximately 0.707106), and the template for gu. is 1/r. And here, r= 1 in the cos() and sin() 
terms, as well as R, but r can be any real number > 0... 


1 1 
cos(y) { ———_—— - ——_ 
is iy onrar 0.707106-i y 


1 
v2 (ix) V y° -0.5 


0.189332 


: 1 1 
+isin —— + ———— 
) Watearer 0.707106. 7 


dy = 


In this particular case, R computes to ~ .986137, and when added to the number above [.189332], 
we obtain 1.17547. 


Now in order for the equivalency to hold on page 552, for the guantumlike component, (*) must 
agree with gu,v(a) - Jo(re), where here, a = ¢ = cos(0) = 2/2, andr = 1. And since guv(r) = 1/7, 
this means gu,.(a) = 1 /a=~V2. On the other hand, Jo(re) = Jo(V2/2) ~ .878852, so that 

Su,v(@) - Jo(re) ~ 1.24288 . 
The two numbers [1.17547 and 1.24288] do not agree, so that we may conclude gu, = 1/r is not an 
acceptable template, for the normalized solution (o = 1) to the guantumlike term in (2) [p 552]; that 
is to say, 


Cuy © 26 + cosh(ra)Jo(re) gu, (a) . 


And this is how we can use the equivalency theorem to test the viability of our templates ... 


554 


Is guv = 1/(r + A) A Suitable Template For Cu, ~ ogu,(0), Where A > 0 


Let us bring back the more general equivalency from page 511, where there are singularities at the 
origin O and at (+6, 0), in the intangible space. Here, a = cos(8) and ¢ = sin(@), and 6 > 0. 


Then if gu,y is well-behaved in the complex plane @, (1) is ... 


af {cos(yr)lguv(Sa + iy) — guv(Sa—iy)] + 
be isin(yr) [guv(Sa + iy) + guv(Sa—iy)]} dy / fy? - (Ge)? 
and (2) is ... 


Cuyv ~ olguv(0) + 2cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre) gu,v(Sa)] . 
And let us recall our equivalency, for this case, where € = gu,»(5a) - Jo(Sre) ... 
(1) = gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre) if and only if (2) is true. (~) 


Now since gu,v = 1 / (r + A) is not well-behaved in the complex plane @, we’ll take the Laplace 
inverse of the following expression, in order to append to (1) the proper residue, when a > 0... 


fis) = 1/{(s +8a+4 A) Js? + Ge)?} . 


Note that whether or not A is equal to zero, r maps to a + iy in @; since again, in R?, it is the case 
that gu(r) = 1/ (r+ A). 


Taking the Laplace inverse of f leads to the following complete harmonic expression [pp 262-4], 
which we'll label as (*) ... 


00 


If {cos(yn[l / a+ A + iy) — 1/(8a+A-iy)] + 
3e isin(yr) [1 / (8a + A+ iy) + 1/(8a+A—iy)]} dy//y?- Geez +R, 


where R = 2e ©* +4" / V8 + 26aH +O, is a doubling of the residue associated with the simple 
pole that is at (da + A) in f(s). And again, a, 5, A are all > 0, and recall too that w+e=l. 


Now let 6 ---» 0, so that in this special case, (*) must equal 1/A from our previous notes [pp 549- 


50], since this is now gu,.(0), and therefore (2) below must hold, by equivalency. That is to say, (2) 
is... 


Cuyv ~ 36° gu,v(O), 


555 


since the dark energy singularities at (+6, 0) have converged to O. And again, guy = 1/(r+ A) in 
R?, and thus we may conclude that this template is valid for Cu,» ~ 6 + gu,v(0), where o = 1. Said 
another way, gu,v does not ‘blow up’ at the origin [r = 0] in R?. 


As an example, suppose 6 = 0 and A = | in (*) on the previous page, so that (*) becomes (r= 1 in 
the cos() and sin() terms, as well as R; but r can be any real number > 0) ... 


00 


anf {costyn[1/(A + iy) —1/(A—iy)] + isin(yr) [1/(A + iy) + 1/(A-iyy]}dy/y +R, 
fe} 


where here, R = 2e ©% + 4)" / /§2 + 25a + A? = 2e* ~ 0.735759. And from the snapshot below 
we see what the integral, just above, computes to ... 


1 


~300 CO8(Y) ( 


[ | ay 
Jo (imy 
i Ci(— 100 + #) — § Ci(100 + #) + Si(— 100 + é) + 2 e Si(100) — Si(100 + #) 


en 


1 ; ( 1 1 ) 
- —})+ésin + 
ltiy =r, ” ly l-iy 


= 0.264274 


Adding the two numbers together [.735759 and .264274], we obtain | ... the desired result, since it 
is the case that gu,y(r) = 1/(r+ A)=1, whenr=0... 


556 


Is guv = 1/(/r + A) A Suitable Template For Cu,y = ogu,(0), Where A > 0 


In this case we use the function f below, associated with the following contour y, and take the 
Laplace inverse of f, along AB, where a, 6, A are all > 0... 


Sis) = 1/ {vs + 5a + A - Js? + (e)?} 


-i6sin(8) 


At the outset, it should be said that fhas no poles; only the branching points at +/5sin(@), and at —p. 
As well, the phases in y are x on the arms CD and GH, relative to the y-axis; and —a on LE and IJ. 
And for the horizontal arms sweeping around —p, the top arm has a phase of 1, relative to the x- 
axis; and the bottom arm has a phase of —a. Finally, the Laplace inverse, itself, is defined to be the 
following integral, along AB, where x = 1/277... 


«J e*fs)as 
Computing along the vertical branches (or arms) yields [labelling as (*)] ... 
oo 
2« S feoseyntt / (fa +A + iy) —- 1/ (fda +A -iy)) + 
OE 


isin(yr)[1 / (/6a + A + iy) + 1/ (6a + A -iy)]} dy/ Jy? - (e)? 


And, after letting 5 ---» 0, the horizontal arms, added together and doubled, compute to [labelling 
as (7)] ... 


00 


4Ki S exp(-r(x + A)) / (x + A)Vx dx 
° 


557 


Now we'll look at some examples we’ve prepared, for (*) and (f), respectively. In the first one, 
below (6 =0, A=1,r=1, 4Ki =2/7), 


i((- a Jeoscy) +i i ,—! }sincy>) 

*300 Vi-iy ylsy Vl-iy ylsy 

{ - dy = 0.68549 
0 ny 


-1-x 


7300 Qe 
f ——§ dx = 0.314598... 
0 aVx (1+x) 


And the sum of these two numbers [1.000088] is ~ 1, which agrees with gu,y = 1/(vr + A), when r 
= 0, since again, A= 1. 


In the second one, below (6 = 0, A=2, r= 1, 4xi = 2/7), 


i({- —_s Jeosiy) +i }siny)] 
*500 V2-iy y2+y V2-iy 2+y 
z dy = 0.642814 
0 ny 


“500 2e-2-* 
{ dx ~ 0.0643471... 


0 Vx (2+x) 


And the sum of these two numbers [.7071611] is ~ V2 /2 [~ .7071067], which agrees with our 
template gu,» = 1/(Vvr + A), when r= 0, since again, A = 2. 


Thus we may conclude that this template is also valid for Cu,y ~ © - gu,(0), where o = 1. Said 
another way, gu,v does not ‘blow up’ at the origin [r = 0] in R?. 


The actual sum of the upper and lower horizontal arms is half the value quoted in (+), on the 
preceding page. However, just like residues, we double this value, before adding it to the harmonic 
expression (*), also on the previous page. For more on the methodology here, see pages 262-4. 


Some corrections to both the diagram and the text were made in this release, for this last research 
note [pp 556-7]. 


558 


Is guy = 1/(r + A) A Suitable Template For Cu,y ~ ogu,.(0), Where A > 0, Part IT 
In Part I [pp 554-5] we developed a a harmonic expression for the general equivalency theorem, 
which is reproduced here [labelling as (*)], where a = cos(8) and ¢ = sin(@) ... 
co 


df {cos(yn[l / a+ A + iy) — 1/(8a+A-iy)] + 
3e isin(yr) [1 / (8a + A+ iy) + 1/(8a+A—iy)]} dy/ /y?- Gee +R, 


And here, R = 2e ©** 4" / V8? + 26a + OD, is a doubling of the residue associated with the simple 
pole that is at (da + A) in f(s). And again, a, 5, A are all > 0, and recall too that weal. 


fis) = 1/{(s +8a+ A) /s? + Ge}. 


We also validated (*) when 6 ---» 0 [pp 554-5], and now wish to do the same thing when ¢ ---> 0. 
In this case, since o? + ¢2 = 1, R reduces to 2e © * 4" / (8 + A), and (*) will evaluate to 1 / (+ A), 
from our previous research notes. And this is equal to gu,v(6), which agrees with our general 
equivalency theorem, stated on page 554, since again, a is now 1. 


As an example, with (a=6=A=1,r=2,¢=0,«=1/2ai,r=1,R= 27 | 2), the integral in (*) 
computes to ... 


kg i(-x5 + sas cos(2 y) +i (=. + or ;) sint2 y)) 


- - dy = 0.481712 
lo my 


And R evaluates to ~ .0183156, and when added to the number above, the result is ~ 0.5. And this 
is precisely gu,v(r), which is equal to gu,»(6), since again, 6 = r= 1, and gu,y(r) = 1/(r + A). 


A line on page 554 was rewritten to state correctly, that the following is true ... 


‘Note that whether or not A is equal to zero, r maps to 5a + iy in @; since again, in R2, it is the case 
that gu,(r) = 1 / (r + A)’. This is the correct interpretation of the mapping, in my opinion, which 
we use in this research note, as well ... 


559 


A Harmonic Expression For gu,» = 1 / (rsin(0) + A) Where A > 0 


Let us bring back the more general equivalency from page 511, where there are singularities at the 
origin O and at (+6, 0), in the intangible space. Here, a = cos(@) and ¢ = sin(@), and 6 > 0; and we 
will suppose the template gu,» is now a function of (r, 8). To wit, gu,v(r, 8) = 1 / (rsin(®) + A), 
where 0 < 6 < 2/2, and a, 6, A are all > 0. 


Then the general harmonic expression (1), where R is a doubling of the residue associated with f(s) 
in the complex plane @, is as follows ... 


fis) = 1/ {((s + 8a): sin(@®) + A) fs? + (88)} 


oo 
af {cos(yr)[gu,v(Sa + iy, 8) — guv(Sa—iy, 0] + 
be isin(yr) [gu,v(Sa + iy, 0) + gu,v(a—iy, 6)]} dy/ /y?- (6)? +R, (1) 
and (2) is ... 


Cuyv ~ ol[guv(0) + 2cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)gu,v(Sa)] . 
And let us recall our equivalency, for this case, where € = gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre) ... 
(1) = gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre) if and only if (2) is true (~) 


The first thing to note here, is that gu,y(6a + iy, 8) = 1 / (rsin(®) + A), where r = 6a + iy in @, and the 
second thing we want to point out is the construction of f(s). 


i6sin(@) 


>) -i8sin(@) 


It has a pole at -p = —(A + dasin(0)) /sin(0), and if we now study the first term in the denominator 
of f(s), which is (s + 6a)- sin(®) + A; we see that as we traverse the vertical branches in the contour 
above, when taking the Laplace inverse of f(s); the variable s is equal to +iy, which gives us 


560 


agreement with what we see in the integrand of (1). Combined with second term in the 
denominator of f(s), gives us the full integrand in (1), which is what we want. 


Lastly, since the pole —p is equal to —(A + dasin(@)) / sin(@) in f(s), the corresponding residue 
computes to exp(-pr) / ,/p? + (Se)2, noting again that a? + &? = 1; since we are taking the Laplace 
inverse of f(s) along AB, where k = 1/2zi; that is to say, 


fers) ds. 


A doubling of this residue, which we call R, is now added to the integral in (1), which gives us the 
complete harmonic expression above, on the previous page. 


Tf, on the other hand, f(s) had branching points instead of poles, we would calculate in a similar 
fashion; this time doubling an integration along both arms associated with the branch points, and 
adding this value R to the integral in (1) [see, for example, pages 556-7]. 


Finally, in (2) on the previous page, we have the term gu,.(6a), and in 2, because Sa is a radial 
measure, this computes to 1 / (rsin(®) + A), where r = da. 


We can now go ahead and test the template, for the guantumlike component in (2), just as we did 
on page 553, and accept or reject it, accordingly. In this particular case, we'll let 0 = 2/4, so that a 
and ¢ are ¥2/2 (approximately 0.707106). And we’ll set 8 = A =r = 1, so that the integral in (1) 
becomes ... 


1 1 a 
cos(y) (——2__ - —_!__), isin 
i (y)( 1540.707iy _ 1.5-0.707i ;) +isinG) 


L 
vz Gm Vy? -05 


0.474422 


1 1 

— Ee 

( 1.540.707: y —_1.5-0.707i 5 
dy= 


The value of R in (1) computes to ~ .107218, and when added to the number above, one obtains ~ 
-581640. On the other hand, gu,y(6a)-Jo(dre) computes to ~ .585902. The numbers are astonishingly 
close, and you have to wonder, for this random choice of 0, whether | / (rsin(@) + A) might be a 
suitable template for the guantumlike component in (2) [perhaps part of a series expansion, say]. 


ae? 2Jo( z=) 
V5 3 
Decimal approximation Decimal approximation 
0.1072178943663382 0.585901612180728 


value of R value of gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre) 


561 


If we were to repeat the testing, say with @ = 2/6, then the integral in (1) becomes, along with R 
and € = gu,y(5a) - Jo(Sre) [6 = A =r = 1, a = cos(@) and € = sin(0)] ... 


Ss (iz) V y? - 0.25 


1 1 * ei 1 1 
cosi (= - et +isin (see tet) 
fi (y) 1.433+0.5iy — 1.433-0.5i 5) ” 1.43340.5iy — 1.433-0.5iy d 


0.596044 
2exp(-2.866) 1.433 2005) 
y 2.866? + 0.25 
Result Result 
0.0391341... 0.654899... 
value of R value of gu,.(5a) - Jo(dre) 


Adding the numbers .596044 and .0391341 together yields .635178, which compares favorably 
with €= .654899. And here is the testing for 0 = 7/3... 


1 1 at 1 1 
cos ( - )+isin + 
500 ©OS'Y) | T3350 866i y — 1.433-0.866i y (y)( 1.433 40,8663 y mama) 


fix 
o3 (x) V y2-0.75 


dy = 0.397824 
1 (2 
Jol — 
exp(— 1.65469) 1.433 - 

V 1.65469? + 0.75 
Result Result 
0.204701... 0.572999... 

value of R value of gu,v(Sa) - Jo(Sre) 


Adding the numbers .397824 and .204701 together yields .602525, which compares favorably with 
€= 572999. Although the comparisons don’t agree, in both cases, there is enough evidence now to 
support the following potential hypothesis, based on these two tests ... .. 


For some smooth function (9), which can be approximated by sin(@), where 
0 <6 < 7/2, it is the case that 1 / (r - h(O) + A) is a suitable candidate for the 
quantumlike component in (2) [p 559]. 


562 


In the case where @ = 2/2, a pole exists at —A in f(s), since a = 0 and ¢ = 1, now. And with 6=A= 
r= 1, the harmonic expression is shown below, along with the term R = v2/e [labelling as (*)] ... 


f(s) = 1/ {((s + 6a)- sin(®) + A) V/s? + (e)?} 


anf {costyn[1/(A + iy) —1/(A~iy)] + isin(yr) [1/(A + iy) + 1/(A-iy)]} dy//y?- & +R 
& 


And since gu,»(r, 8) = 1 / (rsin(®) + A), and € = gu,y(Sa) - Jo(Sre), we see that € = Jo(1). Here are the 
snapshots from Wolfram ... 


o i((- TF + ray) COsty) +4 (= + my) Sin?) 


: my-1+y* 


dy = 0.308547 


Jo) 
v2 ’ 
e 
Decimal approximation Decimal approximation 
0.520260095022888 0.765197686557966 
value of R value of gu,v(6a) - Jo(dre) 


Adding the numbers .308547 and .520260 together yields .828077, which compares somewhat 
favorably with € = .765197, though it is clear, there is no agreement here. Yet I would still 
maintain, that the potential hypothesis from the previous page, is still valid, but becomes somewhat 
weaker, as 8 ---» 1/2. 


In the case where 8 = 0, no pole exists in the first term of the denominator for f(s), since a = 1 and 
€=0 now, and A > 0. Thus R = 0, and gu,(r, 8) = 1/ A, both in R? and @, so that the harmonic 
expression reduces to 


oo 


ani Af sinyr) dy/y =1/A 
& 


And € = gu,y(5a) - Jo(dre) = gu,v(Sa), which must equal 1 / A in R?, for any choice of the argument 
to gu,v, because gu,v(r, 8) = 1/ A. Thus, the agreement is exact here, as expected; since again, we 
have assumed 6=A=r=1... 


563 


Is 1 / (Vr* + A*) A Suitable Template For Cu,y ~ ogu,(0), Where A > 0 


In this case we use the function f below, associated with the following contour y, and take the 
Laplace inverse of f along AB, where a, 6, A are all > 0 (initially). And here a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(8), 
and we’ll assume throughout that A = 1, so that the branch points [—p] for the first term in the 
denominator of f are at ~y, as shown in the picture below, if 6 = 0. 


fis) = 1/ {f(s +80)? + AF - fs? + (6e)?} 


idsin(6) peter 
e = sin(9)} 
y= ¥2/2+iy2/2 


For the upper pair of horizontal branch lines (6 = 0, A = 1, -p = -V2/2 + iV¥2/2), the sum of the 
integrals here computes to 


co 
xf exp(-r(x + p))/ {(x+p)V@+p)* + At }dx upper branch lines U 
° 


and for the lower pair of branch lines (6 = 0, A=1,-p= -V2/2-iV2/2), the integrals sum to 


oo 
xf exp(-r(x + p)) / {c+ p) Vt py)’ + A? }dx lower branch lines £ 
° 


The integral associated with the harmonic expression # [vertical branch lines in the contour], 
reduces to (6 = 0, A = 1, r= 1; range 0 to 500 for computational purposes) 


“500 2sin(y) 
{ Sy) dy = 0.767585 
JO 


nyvVi+y4* 


564 


And to compute R, which we add to #, we simply add the values from U and £ above; and double 
the result. Here are the snapshots, where only a small range in the integration is needed ... 


m2 exp(—(x + 0.707 — 0.707 i)) 
f dx = 
un(V (x + 0.707 - 0.707 i)* + 1 (x + 0.707 — 0.7071) 
0.0593568 + 0.0687528 i 
value of U 
“12 exp(—(x + 0.707 + 0.707 i)) 
= dx= 


(ix) (Vv (x + 0.707 + 0.707 i)* + 1 (x +0.707 + 0.707 i) 


0.0593568 — 0.0687528 i 


value of £ 


In both cases (6 = 0, A= 1, r= 1), we see a real and imaginary component here, and when added 
together and doubled, the result for R is ~ .237427. If we now add this number to A, which 
computes to .767585, the sum is ~ 1.00500. 


The result is very close to the theoretical value of gu,.(r) = 1 / (Vr4+ A* ), which is 1, when r = 0; 
and so we may conclude that 1 / (Vvr4+ A*) is a suitable template for Cu,» ~ ogu,.(0), when A is 


greater than zero. 


We’ll do one more example (6 = 0, A = 1, r = ¥%), and here are the snapshots for #, U and 2L, 
respectively ... 


soo 2 sin(~) 


dy = 0.476315 
vo onyvis+y4 
12 exp(-0.5 (x + 0.707 - 0.7071) i {* exp(—0.5 (x + 0.707 + 0.707 1)) Ix 
dx = - dx = 
tim)(Vix +0707 - 070708 +1 («+0707 - 0.7073) x timy(Viex+0.707 + 070709 +1 (x+0.707 +0707)} 
0.131872 + 0,0640548 i 0.131872 - 0,0640548 i 


Adding U and £ together, and then doubling this sum, gives us R ~ .527488. Now adding R to # 
gives us a value of .527488 + .476315 ~ 1.00380. Again, very nearly 1, which is gu,.(0). 


565 


We can sharpen our estimates by replacing .707 in the integrals above with V2/2. In so doing, U 
and £ become, respectively (6 = 0, A= 1, r= 1), 


12 i 
{ Sx = 0.0581038 + 0.0702193 i 
JO 


“12 je (ltn/V2-x 


dx = 0.0581038 — 0.0702193 i 


Jo 
lei 14 4 
x + x) 1+ ( + x) 

(Fe v2 


Adding the numbers above, and doubling the result gives us R ~ .232415; and adding this to the 
value of #, which is ~ .767585, gives us exactly 1. 


For the case (6 = 0, A= 1, r='%), U and L compute to, respectively, 


dx = 0.130921 + 0.0666319i 


dx = 0.130921 — 0.0666319 i 


Adding the numbers above, and doubling the result gives us R ~ .523684; and adding this to the 
value of #, which is ~ .476315, gives us ~ .999999. Again, a match with gu,.(0), which equals 1. 


It is amazing to me, anyway, just how accurate these results are, given the complex expressions we 
are actually dealing with, and as such, confirms the methodology we are using, to obtain them ... 


566 


A Harmonic Expression For gu,y = 1 / (rsin(0) + A) Where A > 0, Part II 


Let us bring back the more general equivalency from page 511, where there are singularities at the 
origin O and at (+6, 0), in the intangible space. Here, « = cos(@) and ¢ = sin(@), and 6 > 0; and we 
will suppose the template gu,y is now a function of (r, 8). To wit, gu,(r, 8) = 1 / (rsin(®) + A), 
where 0 < 0 < 2/2, and a, 6, A are all > 0. 


Then the general harmonic expression (1), where R is a doubling of the residue associated with f(s) 
in the complex plane @, is as follows ... 


fs) = 1/ {((s + 8a): sin(®) + A) fs? + (88)} 


af {costyr)gur(Sa + iy, 0) — guv(Sa—iy, 0] + 
be isin(yr) [gu,v(Sa + iy, 0) + guv(Sa— iy, 6)]} dy/ /y?- (8)? +R, (1) 


and (2) is, for the guantumlike component, 
Cuy ~ 26 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre) gua). (*) 
And let us recall our equivalency, for this case, where € = gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre) ... 
(1) = gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre) if and only if (2) is true (~) 


Now from Part I [pp 559-62], we showed that the following potential hypothesis is likely true, but 
becomes somewhat weaker as as @ ---» 1/2. In other words, as 6 ---» 1/2, h(@) still exists, but can 
no longer be approximated by sin(@). And this was based on testing when 6 =A=r=1. 


For some smooth function 4(@), which can be approximated by sin(@), where 
0 <6 < 7/2, it is the case that 1 / (r - h(O) + A) is a suitable candidate for the 
quantumlike component in (2) above. 


Now if we let G = 1 / (r - h(@) + A), then we may conclude that T is the limiting case of a broader 
template TG’, which satisfies (~) for all 6, A, r > 0, and becomes T as 6, A, r ---» 1. So while we may 
never know what T’ actually is, we can infer its existence by realizing that T is really just a special 
case of G’. And so, the general form for the quantumlike component (*), can be justified, 
accordingly. 


567 


Generalizing The Harmonic Expression gu,v = 1 / (r -h(@) + A) Where A > 0 


Following up on the last research note, we now wish to generalize the template for gu,y, so that it 
incorporates the variables r, 0, A in the harmonic expression (1), as shown below. And here, we 
suppose that G = 1 / (r - h(@) + A) satisfies (1) = gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre) for 6 = A =r = 1, as per the last 
research note, with 0 < 0 < 1/2, so that the quantumlike form 


Cuyv © 20 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)gu (5a) (*) 


holds, in this very specific case [6 = A =r = 1]. Note that in 2, the italicized variable r in G maps 
back to r; and that r maps over to da. + iy in (1), and that gu,.(6a) is calculated by setting r = 6a in 
T. As well, in the generating function f(s), r maps to s + 6a in the complex plane @. And here, we 
have a = cos(0) and ¢ = sin(@), and we’ll suppose 6, A are > 0, for the time being. 


ax f {cos(yr)[guv(Sa + iy, 0) — gur(Sa—iy, 0)] + 
be isin(yr) [gu,v(Sa + iy, 0) + guv(Sa—iy, 6)]} dy/ /y2- (2 +R (1) 


With these things in mind, we can now generalize T by writing G' = 1/ A(r, 8, A), so that f(s) now 
becomes, where r=s +60... 


f(s) = 1/ {hr 0, A) - fs? + (68)2}. CH) 


And from (+), R can be calculated, by doubling the residue or residues associated with the first 
term in the denominator of f(s), when taking its Laplace inverse; or by calculating along branch 
lines, if we are dealing with branch points. That is to say, for the Laplace inverse 


fers) ds, 


for some appropriate contour , we examine the equation h(s + 5a, 8, A) for poles or branch points, 
and compute accordingly, just as we have done all along, in this tutorial [p 547 ff.]. 


In the harmonic expression (1), we note that gu,v(6a + iy, 8, A) becomes T' = 1 / h(r, 8, A), where 
here we have r = 60. + iy in @, and when moving back to R2, 


guv(r, 8, A) = G' = 1/ h(t, 8, A); 


so that r maps to rin G’. And this is the form for gu,v(r, 8, A) when calculating Cy,v in (*), so that 
again, gu,y(a) is calculated by setting r = da in gu,v(r, 8, A). Clearly, any solution to (*) will be a 
function of (r, 6, 6, A), but in T’, I see no need to carry 6 in the argument list; yet this could change. 


No doubt, the correct template G’, for all 5, A, r > 0, is some kind of infinite series, that reduces to 
Tas 4, A, r---» 1 [p 566]; but whether we will ever find G' is an open question, to say the least. But 
a simple generalization of G might look like 1 / (r4- h(0) + 8 - A), where here, we do include 5. 


568 


And, an example of an infinite series that reduces to T as 6, A, r ---» 1, where 6 is included, might 
be 
n 


TG = limn---» © f(n,r, 5, A) Zr 18) + Bay), 


where r becomes r in #2. And here, we shall define f(n, r, 5, A) = 1/n, if and only if6=A=r=1; 
otherwise, we shall define f(n, r, 5, A) = (6-A — 1), for all 5, A, r > 0. And to ensure convergence 
of the infinite series above, we'll suppose in this latter case that 5 > 0, and that A > 1 /6 [recall that 
the location of the dark energy singularities is at (+6, 0)]. 


Furthermore, we will assume /(0) is some smooth, bounded, and non-negative function in the range 
0<@< 2/2. Thus, with , A, r= 1, G’ becomes | / (h(0) + 1), which agrees with , in this case; 
otherwise G* converges to something meaningful, for all 5, A, r > 0, where it is no longer the case 
that 6, A, r= 1. 


Note that in G", where it is nor the case that 8, A, r= 1 [meaning all three variables can’t equal 1, 
simultaneously]; if we then set r = 1, then as 6, A ---» 1, f(n, r, 6, A) = (6-A— 1) ---» 0. And this is 
the same as setting f(n, r, 6, A) = 1 /n, with 6, A, r = 1, and letting n ---» 0 in TG". Thus, there is a 
smooth transition here between the two cases, and indeed, we can actually define the transition in 
exactly this way. 


We can even go further, by considering templates of type G' = 1 / (r4- h(r, 0) + 8+ A), so long as in 
R?, where r =r, it is the case that r and @ remain independent of one another. For example, we 
might let the function h(r, 8) = A(r-6), so that as 6, A, r ---> 1 in R2, h(r, 8) = h(6) and we return to 
the template G, where T is defined as 1 / (r - h(@) + A). However, such an extension complicates 
further the integrand in (1), in so much as r maps over to 5a + iy for G’, and in the generating 
function f(s), r maps over to s + 6a for TU’, so that 


f(s) = T - L/ Vs? + be)? 


Yet, ultimately, we may need to go down this path, for when dealing with the quantumlike 
component, as shown below, we note that the argument to the cosh and Jo functions has these 
“cross terms’, where a = cos(6) and = sin(@). 


Cuyv ~ 26 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre) gu, (Sa) 


As an example, if we had a template like G” = 1 / sin(r®), and wanted to see if the integral in (1) 
below converged [gu,y = G"], we would let r = 5a + iy in G", and calculate, accordingly. The result 
follows on the next page, where r= 2,6 = 1,0 =7/4, and a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@). 


0 


ax S {cos(yr)[guv(Sa + iy, 0) — gur(Sa—iy, 0)] + 
be isin(yr) [gu,(Sa + iy, 9) + guv(Sa—iy, 0)]} dy/ Jy? - (6)? +R (1) 


569 


cos(2 y) 


1 1 
~ +ésin(2 y) 
sin(? (0.707 + i y)z) sin(? (0.707 ~i y) x) 


dy = 0.158878 


1 1 
Fy (0.707 +i y)) : sin(+ (0.707 -i y)x) 


The good news here is that we do have convergence, and so can now begin to consider templates 
like G", and indeed, infinite series based on G", like say 


TG = limn---» © fin, r, 5, A) Zt he-8) + BA) ; 


where in this case, we might let h(r-0) = sin(r®), when testing [the summation just above, however, 
must still converge in R2]. And note again that G” reduces to T, as 6, A, r ---» 1 in R2, since r=r 
here. 


Clearly the construction of G" is purely hypothetical, but it does tell us that such constructions are 
possible, and could lead to a template that actually is a suitable candidate for the quantumlike com- 


ponent, as shown below ... 


Cu,v © 26 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre) gu, (Sa) 


570 


Is 1 /(vr* + A*) A Suitable Template For Cu,» = ogu,v(0), Where A > 0, Part II 


In this note, we want to revisit the calculations for the contour below, to see how phasing comes 
about, and ultimately, to see how the integrals along the upper and lower branch lines were 
developed. 


i6sin(6) 


To start, we take the Laplace inverse of f(s), as shown below, 


fis) = 1/{J/(s +80)? + AF - Js? + (68)? } 


where the Laplace inverse, itself, is 


xfer fis)ds . 


When we arrive at the upper branch lines U, that are marked with the phases a and —a, the first 
integration runs from s = —oo + iv2/2 to —p, where —p = -¥2/2 + iv2/2. Setting s' = s + p, the 
integration now runs from —< to 0, and letting s' = —x, we arrive at the expression below, at least 
up to sign, after doubling off of either branch line in U, where A = 1, and 6 ---> 0. 


co 
ax» f exp(-r(x + p))/ {(x+p) V@+p)* + At }dx upper branch lines U 
° 


I say up to sign, because the choice of which branch line to double off of, is really up to us, if we 
ignore phases. We can now do the same for the lower branch lines £, where —p = - V2/2 —iv2/2. 


571 


Note that in taking this approach, we wind up sweeping around the origin O, in clockwise fashion, 
in the right-half of the complex plane @, and then heading back out to ©, where the top branch line 
now has a phase of —a, and the bottom branch line a phase of m. We’ll call these branch lines U’ 
when dealing with U, and £' when dealing with £, which you can see in the diagram on page 572. 


But nowhere in this exercise in Part I, do we actually see the phases come into play, for the 
integration above, yet this can be seen by factoring the square root term as follows, for WU’ ... 


Let us write the square root term as 


V@tpy + = VOD Gr + DF - a, CH) 
where p = exp(-in/4), p' = exp(in/4), A = 1, and (1) inside the square root is actually p*. 
Then it becomes clear, for the top branch line in W', where the phase is now —a, that /(—1) =-1; 


and similarly for the bottom branch line in UW’, where the phase is now 7, that /(—1) =i. Hence, 
we double the integration along the top branch line, to arrive at the following expression for W’... 


wf exp(-r(x + p))/ {(x + p) J(- Di xp’ + 1)* = A} Sade upper branch lines U 
re) 


And a similar thing can be done for the /ower branch lines £, associated with —p = -V2/2-iv2/2, 
where p = exp(in/4), p' = exp(-in/4), A = 1, and (-1) inside the square root is actually p*. 


wf exp(-r(x + p))/ {(x +p) J(-Di xp’ + 14 = AY} Sade lower branch lines £' 
re) 


Here are the snapshots for W' and £L’, respectively, where we use the identity (*) in the integrations 
above, and it is the case that (6=0, A=1,r=1)... 


“12 exp(—(X + 0.707 — 0.707 i)) 
ji dx= 
alex + 0.707 — 0.707 i) ¥ (x (0.707 + 0.707 i) + 1)*-1 ) 
0.0581305 + 0.0702366 i 
“12 exp(—(x + 0.707 + 0.707 i)) 
dx= 


(ox +0.707 + 0.707) ¥ (x (0.707 - 0.7071) + 1)*-1 } 


0.0581305 — 0.0702366 i 


Notice that in both cases, we are doubling the integration from the top branch line where the phase 
is —z, so that /(—1) =-7, and thus with k = 1/2zi, the constant becomes 2k - 1 /./(—1) =1/z. 


572 


Now let’s compare these results with what we found in Part I [p 565], where we did not make the 
substitution in (*) above, and so did not deal with phases directly (6=0, A=1,r=1)... 


~(1-i)/V2 -x 


dx = 0,0581038 + 0.0702193 i 


dx = 0.0581038 — 0.0702193 i 


The two are nearly identical, and would be closer still, if not exact, were we to replace .707 in the 
integrations on the last page, with V2/2. 


The picture above shows the branch lines for U' or £L’, where the black dot represents the origin O 
in @. Notice how the phases have reversed themselves from the diagram on page 570. The 
integrations on page 571 now sweep around the origin, in clockwise fashion, in the right-half of the 
complex plane @, and head out to © ... 


And we’d like to say again, that the first integral in Part I [p 563], associated with U, is actually a 
doubling of the integration on the top line in the diagram above; while the second integral in Part I 
[p 563], associated with £, is actually a doubling of the integration along the bottom line in the 
diagram above [which causes a sign change]. However, nowhere here do we actually use phasing; 
rather, a more intuitive approach, and that is because when I wrote Part I, I wasn’t sure how to 
rewrite the term /(@ +p)* + d* that we now see in (*), on the previous page, to take advantage of 
phases. Yet both approaches [Parts I and II], oddly enough, seem to be acceptable ... 


573 


Generalizing The Harmonic Expression gu,» = 1 / (r -h(@) + A) Where A > 0, Part II 
Following up on Part I [pp 567-9], we suppose that G = 1 / (r - A(@) + A) satisfies our general 
equivalency theorem [G]; namely, (1) = gu,(6a) - Jo(sre) for 6 = A=r=1, with O < 0 < 2/2, s0 
that the quantumlike form 


Cuy = 20 - cosh(6ra)Jo(6re)gu,v(Sa) — (*) 


holds, in this very specific case for G [6 = A=r= 1]. 


ax f {cos(yr)[guv(Sa + iy, 0) — gur(Sa—iy, 0)] + 
be isin(yr) [gu,v(da + iy, 0) + guv(Sa—iy, O)]} dy//y?- (2)? +R (1) 


Now suppose TG’ is some gravitational template that satisfies G for all 5, A, r; so that (*) holds more 
generally, in this case. Then in particular, G’ satisfies G if 5, A, r all equal 1, and so TG’ must reduce 
to T in this case, if the solution to (*) is unique. 


On the other hand, suppose without loss of generality, that 6, A = 1. Then a simple continuity 
argument suggests some T' exists that satisfies G for r greater than 1, but arbitrarily close to 1, and 
hence is a suitable candidate for (*), for all 0 < 6 < 2/2, say. T' will look similar to TG, and 
becomes T as r ---> 1. 


Now let r' > 1 be the /argest value of the radius, for which a G' can be found that satisfies G in the 
range 1 <r <r’, forall0 < @< 2/2, say. Then again, a simple continuity argument suggests some 
T exists for r > r’, that satisfies G, where r is close to r', and becomes V' as r --» r’, from above. 


Thus, we can cover off the whole of R? in this way, by travelling out to «©, or heading toward the 
origin O. And so, we can ‘stitch’ together a set of templates, smoothly, that satisfy G for all r > 0. 
Said another way, there is no reason to believe there is an upper bound less than ©, or a lower 
bound greater than zero, at which the ‘stitching’ terminates. 


And this further justifies the form (**) for the quantumlike component over all of £2, when there are 
dark energy singularities at (+6, 0), despite the fact that we may never know what T' really is; only 
that it exists. 


To solve (*), we’ll begin by assuming 6, A = 1, and we’ll solve it for G = 1 / (r - h(@) + A), which 
will tell us what h(0) actually is, when 6, A, r = 1; since here we know G is satisfied by T, in this 
case. Now from our continuity argument, there must exist a G' = 1 / (h(r, 8) + A), which is the 
smooth extension of , that satisfies G over all of R?, and thus is a suitable candidate for (*). 


Furthermore, it must be the case that G' becomes T as 6, A, r ---» 1, which implies, in particular, 
that h(r, 8) ---» r - h(®), as we reach this limit. So solve (*), using VW’, to find h(r, 8) and validate the 
special case when 6, A, r ---» 1. This may be a useful methodology for obtaining a solution to (*). 


574 


Whether a single template such as T or G’ will suffice when solving (*) is debatable; for even if we 
assume the inner block [8] is the default r°, we’re still left with solving two equations; namely, the 
radial and timelike components corresponding to u,v = | and u,v = 3, respectively. 


Cuv © 26 -cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)guv(Sa) — (*) 


And since the general equivalency theorem [G] doesn’t tell us [and indeed, can’t tell us] whether 
the template is radial or timelike, it is up to us to decide. 


If a single template can handle both cases, then we can proceed to solve (*) ... according to the 
remarks above. And if we need two templates that satisfy G, then I would suggest we write T as 


Tuy =1/ (r- hu) + Auy), 


to indicate this difference. And similarly for T’, where for the radial and timelike components, we 
would write 


Buy =1/ auv(r, 8) + Any) - 
In both cases, however, we would insist that T'u,y becomes Gu,v as 5, Au,y, r ---» 1, which implies, in 
particular, that Jiu,v(7, 8) ---> r - hu,.(8), as we reach this limit. Again, it is understood that both Tu,v 


and T'u,y satisfy G. 


Similar remarks apply when dealing with a dark energy singularity at the origin O, where here, we 
have 


Cuv = 6 guv0). (4) 
A number of templates were studied for this equation [p 547 ff.], which is much easier to deal with 


than (*), so it should be easier to verify that they satisfy G; in the event we need two templates for 
the radial and timelike directions, respectively, when solving (+). 


575 


Generalizing The Equivalency Theorem To Three Dimensions 


In two dimensions, the generalized equivalency theorem [G] states that (1) = gu,(6a) - Jo(6re) if and 
only if (*) holds, where a = cos(@) and ¢ = sin(6), and the singularities are at (+6, 0) ... 


Cuy = 20 - cosh(Sra)Jo(6re)gu,v(Sa) — (*) 


af {cos(yr)[gu,v(Sa + iy, 8) — gu,(Sa—iy, 6] + 
be isin(yr) [gu,v(Sa + iy, 0) + guv(Sa—iy, 0)]} dy/Jy?- G2 +R (1) 


In three dimensions, (*) becomes, in physical coordinates [see diagram below] 
Cuyv ~ 26+ cosh(6rcos(y))Jo(Srsin(y))gu,(cos(y)), (+) 


where here, cos(y) = sin(®)cos($), and the physical singularities are located at (+6, 0, 0). 


Thus, when going over to three dimensions, « in (1) above maps to cos(y), and ¢ maps to sin(y). 
And if B= 1 / A(r, 8, $, A) is our template in R3, then we would replace the gravitational 
expressions gu,v(5a + iy, 8) in (1) with G', where r maps to da + iy in TW’; and again, a is now cos(y) 
in (1). And in gu,v(Scos(y)) in (+), r becomes dcos(y) in TG’, since T' is the gravitational template 
Su,v in KR. 


As to the generating function f(s), it becomes, where r= 5 + 6a. in G’, and a = cos(y) and € = sin(y); 


f(s) = UW 1/ fs? +e)? . 


576 


Interpreting Radial Versus Time In The Quantumlike Component 


For the guantumlike form (*) shown below, we can speculate on what it means to perceive things in 
the radial direction [u,v = 1] versus the time direction [u,v = 3] in R?, where there are dark energy 
singularities at (+5, 0), and we are in the intangible space Ts. 


Cuyv = 26 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)guv(Sa) — (*) 


From page 496, we see what a typical radial wave pattern looks like in Te, for the dark energy 
component above; namely € = 20 - cosh(6ra)Jo(Sre), where here o, 5 = 1, and a = cos(8), ¢ = sin(@). 


| 
J vow { 
5 10 15 2 | 35 | 30 


r=x-axis , 0 = 80°, radial 


Such a wave & should possess both energy [E] and momentum [1], and so just like in the tangible 
space T« [pp 532-4], where the equation Cy,» ~ kTu,v applies for a perfect star [S*]; and p 
corresponds to pressure (spacelike) in S* via Ty,y, while E corresponds to density (timelike) in S* 
via Ty,y; we can form a similar analogy for & in the intangible space Tg, when looking at (*). 


As such, when solving (*), we ought to form templates Gy,» around this analogy, where one is for 
the radial component [1], and the other for the time component [E]. Such an approach was noted 
on pages 573-4, and may prove to be feasible, based on the suitable template G = 1 / (r - h(@) + A). 


In Waner’s book Introduction to Differential Geometry and General Relativity [6" printing], he 
uses the templates exp(2A(r)) and —exp(2¢(r)), for the radial and time components, respectively, in 
the solution to Cy.» = kTy,v, for a perfect star, and shown below. Curiously, the radial and time 
components in the solution g+ are inverses of one another, up to sign. 


Schwarzschild Metric 
jee YY ® 
aes 0 ro 2 0 
0 0 7*sin?@ 0 
0 0 0  -(1-2M/r) 


577 


But if, indeed, we’ve reached a point where the coupled equations (*) below can be justified over 
all of R2, according to our methodology M on pages 573-4, and previous research as well [p 316 


ffl... 
Cuy ~ 26 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)gu, (Sa), — (*) 


then we are free to choose our templates A and @ for (*), in the radial and time directions, however 
we want. They might both be functions of (r, 8, 5, A), and might also incorporate the momentum 
and energy of the €-wave, itself. Either way, the assumption here is that (*) is the correct form, 
whether it is induced by Ml or some other line of reasoning found elsewhere in this essay [see, for 
example, pp 461-479]. 


Thus, we don’t necessarily have to adhere to the approach mentioned on pages 573-4, though it 
seems to be our safest bet at this point; for it guarantees us a template or family of templates that 
may imply the truth of (*). But whatever the approach, the generalized equivalency theorem [G] 
should hold for the normalized solution gu, to (*), since G is an ‘if and only if’ proposition [for 
more on normalized solutions, see pp 522-3]. 


In particular, therefore, if (*) is true for some gu,v [u,v = | or 3], then it must be the case that (1) = 
gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre), provided the integral below converges ... 


ax Sf {cos(yr)[guv(Sa + iy, 0) — gur(Sa—iy, 0)] + 
de isin(yr) [gu (Sa + iy, 0) + guv(Sa—iy, @)]} dy/ /y?- (G2 +R (1) 


And we can go further now, and solve the three-dimensional analog; namely, 
Cuyv = 20 - cosh(6rcos(y))Jo(Srsin(y))gu,v(Scos(y)), — (F) 


where here, cos(y) = sin(@)cos(), and the physical singularities are located at (+6, 0, 0). 


Again, we should feel confident that the templates A and @, extended to three dimensions for the 
radial and time components, do exist and will produce a solution gu,y to (+), which satisfies the 
three-dimensional analog of the general equivalency theorem [p 575]. 


Finally, it should be said that suitable templates derived or inferred via G, are simply functional 
expressions that are consistent with the form for the right-hand side of (*) or (+), or with the form 
for the right-hand side of Cuv © 6 - gu(0)®, in the case of a dark energy singularity at the origin 
O. To see if they are really solutions could only be known if, for example, they satisfied (*) or (+), 
or in the simplest case, (§) ... 


578 


A Simple Case Study 
In our model, things are static. While it is true that the quantumlike radial waves [€] associated 
with (*) below, emanate from the origin O, they are not fluctuating with time. Nor are the dark 
energy singularities at (+6, 0) rotating or spinning on a circle of radius 6 > 0, centered at O. 

Cuv © 26 -cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)gu,v(Sa) — (*) 

€ = 20 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre) 
Thus, a diagonal solution D to (*) in R? can be justified, where in this study we will allow the inner 
block [B] to default to 7° [for large r, however, it would be wise to include B in the calculations, 


according to some template, as per previous research notes (see, for example, pp 480-513)]. 


In the diagram below, we see a thin annulus @ containing the unit circle Ci, so that the radius r is 
trapped between | —€ and | + €, where € is arbitrarily small and greater than 0. 


*S unit circle 


radius = 1 + € 


We'll attempt to solve (*) in @, using the templates described on pages 573-4, and reproduced here; 
that is to say, for u,v = 1 or 3, where 6, Au,y = 1 and a = cos(8), ¢ = sin(@), 


Tuy =1/ (r+ hu) + Awy) « 


We choose templates of this type, because from our potential hypothesis [p 566], it is known that 
they are consistent with the right-hand side of (*), from the generalized equivalency theorem [G]. 


But, you may ask, is there really more than one such /y,,(8) ? The answer is likely yes, because 
such templates arise from a study of TG = 1 / (rsin(®) + A) [pp 559-62]; but we could just as easily 
have chosen functions other than sin(®) in T, thus leading to other potential hypotheses. And so, a 


579 


family ¥ of suitable templates of type {Gu,»} emerges, which may be solutions to (*) in @ for u,v = 
1 or 3. 


Now solve (*) in @ for the normalized solution WV (o = 1), using the templates Guy [u,v = 1 or 3, 
and 8 = r’], and then let € ---» 0, so that the radius r ---» 1. This will tell us what hu,v(8) is along Ci, 
and thus what the solution gu,y is along Ci, as well [it is simply Tu,v, where the functions hu,y(8) are 
now known]. The general solution will then be o- WV. 


It should be said that in (*), and reproduced below, any Cu,y is calculated from {Tu,v}, and gu,v(da) 
is calculated by letting r = 5a in Guy. As well, if B=’, then u,v = 2, and here the solution Guy = 
u,v = B holds. 


Cuyv © 20 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre)guv(Sa) — (*) 


To interpret the result along C1, we note that since this is a diagonal solution [D], gu,y should be 
seen as a measure of the ruler tick in the direction of r, for any given 0, if u,v = 1; and as a measure 
of the clock tick in the direction of r, for any given 9, if u,v = 3; and as a measure of the angular 
tick in the direction of @, for any given r, if u,v = 2. By ‘measure’, we mean ‘reflection of’, in some 
sense of the word. 


Now we can solve the broader problem over all of R?, by considering templates like the following 
[pp 573-4], where again 5, Ay,y = 1 [uv = 1 or3, B=Pr)... 


Buy = 1/ Ituv(r, 8) + Ay) - 
In both cases, however, we would insist that G'u,» becomes Tu,v as r ---» 1, which implies, in 


particular, that Jiu,v(7, 8) ---> r - hu,.(8), as we reach this limit. Again, it is understood that both Tu,v 
and T'u,y satisfy G, where u,v = 1 or 3. 


580 


A Simple Case Study, Part II 


Imagine at point P = (r, 8) in &? at a distance of r units from the origin O. Suppose further that 
there is nothing in the tangible space T., so that relative to an imaginary observer [@] at the origin 
in R2, the distance to P is simply r. 


Now let’s place our dark energy singularities at S = (+6, 0) and ask ourselves how r changes, due to 
the presence of the quantumlike radial waves & = 20 - cosh(5ra)Jo(Sre), in the intangible space Ts, 
which we see in the coupled equations below [pp 532-4] ... 


Cuy = 20 - cosh(6ra)Jo(6re)gu,v(Sa) — (*) 
Suppose that the normalized (o = 1) solution [W] to (*) is [gu,v], so that the general solution is now 
o- NW [pp 522-3], where o > 0. To find out how r changes because of S, we perform the following 


integration along & [pp 395-7], 


r 


S(O tadanet 
fe} 


where gi; is the radial component in W [we'll assume here that ¢ > 0]. 


Note that (+) could have an imaginary part, because the radial waves are both positive and negative 
in the range 0 < @ < 2/2, and exponential in nature if 8 = 0 [see pages 345-9 for pictures of €, for 
different angles 6, in 2]. Thus, y is to be interpreted as positive distance and ¢ as negative 
distance in (f), so that along é, r is now perceived by @ to be r+ yn -C. 


As an example, we’ll have a look at the following expression [labelling as (§)] ... 


"2x 
{ V sin(x) dx = 4 E(2) ~ 2.39628 + 2.39628 i 
0 


Here we see that the real and imaginary parts agree, so that if gi: was sin(x), the change to r at 27 
units from O would be zero. 


Similar arguments can be put forth for the angular and time components in o - W, using this 
particular interpretation of how dark energy in T: affects our perception of distance in R2. 


581 


A Simple Case Study, Part III 


Let us bring back our thin annulus @, as shown below, using our template Gy,» inside ; that is to 
say, for u,v = 1, we have 6, Au,v = 1 and hu,y(8) = sin(8), so that from our potential hypothesis, 


Suv =1/ (r+ huv(0) + Any) - 


unit circle 


radius = 1+€ 


We’ll now situate our imaginary observer @ at the origin O in £2, so that in the absence of any 
dark energy, and nothing in the tangible space Tx, © will say the distance D between the inner and 
outer rings of @ is always 2e, for any choice of 0. 


Now let’s place our dark energy singularities at S = (+6, 0) and ask ourselves how D changes, due 
to the presence of the guantumlike radial waves & = 20 - cosh(Sra)Jo(5re), in the intangible space Ts, 
which we see in the coupled equations below, where a = cos(8), ¢ = sin(@) ... 


Cuy = 20 - cosh(Sra)Jo(6re)gu,v(Sa) — (*) 


From our previous research note, the integral component in @ is, for @ = 0 [and thus g:1= 1] ... 


l+e 
S (7mm dr = 2e-Vo, 
l-e 


so that to @, it is the case that D = 2c + 2e - Vo. The distance, relative to @, has increased because 
of the radial waves € = 20 - cosh(6ra)Jo(6re), associated with dark energy. 


Repeating for 9 = 2/2 [and thus gi; = 1 / (r + 1), since /1:(8) = sin(®)], we find that the integral 
component is now approximately € - ¥2o, so that D = 2c + € - V2o, and thus has increased again 
because of €, but /ess so than the value when 6 = 0. 


582 


And this is because at @ = 0, is equal to 20 - cosh(r) in @, and increasing; whereas at the angle 0 = 
m/2, & is equal to 2c - Jo(r) in @, and decreasing. Thus, to @ ... the annulus appears to be more 
elliptical in shape, as shown in the picture below [not drawn to scale] ... 


Ss. 
eae 
a 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


Whether € really has an influence in the timelike direction, on our imaginary observer @ situated at 
O, is an open question, as far as I’m concerned. Certainly in the tangible space T.x, with a perfect 
star centered at O, such an influence is apparent. But in the intangible space Te, what we really 
have here are radial waves [&], which are quantumlike in nature, emanating from O at different 
angles. And we see from the example above, how € can influence an observer’s perception in £?, 
in the radial direction, which is spacelike. 


If there is a justification for a timelike influence on ©, via &, then such an influence should be coded 
into the equations in (*), on the previous page [u,v = 3]. Otherwise, if no such influence really 
exists, then u,v = 3 should be omitted altogether in (*), in my view. 


Similarly, we see from the picture above, that based just on an analysis of the radial component; 
that is to say u,v = 1, © can infer that the unit circle C; in R? has become more elliptical. What then 
should we do with the inner block & [u,v = 2], especially since we already know that angular 
fluctuations along C; are really just cross-sectional views of €, for any given radius r. 


In the end, this entire exercise of solving (*) may boil down to finding a solution for gi; here, and 
nothing more. But at this point, it’s too soon to say ... .. 


583 


A Simple Case Study, Part IV 


Let us bring back our thin annulus @, as shown below, using our template Gu,» inside A; that is to 
say, for u,v = 1, we have 6, Au,y = 1, so that from our potential hypothesis, 


Suv ~1/ (r+ huv(0) + Auy). (Ff) 


*’ unit circle 


radius = 1+ € 


The goal here is to develop a methodology for finding /u,.(8), so that we may use gu, above to 
calculate radial distances inside @, just as we did in the last research note. An improvement over 
the approximation /y,,(@) ~ sin(@) in Part III, you might say. 


The Riemann Curvature tensor must be at least fwo-dimensional, and from my reading of things, is 
proportional to Ri212 [1 = r, 2 = 6] in an (r, @) layout in R?, where we omit the time component 
altogether. From this, and using (7), we should be able to calculate the Ricci tensor Ri, and the 
Ricci scalar R; so that in theory, at least, a solution to (*) below is possible for u,v = 1. Here, the 
inner block will default to 7? [u,v = 2], and o = 1, a = cos(6), ¢ = sin(@), so that we are looking for a 
normalized solution W, for u,v = 1. The general solution will then be o - W. 

Cuy = 20 - cosh(Sra)Jo(6re)gu,v(Sa) — (*) 


For u,v = 1, and using (+), we see that (*) may be written as [o, 6, Av,y = 1; where (+6, 0) is the 
location of the dark energy singularities, € = 2cosh(ra)Jo(re), and h = hu,(8)] ... 


Rii-R/2r-h+1) = E/(a-h+1). 
And this results in the following quadratic 
av’+bh+c=0, (8) 


where a = 2raR11 ; b= 2rRi,1 + 2aR1, — aR -2r€;c =2Ri1-R-2€. 


584 


The proper solution to (§) will give us h = h1,1(r, 8) in G, but this will become /1,1() as r ---> 1. 
And this is the form for hf in the radial solution, reproduced below, that we will use in @ to 
calculate distances between the inner and outer rings of the annulus, just as we did in the previous 
research note [u,v = 1, Au,v = 1], where we let /11,1(0) ~ sin(@). 


guy ~1/ (r+ huv(0) + Auy). — (F) 


Thus, (+) becomes an approximation in G, for small €, but from the perspective of integrating the 
expression below, 


l+e 


S O° 911 dr 


l-e 


is much easier to deal with than h = /1,:(r, 8) in (§) above. Indeed, it’s unlikely we could even 
succeed at integrating, were we to use /1,:(r, 8) in (7) ... 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


Strictly speaking, the quadratic (§) on the last page may be more complex, since terms like Ri,1 and 
R in the coefficients a, b, and c, could contain the function h, itself, and various derivatives. But 
regardless, in order to maintain consistency with the way in which (§) was derived; that is to say, 
via the template (+) for u,v = 1, and a default inner block B = r° [u,v = 2]; it is best to let r ---» 1 
everywhere in (§) first, and then solve for h = h(®), accordingly. 


For because (§) is derived via (+) and 8%, necessarily h is a function of 8 only, in (§). And so, to 
maintain this consistency when solving (§), we first let r ---» 1 everywhere here, and then proceed 
to solve (§) for h, in some suitable fashion. 


585 


A Simple Case Study, Part V 


To show the reader just how complex the problem is, in terms of finding h = /1,1(6), I’ve calculated 
the connection coefficients for Ri,1 only, which arise by studying Rizi2. They are listed below, 
where the template is guy © 1/ (r+ hu,v(0) + Auv) [4v = 135, Auv = 1], and the inner block B =r’. 


Ty = -h/2(rh +1) 5 Pro. = 1/7 3 Vils = -rh'/2rh4+ 1) 5 T71 = h'/2rrh + 1P 
Tx) = 0; Tx = 1/r 3 T12 = dl 71/d0 3 M21 = -1/7 


Out of this, Ri,1 is formed, according to the formulas below, taken from Waner’s book Introduction 
to Differential Geometry and General Relativity [6" printing, pages 88-89] ... 


1 oak 
Tyce = 28 Geen + Sine — Srop) 


Rye egies ly gy recta cereal peal 


— Ri — of 
Ray = Ravi = 8 Rai 
Note that Rj,1 is actually Ri712 , since Ri'1; = 0, and you can see, just from calculating Ri, how 
difficult it is going to be to solve the equation below for h(@), from Part IV [p 583], after first 
letting r ---> | here. 


Riit—R/2r-h+1) = E/(a-h+1). 
But if a solution can be found, one of the conditions placed on h(8) ‘might’ be h(O) = 0, and this 


stems from our analysis of G = 1 / (r sin(®) + A) [pp 559-62], where we saw that when @ = 0, the 
match is exact, with respect to the general equivalency theorem G [see page 562, in particular]. 


586 


A Simple Case Study, Part VI 


In this note, we wish to calculate the area of the [distorted] elliptical annulus € below [pp 581-2], 
that our thin annulus @ has morphed into, because of the dark energy radial waves generated from 
the singularities S at (+6, 0); and emanating in all directions, from O. 


Here, guy = 1/(r + hu) + Auyv), where u,v = 1, and 6, Au,y = 1, with hy,.(8) ~ sin(®), using our 
potential hypothesis (thus gu,y becomes a simple estimator). Now the integral [Ac] of interest to us, 
is shown below, and ultimately, because of symmetry, we'll multiply this integration by 4. 


m/2 lt+e 
S S Je Ga vVordrdé 
0 l-e 


We'll now situate our imaginary observer @ at the origin O in £2, so that in the absence of any 
dark energy, and nothing in the tangible space Tx, © will say that € really is @, with inner and outer 
rings of radii | — € and 1 + €, respectively; and hence @ concludes that the area of @ is just 47. 


Of interest to us is the following indefinite integral, where here c = sin(®) and x =r ... 


S xivari dx = (2/3c*) Vex ¥1 (cx—2), 


so that Ac becomes, after multiplying by 4, 


587 


m/2 


(86 / af (1/sin2(0)) -[ {2+ e sin@) +1 (1 +6) sin(@®) -2) — 
0 
V@- 6 sin(@) +1 (1-6) sin(®) —2) ] do 


The first thing we want to check is that as 6 ---» 0, the integral just above [Ac] converges, since 
there is a denominator term of sin?(0) here. So let sin(®) ~ 6, and expand each square root term 
using a Taylor series, for small 9 ---> 0 and fixed €; for example, 


JG@+ Osin@+1 ~ J/44+ 0041 = J14+0 4+ 06 = 14+%-(14+00 


Then after collecting terms, the bracketed expression in A¢ reduces to 2e - 6°, and since sin(@) ~ 0, 
we see that after dividing by the denominator term sin*(0) © 6°, we obtain 2c. Thus, the integral 
converges as 0 ---» 0. 


Next, we want to evaluate Ac as € ---» 0, for fixed 8. Here we expand each square root term, using a 
Taylor series to first order, as per the following construction ... 


VG + osin(@)+1 = J+ sin) - J+ € -sin@)/(1 +sin @))) 
= J+ sin@) - {1+%- esin(6)/(1 +sin(0))} 


If we now collect terms, the bracketed expression in Ac ... divided by the sin’(0) term in the 
denominator, is equal to 3e/./(1+ sin(@)) , and so Ac becomes ... 


n/2 
(Boe) f° 1/J/(1+ sin(@)) dO = (80e) {log (3 + 2 V2)} / v2 
0 


And this is the amount by which the area of the annulus @ has increased, incrementally, due to the 
presence of dark energy, as it morphs into €. That is to say, relative to O, the area of € is the area of 
A+ Ac. 


As an example, if 6 = 1, so we are dealing with a normalized solution for gu,y, then Ac ~ 10e, so that 
the area of € is nearly double that of @, relative to @. But in reality, o is likely to be very small ... 
perhaps on the order of the cosmological constant. 


CORRECTION 


Since in the normalized solution W [o = 1], the inner block is 7° [pp 522-3], it becomes o - r’ in the 
general solution, and so this research note has been updated in the integrals, to reflect the change. 
A correction was also made to the right-hand side of the integral just above, concerning the log 
argument. 


588 


A Simple Case Study, Part VII 


In a three-dimensional model, the following simple estimator (*) for gu,y may be of interest to us, in 
our thin annulus @ [spherical shell] containing the unit sphere, where u,v = 1, and 6,A = 1. Here, 
we are using a physical coordinate system, as shown below, where the dark energy singularities are 
located at (+5, 0, 0), and 0 < 0, < 2/2. Also, we should note that cos(y) = sin(8)cos() in the 
coupled equations (+) for this setup. 


guv = 1/(r-sin(y)+A) (*) 


Cu ~ 26 - cosh(Srcos(y))Jo(Srsin(y)) gu,(Scos(y)) — (+) 


To see why (*) may be a simple estimator, let us start with @ = 0. Then (*) reduces to the 
expression | / (r - cos(@) + A) in the x-z plane; and when @ = m/ 2, (*) becomes | / A — its maximum 
value along the x-axis, where the dark energy € = 20 - cosh(6rcos(y))Jo(Srsin(y)) is also strongest. 


On the other hand, when 6 = 0, € is at its weakest in the x-z plane; in line with (*), which takes on 
its smallest value of 1 / (r + A). Now setting o = 1 / 2, we are in the y-z plane, and here (*) reduces 
to 1 / (r + A), no matter the choice of 0, and that is because € is always at its weakest in this case. 
And finally, if @ = 2 / 2, we are in the x-y plane, and (*) reduces to 1 / (r - sin() + A), which is what 
we expect. 


For values of 8, o in between 0 and z / 2, (*) is designed to interpolate smoothly, and so becomes an 
interesting candidate as a simple estimator for (+) in @, provided it approximately satisfies the 
three-dimensional equivalency theorem, on the unit sphere [p 575; see also pp 559-562 for the 
analog in two dimensions, as well as the potential hypothesis on page 561, in particular]. 


NOTE TO THE READER 


An earlier release put forth a different template in (*) than the one above; however, it is not fully 
symmetric in the x-z and and x-y planes, but the one above is ... 


589 


OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


In the two-dimensional case, where there are singularities at [(+5, 0), (0, +6)], our simple normalized 
[co = 1] estimator for the thin annulus @ containing the unit circle, is simply [u,v = 1; 6,A = 1]... 


guv = 1/(r-sin(®)+A) + 1/(r-cos(@)+A), 
where 0 < 0 < 2/2. 
Since we’re using a default inner block B = 7’, it remains B when adding component solutions 
together [pp 522-3, 526-30]; so that the normalized solution WV is [gu,y, B], and the general solution 


iso- WN. The time component is omitted altogether, for now. 


In the three-dimensional case, with singularities at [(+6, 0, 0), (0, +5, 0), (0, 0, +5)], rotations are 
performed as per the notes on pages 532-4 and 536-7, where we define [1 =x, 2=y,3 =] ... 


cos(y)1 = sin(@)cos(p) ; cos(y)2 = sin(®)sin(p) ; cos(y)3 = cos(0) 


Thus, cos(y)2 is a 90 degree rotation of cos(y): in the x-y plane, and cos(y)3 is a 90 degree rotation 
of cos(y): in the x-z plane, using physical coordinates. 


The normalized estimator [o = 1] for our thin spherical shell, containing the unit sphere; where the 
default inner block 8 = [7 , r’sin?(0)], is now [uv =1;8,A=1;0< 0,6 < 2/2)... 


guy = 1/(r-sin(y)i +A) + 1/(r- sin(y)2+ A) + 1/(r- sin(y)3 + A). 


590 


A Simple Case Study, Part VIII 


In this note, we are going to calculate the increase in volume of a spherical shell @, with inner and 
outer spheres of radii 1 — € and 1 + €, respectively; due to the presence of dark energy driven by the 
singularities at (+6, 0, 0). We note that cos(y) = sin(®)cos($), in physical coordinates [p 588], and 
that the inner block defaults to B = [ , r’sin?(0)] in a normalized [o = 1] solution. 


We'll call this ellipsoidal annulus €, that our thin shell @ has morphed into, because of the dark 
energy radial waves generated from the singularities S at (+6, 0, 0); and emanating in all directions, 
from the origin O. 

Here, guy = 1/(r - sin(y) + Auyv), where u,v = 1, and 6, Auy = 1, using our potential hypothesis 
(thus gu,y becomes a simple estimator). Now the integral [Ac] of interest to us, is shown below, and 


ultimately, because of symmetry, we'll multiply this integration by 8. 


m/2 m/2 1+e 


S S S lo Ga Vorvorsin(0) drdodp 
0 0 


l-e 
We’ll now situate our imaginary observer © at the origin O in £3, so that in the absence of any 
dark energy, and nothing in the tangible space Tx, © will say that € really is @, with inner and outer 
spheres of radii 1 — € and | + €, respectively; and hence © concludes that the volume of @ is just 


(4n/3){(1 +63 — (1- ©} 


Of interest to us is the following indefinite integral, where here c = sin(y) and x =r... 


S 2a +1 dx = (2/ 15c*) Vex +1 (3c?x? —4cx + 8), 


so that Ac becomes, after multiplying by 8, 


n/2 n/2 lt+e 
(16/15) 632 S S [Ver $1 {(3c2? — der + 8)/c3}] sin(®) dodg 
0 0 ite 


And here, the bracketed expression [B] is to be evaluated at its upper and lower limits of r= 1 + € 
and | — e¢, respectively; after which, we expand the result as a Taylor series to first order in €, just 
as we did in Part VI [pp 586-7]. Almost magically, we find the numerator in B computes to 15c%e, 
and after dividing by the denominator c’, yields 15¢/Vc +1. We then complete the balance of the 
integration, giving us the following expression for A¢ ... 


591 


m/2 n/2 
(16¢)o7? S S (sin(0) / Ve + 1) dodo 
0 0 


And this is the amount by which @ expands into €, incrementally, because of the dark energy radial 
waves. Note that € will be stretched more along the x-axis, than the y, z axes, because the dark 
energy singularities are at (+6, 0, 0). 


CORRECTION 
In a previous release, the denominator term vc + 1, in the integral above, was omitted. Here, we 


have corrected that omission ... 


For the record, the integral above computes to ~ 1.18367, as we see in the picture below, so that the 
incremental volume is Ac = 20e0°”. 


a 


a sin(x) 
t [? a dy dx = 1.18367 
ed V1+ y1-cos?(y) sin?(x) 


592 


A Simple Case Study, Part IX 


Our simple estimator, for the unit circle Ci in R2, is guy = 1/(r- sin(@) + A)... where u,v = 1, and 
6,A=1;0 < 0 < 2/2 and the dark energy singularities are at (+6, 0). What is important to observe 
here, is that gu,y is consistent with spacelike behavior [pp 580-91], and so it is natural to assume 
that the potential hypothesis, reproduced below, is referring to a template G = 1 / (r - h(@) + A) that 
is also spacelike in nature. 


For some smooth function (@), which can be approximated by sin(@), where 
0 <6 < 7/2, it is the case that 1 / (r - h(O) + A) is a suitable candidate for the 
quantumlike component in (*) below, on the unit circle ... 


Cuy = 20 - cosh(6ra)Jo(6re)gu,v(Sa) — (*) 


Thus, the only meaningful way to find h(@), is by solving (*), and using G; where the inner block 
defaults to B = ?’, in this case, and the initial condition h(0) = 0 holds. A tall order, given the 
complexities mentioned on pages 583-5, in particular. And since it is quite possible we will never 
actually find h(®), we may have to be content with using simple estimators to calculate distance, 
area and volume, as we did in this Simple Case Study series. And that, in turn, is where the general 
equivalency theorem [G] may be able to help us [pp 559-62, 575). 


As to the time component, I am not sure, right now, if dark energy [&] really has a temporal 
influence on the imaginary observer ©, situated at the origin O in R? [pp 581-2]; but if it does, then 
perhaps a simple estimator like gu,y = 1 / (r- cos(®) + A) might work here [u,v = 3] on Ci. 


For with singularities at (+5, 0), it behaves inversely to gu,v [u,v = 1], in so much as gu,y increases 
as gu,v decreases, and conversely, as 8 moves between 0 and 2/2 in #2. Said another way, the 
simple timelike estimator for singularities at (+6, 0), is equivalent to the simple spacelike estimator 
for singularities at (0, +5), where the latter approximately satisfies G, as we know [pp 559-62]. 


And finally, similar remarks apply in #3, where here, simple estimators were discussed on pages 
588-9. 


When testing gu,y as we did gu,» on pages 559-562, I saw that the agreement was exact if 0 = 2/2, 
and exact out to six decimal places if 9 = 0. I also noted that the result for 8 = 1/4 would not 
change; that is to say, it is 58164 versus .585902 for both gu,y and gu,v. This is probably enough 
evidence to support our guess that gu,» may be used as a simple estimator, for the time component 
on the unit circle C1, when there are singularities at (+5, 0), if we choose to go down this path. 


Hence, gu,y becomes a simple estimator in the thin annulus @ containing Ci, and by extension, a 
simple estimator in the thin shell containing a unit sphere; where here gu,» = | / (r - cos(y) + Auv), 
and cos(y) = sin(8)cos($) [providing, of course, gu,v approximately satisfies the general equivalency 
theorem G in three dimensions (p 575), when there are singularities at (+6, 0, 0)]. 


593 


Some additional testing was done for the time component gu,v, on the unit circle, when 6 = 2/6 and 
6,A = 1; with singularities at (+6, 0). Here are the results ... 


SS ee si SS SS ee 
ag costy) 1.75+0.866iy  1.75-0.866 iy ) is sing) ( 17508661y * 175-0. aa) 
dy= 

vos (ni) yy? - 0.25 

0.406792 

4Jo(5) 
iE = 7 
2 \ — ¢7/(2 V3) 
13 


Decimal approximation Decimal approximation 


0.127358759632430 0.536268461280464 


value of R value of € 
From pages 559-62, we add the value of R to the value of the harmonic expression, just above; 
which gives us ~ .534151, and we can see here how closely it agrees with €. Thus, we may 


conclude that gu,y is a simple estimator for the time component on the unit circle, and by extension, 
in the thin annulus @ containing this circle. 


Furthermore, we may conclude that in the presence of stronger dark energy [be it positive or 
negative], clock ticks expand and ruler ticks contract; and as the stronger dark energy becomes 
weaker, ruler ticks begin to expand and clock ticks begin to contract. 


Note that stronger dark energy can be strongly positive or strongly negative [meaning further away 
from the x-axis], when looking at the quantumlike radial waves, as shown below; so that clock and 
ruler ticks can expand and contract in the positive or negative sense as well. 


5 10 


r ‘| 


r=x-axis , 0 = 80°, radial 


594 


A Simple Case Study, Part X 


Let us bring back our thin annulus @, as shown below, and note that for an imaginary observer © at 
the origin O in ?, where now there is no dark energy, and nothing in the tangible space Tx; © will 
say the area between the inner and outer rings of @ [with radii 1 — € and 1 + €], is just 4ze. 


Now let € ---» 0, so that we are actually on the unit circle C;. Then the circumference of C; can be 


expressed as 


lim 4m€/2¢€ = 20 
e---0 


Nj 


unit circle 
radius = 1 + € 
X e 


Now let’s place our dark energy singularities at S = (+6, 0), and note that @ morphs into the 


elliptical annulus €, as shown in the diagram be! 
ellipse E; is what C; has become, because of the 


low [not drawn to scale]; where the lighter green 
ark energy radial waves € , emanating from O. 


595 


From part VI [pp 586-7], the incremental area in €, that @ has expanded into, is approximately Ac = 
8o0ek, where the constant k = {log (3 + 2V2)} / V2; and so to ©, the area of € is now the area of @ 
plus Ac, which is @ = 4c + 80€k. 


If we assume that o is very small, then we can divide @’ by 2e, using our lim e€ ---» 0 argument 
above, and conclude that the circumference of E, in € is approximately 21 + 40k. 


In three dimensions, for a thin spherical shell S containing the unit sphere S;, with inner and outer 
radii of 1 — € and | + €, respectively; © will say in the absence of dark energy, and nothing in the 
tangible space, that the volume of S is, for small € [pp 590-1] ... 


(4n/3){1 +6? — (1- ©)7} © 82 
Dividing this by 2¢, and using an «€ ---» 0 argument, tells us that the surface area of S; is simply 47. 
To find the surface area S' of S; as it morphs into an ellipsoid, due to the presence of dark energy, 
with singularities at S = (+6, 0, 0); we add the incremental volume Ac [pp 590-1] to 87, and again, 
divide by 2e, if o is small. That is to say, 
S' = (8ne + 16e0°/7k) /2€ = 4n + 80°7k, 

where cos(y) = sin(@)cos(), c = sin(y), and k is equal to 

m/2 n/2 

S S (sin(®) / Ve + 1) dddp 

0 0 


596 


A Simple Case Study, Part XI 
We can improve on our simple spacelike estimator for the unit circle C; in £2; that is to say, gu» = 
1/(r- sin(®) + A) ... where u,v = 1, and 8,A = 1; 0 < @ < 2/2 and the dark energy singularities 
are at (+6, 0). We do this by writing 


Suv = L/(r-(@)sin(0) +A), (fF) 


where here (8) = 1 + (1/20)sin(z@(1 + 1/10)), as shown in the plot below. 


i a 1 hd 
plot 1+ 5 sin(xx(1+—-)}) ow2 
20 10 2 
Plot 
1.04 
1.02 
1.00 
0.98 
0.96, 
09s 


00 02 04 06 OB 10 1.2 La 


Notice in the chart above, that we over-compensate if ® is approximately /ess than 1/4, and do just 
the opposite if 0 is approximately greater than 1/4. Notice also that at @ = 0, n(®) = 1, so that the 
general equivalency theorem [G] is still exact for this choice of 8 [pp 559-62]; and that at 0 = 2/2, 
n(0) = .96. 


We’ll now calculate the various pieces that make up G, using (+), and see how things play out, 
when 8 = 7/2; the angle at which #, + R deviated most from € [pp 559-62], using the original 
simple estimator, labelled (*) above. Here, Ax [shown below], is the harmonic expression itself, to 
which we add R, and then compare this result with €. For the record, the simple pole is at —A / 
7(8), in this case. 


1 : 
+z |sino» 


ay 


— 1 cos(y 
‘00 i( ; + zi, }eoson +4 
{ = dy = 0.30261 
wi 


ny-1 


value of Hex 


597 


2expi--L 
exp( 0.96 ) Jo(1) 
i( —. y +1 
V\o96 
Result Decimal approximation 
0.488742... 0.765197686557966. 
value of R value of € = gu,y(5a) - Jo(Sre) 


Thus, the value of A + R is approximately .7913 here, versus € ~ .7652. This is an improvement 
over the result on page 562 using (*), where Az + R was ~ .8281, and € remained the same at ~ 
-7652. 


Furthermore, given the oscillatory nature of y(8), we would expect to see improvement for all 
values of 0 between 0 and 7/2; since in the original results [pp 559-62], H. + R was less than € for 
6 approximately /ess than 1/4, and just the opposite for 8 approximately greater than 1/4. 


But finally, we have to recognize that by improving the simple estimator, as we did here; 
calculations for things like distance, area and volume, that were carried out in this Simple Case 
Study series, will inevitably become more complex. 


There is always a trade-off in these matters, and so we can be satisfied that by using (*) instead of 
(+) for our calculations, we probably got fairly accurate results. In other words, would (+) yield 
anything much better ? 


598 


A Simple Case Study, Part XII 


If we suppose the simple estimator for @ is no different than the simple estimator for g:1, on the unit 
circle C; in R?; then there is another way we can calculate the circumference of E:, which is what 
C; becomes, when there are dark energy singularities at (+6, 0) [E: is the light green ellipse as 
shown in the picture below, not drawn to scale; but see also pp 594-5]. 


For consider the following integral [Ac], where gu,y = 1 / (r - hu,(8) + Au,v) when u,v = | or 2, and 
6, Auv = 1, with hu,(8) ~ sin(®), using our potential hypothesis. Note that because of symmetry, 
we’ll multiply this integration by 4, and note also that u,v = | or 2 means u and v are both | or 2. 


m/2 


S Jha 0 G22 d0 
0 


If we set r = 1 in both gi; and go2 above ... then we are actually calculating the incremental 
circumference [Ac] of E:, due to dark energy; and this computes to 40, after multiplying the integral 
above by 4. Thus, to the imaginary observer @ at the origin O in £2, the total circumference of E; 
is now 22 + 40, which compares favorably with our estimate of 2a + 40k on pages 594-5, for small 
o, where the constant k = {log (3 + 2V2)}/V2 = 1.25. But again, this assumes g:,1 = g22 on the unit 
circle. 


For the three dimensional case, we suppose that on the unit sphere Si, gu,v = 1/(r - sin(y) + Auv) 
when u,v = 1, 2 or 3, and 6, Au,y = 1, with cos(y) = sin(®)cos(), using physical coordinates. Then 
our integral [Ac] for the incremental surface area of E; becomes [where S; morphs into the distorted 
ellipsoid Ei, due to the dark energy singularities at (+5, 0, 0)] ... 


599 


m/2 n/2 


S S ema V9 922 VO° 933 dodo 
0 0 


Note that because of symmetry, we’ll multiply this integration by 8, so that after setting r= 1 in gi, 
822, and g33 above, Ac computes to 80°?k, where k is the constant below ... 


wh 


s 1 
al erm 4 ax = 1.01654 


>. a2 
(1 + y¥1—cos*(y) sin*(x) ) 

Thus, to the imaginary observer © at the origin O in &? ... the total surface area of E; now 

becomes 472 + 80°/?k; which compares favorably with our estimate of 4m + 80°/?k on pages 594-5, 


for small o, where k is equal to 


sin(x) 


dy dx = 1.18367 


——————— 
yl + ¥1-cos?(y) sin?(x) 


But again, this assumes gi; = g22 = g3,3 on the unit sphere, and we should also note that small o 
only applies in the arguments on pages 594-5; because there, we only use 2 as our radial distance, 
when area or volume is divided by this quantity [see also pp 581-2]. And this requires that o be 
small. 


When calculating something like circumference or surface area, there are four cases to consider, as 
shown in the diagrams below; as 9 moves from 0 to x / 2, within the context of general relativity 
and dark energy ... 


ruler tick and angular tick constant ruler tick constant, angular tick changing 


600 


cee 


ruler tick changing, angular tick constant ruler tick and angular tick changing 


In calculating the incremental area or volume of a thin annulus containing the unit circle, or a thin 
shell containing the unit sphere [pp 586-7, 590-1], in the presence of dark energy [&]; we chose to 
go with the diagram on the /eft, just above, so that the inner block B was the default. And we did 
this to simplify the calculations. 


But in this research note, to calculate the circumference or surface area of E,, which is what the 
unit circle or unit sphere morphs into, because of €; we chose to go with the diagram on the right, 
just above, and hence the integrals on pages 598-9 are written the way they are. 


Also, g2,2 and g33 are to be associated with the 6 and @ components, respectively, using a physical 


coordinate system ... .. 


If, on the other hand, g22 and g3,3 behave more like the timelike estimator [pp 592-3], then the 
normalized integral on page 598 computes to 


1 i 
dx = V2 log(2) = 0.98026 


+ sin(x) ¥1+ cos(x) 


so that Ac ~ 40, after multiplying by 4; and this is about the same as using the spacelike estimator. 
And similarly for three dimensions: using the timelike estimator, the integral on pg 599 evaluates to 


S5 1 
E , dy dx = 1.34305 
I 


| 2 2:2 
© “(1+ cos(y) sin(x)) 1+ y 1 - cos*(y) sin?(x) 


and this somewhat agrees with the constant k ~ 1.0165, using spacelike estimators, though it is 
larger. 


601 


A Simple Case Study, Part XIII 
To show that 


n/2 


S VF Ga JWG 0 
0 


is the correct expression for calculating the incremental circumference [Ac], as our unit circle Ci 
morphs into the ellipse E1, when there are dark energy singularities at (+5, 0); let us repeat the 
arguments from pages 586-7 and 594-5, where we now calculate Ac as follows, presuming o to be 
small [pp 581-2]. Thus, the default inner block & is replaced by the estimator ,/o- gp. ... 


m/2 1l+e 


[ lim J S \oon VO° G22 drdo| [2 (*) 


e-»0 0 L-e 
We'll suppose guy = 1 / (r - hu,(8) + Auy) when u,v = | or 2, and 6, Au,y = 1, with hu,»(8) ~ sin(®), 
using our potential hypothesis. Note that because of symmetry, we’ll also multiply the integration, 


just above, by 4, after completing the calculation. 


Of interest to us is the following indefinite integral, where c = sin(®) and x =r... 


S treet) ae = (1/c) log (cx + 1) 


Using this, we evaluate the inner integral in (*), and then expand the result as a Taylor series for 
small ¢. The expansion computes to 


(1/o)[{log (1 +c) +ce/(1+c)} — {log (1 +c)—ce/(1+0)}] = 2e/(1 +0), 


and we now complete the calculation, by computing the remainder of (*) and multiplying by 4 ... 


n/2 
[ lim S 80c/(1 +0) 40] / 2 = 40 
e-—->0 0 


In other words, there is absolutely no difference between this approach and first setting r = 1 in (+), 
which is how these calculations were actually done in Part XII, to begin with. But here, by taking 
the € ---» 0 approach, and using (*); it is easier to see the interplay between the ruler tick and the 
angular tick; whereas if I set r = 1 initially, in (+), and do the calculations, it is harder to understand 
what Vo Sia really is in (}), in particular. Yet it is needed, in order that the two methods agree, 
and it should be mentioned that similar remarks apply in R3, but we won’t do the calculations here. 


602 


Finally, when we look at the Wolfram integrals on pages 599-600, and reproduced here, where x = 
8 and y = , it makes no difference if we map cos(y) to sin(y). For then, our dark energy singular- 
ities now lie along the y-axis at (0, +6, 0), since cos(y) = sin(®)sin() [pp 588-9]; but no such claim 
can be made along the z-axis, since here cos(y) = cos(@) ... and the influence due to is lost 
altogether. A manifestation of the coordinate system we are working in, as we have said before. 


i” 1 
a dy dx = 1.01654 
(1 + v1 — cos*(y) sin(x) ) 


dy dx = 1.34305 


a 
(1+ cos(y) sin(x)) «J 1+ y 1 -cos?(y) sin?(x) 


dy dx = 1.01654 


f i 
3/2 
(1 + y/1-sin?(x) sin?(y) ) 


dy dx = 1.34305 


CL a 
(1 + sin@x) sin(y)) 1+ ¥1-sin?(@x) sin*(y) 

= sin(x 
i(_]S— dy dx = 1.18367 
yl+ y1 - cos*(y) sin?(x) 


a a sin(x) 
FL aol dy dx = 1.18367 


1+ V1 -sin*(x) sin*(y) 


603 


A Simple Case Study, Part XIV 
For the case where there are singularities at (0, 0, +6) along the z-axis, using a physical coordinate 
system; we repeat the methods on pages 590-1, since here cos(y) = cos(®), when calculating the 
dark energy component [pp 588-9], as shown below ... 


€ = 20 - cosh(6rcos(y))Jo(Srsin(y)) 


Using the default inner block & = [7° , r’sin(®)], we find that Ac computes to [where c = sin(@)] ... 


m/2 n/2 
(16e)0*? S S (sin(0) / Ve + 1) dodb 
0 0 


And this is the [volume] amount by which § expands into €, incrementally, because of the dark 
energy radial waves. Here, S is the thin spherical shell containing the unit sphere, with inner and 
outer radii of 1 — € and 1 + €, respectively; and € is the ellipsoidal annulus, that our thin shell S has 
morphed into; because of the dark energy radial waves generated from the singularities S at (0, 0, 
+5), and emanating in all directions, from the origin O. 


Note that € will be stretched more along the z-axis, than the x, y axes, because the dark energy 
singularities are at (0, 0, +5). 


Now the integration, just above, computes to 8meo*k, where k evaluates to 


< sin(x) log(3 - 2 ¥2) 
{ ——— dx = 2+ = = 0.75355 
vo ¥1+sin(x) V2 


and thus, Ac ~ 18.939 eo*/?.. Now let’s compare this to Ac on pages 590-1, where the dark energy 
singularities were at (+5, 0, 0), along the x-axis. This value was 16¢0°/?k, where k evaluated to 


dy dx = 1.18367 


[' 1 sin(x) 
Jo Jo 


1+ ¥1-cos (y) x) 


so that here, Ac = 18.939€6*/?. Remarkably, the two results are identical ... 


604 


A Simple Case Study, Part XV 


From pages 601-2, it is not hard to show that by first setting r = 1 in (+), the correct interpretation 
of this expression, for small o, is actually (*), as shown below ... 


m/2 n/2 


S S (ma VO° G22 JF G33 d0dp (+) 
0 0 


m/2 nm/2 lt+e 


[ lim S S S [S- Gia JO-Ga2 JO-Ga3 drdbdp] [2 (*) 


e-)00 O l-e 


Here, (+) is defined to be the incremental surface area [Ac], as our unit sphere S; morphs into the 
ellipsoid Ei, when there are dark energy singularities S at (+6, 0, 0), or at (0, +5, 0), or at (0, 0, +6). 
Thus, the default inner block 8B is replaced by the estimator /o- gz. ,/o- g3,3; and we have 
already shown that for guy = 1/(r - sin(y) + Auv), where u,v = | or 2 or 3, and 6, Auy = 1 ... this 
surface area Ac does not change if S is either (+6, 0, 0), or (0, +6, 0) [pp 601-2]. For definitions of 
sin(y) using physical coordinates, see pages 588-9. 


But since there can be no assurance that Ac will remain invariant when S is equal to (0, 0, +5), we 
have a choice at this juncture: find estimators for g22 and g3,3 such that Ac does not change, no 
matter the choice of S; or use the default inner block B = [?° , r°sin?(®)], where we showed in the 
last research note [p 603 and pp 601-2] that the incremental volume A¢ remains invariant (and thus 
Ac too, after dividing Ac by 2€ using a lim € ---» 0 argument), regardless of what S is. A minor 
miracle, you might say, and the better choice, in my view; since we’re not likely to find estimators 
for g22 and g33 that approximately satisfy the general equivalency theorem [G], and meet our 
invariance criteria, anytime soon [p 575]. 


And so at this point in #3, we can conclude that on the unit sphere Si, and hence in a thin shell S 
containing Si, with inner and outer radii of 1 — € and 1 + «, respectively; a suitable normalized 
solution W (o = 1) for the coupled equations is 


guy =[1/(r- sin(y) + Awy), 7, Psin?(0), 1 / (r- cos(y) + Auv)] . 
where again, definitions of sin(y) and cos(y) using physical coordinates, can be found on pages 


588-9. The general solution is then o - W, and of course, the presumption here is that gi: and gaa 
approximately satisfy G on S: ... 


605 


A Simple Case Study, Part XVI 


Here, we are going to analyze the estimator guy = 1 / (r - sin(y) + Auv) over the unit sphere [Si], 
using our general equivalency theorem G, in three dimensions [p 575]. The singularities are to be 
located at (+5, 0, 0), where u,v = 1; 5,Au,y = 1 and 0 < 0, < 2/2; and again, we are using physical 
coordinates, as shown in the diagram below. 


Since cos(y) = sin(®)cos(), we’ll start by looking at the x-z plane. Here cos(y) = sin(®), so that 
sin(y) = cos(8) = sin(a/2 — 8) , and we know from earlier testing that in this case, gu,y approximately 
satisfies G with a reasonable degree of precision [pp 559-62]; but weakens somewhat as 0 
approaches 0, heading north. We’ll label this result good. 


Now looking at the x-y plane, cos(y) = cos($), so that sin(y) = sin(), and we know from pages 559- 
62 that in this case, gu,y approximately satisfies G with a reasonable degree of precision. Indeed, as 
approaches 2/2 from below, the degree to which gu,» approximately satisfies G weakens 
somewhat, but is still acceptable to us. We’ll also label this result good, as it is really no different 
than what is happening in the x-z plane. 


Finally, let’s look at the y-z plane. Here cos(y) = 0, so that sin(y) = 1, and this is the same as the 
case just above, where @ = 2/2. Thus, when analyzing gu,y over the whole of S:, we should expect 
the results to be good as well. 


Let us now set 0, 6 = 2/4 on S; and calculate the various components of G, using the notes on page 
575 as our guide. Here are the results, noting that « = cos(y) = V2, and & = sin(y) = V3 /2, and that 
the simple pole is at  —1.6547, in the generating function f(s). The value of A is shown below ... 


1 1 ) ‘ 1 1 
cos(y) {| —————— - ———~_ } + isin, ————_ + ——_— 
fe OD) Sasscamea 1.433-0.866i y (y( 1.43340.866/ y 1.433 anaiy) 
v3 


2 (ix) ¥ y? -0.75 
dy = 0.397824 


606 


1 v3 
Jo| — 
exp(— 1.65469) 1.433 : 
\ 1.65469? + 0.75 
Result Result 
0.204701... 0.572999... 
value of R value of € = gu,y(6a) - Jo(re) 


From our theory concerning G, we add the value of fz to R, and compare to €. In this case, we see 
that Az + R = .6025, and we note that it agrees reasonably well with €. Indeed, it is exactly what 
we find on page 561, when @ = 2/3 in an £? layout. 


And we expect the same to be true for the estimator guy = 1 / (r - cos(y) + Auyv), so that the 
normalized solution W (o = 1) for the coupled equations; namely 


guy =[1/(r- sin(y) + Auy), 7, Psin2(®), 1/ (r+ cos(y) + Auv)] , 


is indeed a valid representation on the unit sphere S,, and hence in a thin shell S containing S), with 
inner and outer radii of 1 — € and 1 + €, respectively. The general solution is then o - WV [p 604]. 


607 


A Simple Case Study, Part XVII 


In this note, we wish to offer up a pair of estimators for the inner block & in R3, which preserve 
invariance when looking at incremental surface area and volume, in the presence of dark energy 
[€]. In Part XV [p 604], I did not think such estimators could be found, which not only conserved 
the property of invariance, but also, approximately satisfied the general equivalency theorem G ... 


But consider the following timelike normalized inner block & on the unit sphere S in £3, so that it 
conforms to this behavior and is also similar to the default inner block [r?, rsin?(®)]; to wit, for 
singularities at (+5, 0, 0) and 0 < 0, < 2/2... 


B = [1/(r-cos(y) + Au) , sin°(0) / (r+ cos(y) + Any) . 
where u,v = 2 or 3; 6,Au,v = 1 and cos(y) = sin(®)cos($), using physical coordinates. 
We now calculate the incremental surface area [Ac], by setting r = | in the expression below, as our 
unit sphere S; morphs into the ellipsoid E; [p 604], where gu,» = 1 / (r - sin(y) + Au,v) is the radial 
component when u,v = 1. And in (+), because of symmetry, we multiply by 8 to complete the 


calculation ... 


m/2 n/2 


S S 7m VO° 922 (5° 93,3 dddp (+) 
0 0 


Here are the normalized (o = 1) snapshots from Wolfram, where x = 0, and y= 9 ... 


ee} 8 sin(x) 
{ { dy dx = 6.48798 
Jo Jo ——— 


(1 + cos(y) sin(x)) «1+ 1 - cos?(y) sin2(x) 
yl+y 0 


Ac © 6.48807? when S = (+8, 0, 0) 


am (ha dy dx = 6.48798 


n Jo 


i 5 8 sin(x) 


———— 
(1+ sin(@x) sin(y)) yl + ¥1-sin?(x) sin?(y) 


Ac = 6.48807? when S = (0, £3, 0) 


= 8 sin(x) 
[ { ———- dydx 
0 ¥1+sin(x) (1+ cos(x)) 
x(8sinh"'(1) — 2 ¥2 log(3 +2 ¥2)) ~ 6.4880 


Ac = 6.488677 when S = (0, 0, +5) 


608 


Notice that all three values of Ac are the same, so that for this inner block B, both incremental 
surface area and volume do not change, no matter our choice of S. Furthermore, when using the 
default inner block [7°, rsin?(0)], incremental surface area was calculated to be 8o°/7k [no matter 
the choice of S], with the constant k ~ 1.18367, so that in this case Ac * 9.4696°” [pp 594-5]. The 
two results differ, as they should. 


As well, these timelike estimators for B will satisfy G on the unit sphere, and if we were to use 
spacelike estimators for B, I suspect these too would preserve invariance. But whether these 
estimators have any real meaning within the context of dark energy and general relativity, is 
another matter. Nonetheless, we note them here, for the properties they do have ... 


= i 
\ 
oe 


A POSSIBLE INTERPRETATION 


In the left picture above, in the absence of € , we see a unit circle C, with an angle @ subtended by 
the arc AB. In the presence of dark energy singularities at (+6, 0), C will morph into the ellipse E, 
stretched more in the direction of x than y, and the angle @ that was subtended by AB now becomes 
the angle 0’ subtended by the arc A'B'. Clearly 6’ < 6, which means that for an imaginary observer 
© at the origin O in 2, angular ticks expand in the presence of stronger dark energy [x-axis], and 
just the opposite as the stronger dark energy weakens [y-axis]. And this is reminiscent of how the 
clock tick behaves, which is inverse to the ruler tick. 


CORRECTIONS 


A small change was made to the value of Ac at the base of page 603. On pages 605-6, sin(y) is 
actually V3 /2, and not the value of ¥2 that was reported there in an earlier release. This changes 
the calculations for Az, R, and €; and so ... .. the pages have been updated, accordingly. The 
calculations can also be found on page 561, when 6 = 2/3 in an &? layout. Again, the results are 
favorable when comparing 4. + R to €. 


609 


A Simple Case Study, Part XVIII 


We can save ourselves an enormous amount of calculating, by realizing that if g' = f, for some 
function f, then g(1 + €) ~ g(1) + g’(1)e, using basic calculus, if € > 0 is small. Similarly, we may 
write g(1 — €) = g(1) — g'(Le, so that 


u 


gl +e) — g(l—e€) = 2eg(1) = 2ef(1) 
Thus, 


l+e 


S fear 


l-e 


U 


2¢f(1) 


And so, when evaluating an expression like the following, from page 590, where c = sin(y) and x = 
Piase 


l+e l+e 
S eiveast dx = [(2/150) Vex FI Bc2x2-4ex+8)], 
l-e l-e 


we actually don’t need to perform a Taylor series on the right-hand side of (*). Instead, we 
conclude immediately that this must be 2€f(1), for small €, where 


fx) = Pl Vex +1 


610 


A Simple Case Study, Part XIX 


In this note, we are going to go through the calculations for the general equivalency theorem [G], 
when 0, = 2 / 4 on the unit sphere S; in R? [pp 605-6]. Here guy = 1/(r - sin(y) + Auy), with 
dark energy singularities at (+5, 0, 0), where u,v = 1; 6,Au,v = 1 and 0 < 0, < 2/2, using physical 
coordinates. Thus, a = cos(y) = sin(®)cos($) in this case, which computes to 2, and € = sin(y), 
which computes to ¥3/2. 


As to the generating function f(s) [p 575], it becomes, where r= 5 + 6a in gu,v ... 
S(s) = guy - 1/ ys? + (6e)? = 1/((s + a) - sin(y) + Au) - 1/ys? + (68)? 
And so, the simple pole associated with the first term in f(s) is —p = —Au,v / sin(y) — 6a ~ —1.6547; 


and we now calculate the residue associated with —p from the Laplace inverse of f(s) over some 
contour y, as shown below, where the constant « = 1/2zi [pp 559-62] ... 


rf erfis) ds. 


This gives us Res = exp(—pr) / Jp? + (Se)? , and thus ... the value of R used in G is 2 - Res ~ 
0.2047, since here r = 1. 


We then go ahead and calculate € = gu,.(a) - Jo(Sre), where r = | in Jo, since we are on S; in R3; 
and here, r = 6a in gu,v, since da is a radial measure. This gives us € ~ 0.5730. 


Finally, we calculate the harmonic expression #éx, as shown below, where r maps to 5a. + iy in gu,v, 
so that gu,v(Sa + iy, 8, o) = 1 / (Sa + iy) - sin(y) + Auyv). And here, r= 1 in the cos and sin terms. 


ax F fcosomtgur(6a + iy, 0, 6) ~ sur(a—iy, 0, 6)] + 
be isin(yr) [gu,v(5a + iy, 8,6) + gu.v(Sa—iy, 0, 6)]} dy / Jy? = (ey? 


And this gives us a value of ~ 0.3978, as shown below. We then compare Az + R ~ .6025 to €, and 
find that the agreement is reasonable. And indeed, this particular agreement actually holds for any 
<0, >, such that cos(y) = Y2, and0 < 0,0 < 2/2 onS. ... 


1 1 
cos - 
*500 (y{ 1.433+0.866i y —_1.433-0.866i y 


fe ne 
Laer) (ix) V y* - 0.75 


dy = 0.397824 


5 1 1 
+isin + 
) | 1.43340.866i y 1.433 amaryl 


611 


A Simple Case Study, Part XX 


In this note, we are going to provide spacelike and timelike estimators over the whole of R?, using 
the methodology that follows. Let us begin, then, by recalling the form for the dark energy itself, 
where there are singularities at (+6, 0). That is to say, 


€ = 20 - cosh(Srcos(@))Jo(Srsin(6)) 
For a unit circle C of radius 1, with 6,0 = 1; we note that on C; at 8 = 0, € = 2cosh(1), and on C, at 
0=2/2,§ =2Jo(1). Thus, the ratio R of these two values is simply cosh(1) / Jo(1), and if we now 


define our spacelike estimator [u,v = 1] to be guy = 1 /(r- sin(@) + A), where A is some function of 
r; then it stands to reason that 


R= (r+A)/A, (*) 


since ruler ticks contract in the presence of stronger dark energy, and begin to expand as the dark 
energy begins to weaken. 


In this case, R = 2.01, so that from (*), A = 1 if r = 1, and this is the value of A that was used 
originally when testing gu,y against the general equivalency theorem [G] on pages 559-62. 


Now let’s look at the circle C, of radius r = ¥2. In this case R ~ 1.20, so that A ~ 5/2, and the 


estimator is now gu,v = 1 /(r- sin(®) + A) on C,. Thus, we can go ahead and calculate the various 
components of G, when 0 = 0 and 1/2, say, and see how things play out. 


The generating function is 

F(s) = guy - 1/.fs* + (e)? = 1/((s + 8a) -sin(0)+ A) - 1/ ys? + 6e)?, 
and at @ = 7/2, the simple pole associated with the first term in f(s) is —p =—A/ sin(®) — 6a =—A, 
since a = cos(), and ¢ = sin(8). Thus, the residue is Res = exp(—pr) / /p? + (Se)? , so that the R 


value associated with G is R = 2 - Res ~ 0.2128. Again, r= Y2 in this calculation. 


And since a = 0, gu,v(6a) = 2/5, and Jo(Sre) = Jo(V2), because r = V2, and ¢ = 1. Thus, since it is the 
case that € = gu,y(6a) - Jo(dre), we see that € ~ 0.3754. 


Finally, we have the harmonic expression x , and here gu,y(da + iy, 8) = 1 / ((6a + iy) - sin(®) + A), 
since r maps to 6a + iy in this case. Here is the result, noting that r = / in the cos and sin terms ... 


(pss plese) 


B00 ) 
f = = —> dy = 0.171251 
: nmy-l+y 


wr 


And here are the snapshots for R and €... 


612 


exp(— 1.25) 


2Jo(>) 
5 


v +1 
Result Decimal approximation 
0.212810... 0.375387922896325 
value of R value of € 


Now we compare Az + R to €, and we find that Az + R ~ 0.3841, which compares favorably with 
the value of €. 


When 6 = 0, there are no poles associated with the first term in f(s), and so R = 0, and the harmonic 
expression reduces to (r = Y2, = 0, k= 1/2ni) 
oo 
ani Af sinyr) dy /y =1/A 
& 


And € = gu,y(5a) - Jo(dre) = gu,v(Sa), which must equal 1 / A in R?, for any choice of the argument 
to gu,v, because gu,y(7, 8) = 1 / A now. Thus, the agreement is exact here, as expected [pp 559-62]. 


In general, we may write, for any r > 0... 
R = cosh(r)/Jo(r) = (r+ A)/A, (*) 


and solving this for A will give us the spacelike and timelike estimators, gu,y = 1 / (r - sin(@) + A) 
and guy = 1/(r - cos(®) + A) on C,, respectively. And these estimators will approximately satisfy 
G, because of the way in which A is calculated from (*). In R3, we simply replace @ with y in gu,v, 
noting that cos(y) = sin(@)cos(), with 0 < 8, < 2/2; and that the singularities are at (+5, 0, 0). 


For large r, R becomes very large, so that A ---» 0, and thus in very deep space, the estimators 
reduce to guy = 1/(r- sin(y)) and guy = 1/(r- cos(y)) in R38. And as r ---> 0, cosh(r) / Jo(r) agrees 
with (r + A) / A, and it seems that A increases here as r decreases. If so, then gu,y ---» 0 in this case. 


613 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXI 


We can now calculate the incremental volume [Ac] of the ellipsoid €, that our unit sphere has 
morphed into, using the results of the last research note. We’re fairly confident that the spatial 
estimator gu,y = 1/(r- sin(y) + A) [u,v = 1] will work for us in the range 0 < r < 1, where here it is 
that case that A = r/(&R— 1), and R = cosh(r) / Jo(r). Outside this range, we'd want to do more 
testing, using the general equivalency theorem [G]. 


Now in this setup, using physical coordinates, the dark energy singularities are at (+6, 0, 0), where 
6 = 1, and cos(y) = sin(®)cos($), with 0 < 0, < 2/2. As well, we'll use the default inner block B 
= [, Psin*(0)]; so using symmetry, we multiply the normalized integration (6 = 1), as shown 
below, by 80°”, where x =r, y= 0 and z= 9. 


x sin(y) 
i fy it dz dy dx = 0.356058 
yeaa +x ¥1-cos?(z) sin?(y) 
= who 

Thus, Ac ~ 2.850°/, or in round numbers, about 30°/7. Thus, to an imaginary observer @ at the 
origin O in &3, with nothing in the tangible space, the unit sphere has morphed into a ellipsoid € 
whose volume is approximately 42/3 + Ac. And again, € will be stretched more along the x-axis, 
than the y, z axes, due to the location of the singularities. 


For singularities at S = (0, +6, 0), the normalized integral becomes 


f ic ‘fi S00) dz dy dx = 0.356058 
(= Tene +x ¥1-sin?(y) sin?(z) 


ar) 


and for singularities at S = (0, 0, +6), the normalized integral is 


2? sin 
f ff 7 =  — dz dy dx = 0.356058 


+xsin(y) 


Thus, in the range 0 < r < 1, our estimator preserves volume invariance, no matter the choice of S, 
which is what we expect. 


614 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXII 


Before we start, we’ll mention that some additional commentary was added to page 613, regarding 
volume invariance. Now in this note, we'd like to study the circle C, of radius r = 2, and see how 
things play out when calculating the various components of the general equivalency theorem [G], 
for @=0 and 0 =7/2. 


Now we already studied the circle of radius ¥2 on pages 611-12, so we needn’t go through all the 
details again. Instead, we'll simply quote the results, for our estimator gu,y = 1 / (r - sin(@) + A), 
where 


R = cosh(r)/Jo(r) = (r+ A)/A 
When 0 = 0 the match is exact, so all we have to look at is 0 = 2/2, where it is already known that 


the deviation between Hz + R and E is greatest [pp 559-62, 596-7]. Here are the results from 
Wolfram, assuming no mistakes were made in the calculations ... 


1 1 Po 1 1 
ir cos(2y) ( 0.12655+iy omen) Se sin(2y) ( 0.12655+iy * oma) 


dy = 0.45879 
1 (ri) yy -1 
value of Ax 
(0 (2) 
exp(—2« 0.12655) 0.12655 
0.12655? +1 
Result Result 
1.540494... 1.76919... 
value of R value of € 


Thus, Hx + R ~ 1.99928, which is somewhat larger than €, but all things considered, the two 
numbers are within about 10% of one another; which is the maximum deviation we should see, for 
9 between 0 and 2/2. As well, we’re in new territory here, using r/ (# — 1) as the estimator for A 
in guy, and venturing out beyond the unit sphere, where r = 1. So we'll use this estimator in the 
range 0 < r < 2 now; and in doing so, we find that the incremental volume [Ac] for a sphere of 
radius r = 2 computes to 86°/?k, when the singularities are at (+5, 0, 0), and k is 


coshixt 
Jou 


ok si 
Ti Ea dz dy dx = 3.3036 
2 ” i <—— +x \)1-cos?(z) sin*(y) 


615 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXIII 


To calculate how much the unit sphere S has been stretched into an ellipsoid € along the x-axis, 
when the singularities are at (+5, 0, 0) [with 6 = 1], we simply evaluate the expressions below, 
where o = 1... 


a 1 a 1 
i ———— dx = 0.615881 f dx = 0.528654 
" x ix} 
athe } ) 
incremental distance along x-axis incremental distance along y,z axes 


For in this case, our estimator is gu,y = 1 / (7 - sin(y) + A), in the range 0 < r < 1, where A is equal 
to r/(R= 1) and 


R = cosh(r)/Jo(r) = (r+ A)/A 


And since no zeroes of the Bessel function Jo(r) exist in the range 0 < r < 2, we don’t have to 
worry about that issue right now. 


Now since the singularities are at (+5, 0, 0), cos(y) = sin(®@)cos(), using physical coordinates, 
where 0 < 0,0 < 2/2. 


616 


And so, if 8 = 2/2 and @ = 0, we are on the x-axis, so that cos(y) = 1, and hence guy =1/ A. On 
the other hand, if @ = 2/2 and $ = 2/2, we are on the y-axis, so that cos(y) = 0, and hence it is the 
case that guy =1/(r+ A). Finally, if 6 = 0, irrespective of what > is, we are on the z-axis, and 
again, cos(y) = 0. Thus, the incremental distances shown on the last page are correct, when the 
singularities are at (+6, 0, 0). 


Hence, to the imaginary observer @ at the origin O in £3, the ellipsoid € is stretched more in the 
direction of x, than y or z. And to @, the distance to € along the x-axis is now ~ 1 + 0.616V6 ; and 
the distance to € along the y,z axes is now = | + 0.5296. 


Finally, the incremental surface area [Ac] is 80°/k, as § morphs into € [pp 598-600], and k is the 
integral below [y = 8 and z = $]; which is slightly different than what we see on page 599 [there k is 
approximately 1.18367]. And that is because on page 599, A = 1; whereas here, it is r/ (R — 1), 
where r = | [approximately 0.9837]. And lastly, it should be said that Ac is invariant with respect 
to the location of the singularities, as it should be. 


C((——__S dz dy = 1.18928 


= + ¥1-cos?(z) sin*(y) 


Pt) 


-l+ 


Now as to R = cosh(r) / Jo(r), we should mention that it will become infinite if we encounter a zero 
of Jo(r). In very deep space, that may not matter so much because A ---» 0 anyway, for large r, if 
we have A= r/(&— 1); since here Jo(r) ---» 0. And for 0 < r < 2, we don’t encounter any zeroes 
of Jo(r); but otherwise, it is an issue that needs to be resolved, if we want a usable estimator for A, 
no matter the choice of r. 


617 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXIV 


In this note, we are going to begin by looking at the intervals Ri = (1,72) and R2 = (72,73), where ni, 
r, and r3are the first, second and third zeroes of Jo(r), as shown in the plot below. These zeroes are 
at = 2.4, 5.6 and 8.7, respectively, and here we’ll define Ro= (0,11). 


From the last research note, our estimator for A is r/(R— 1), where R = cosh(r) / Jo(r), and the 
plots of A are shown below ... 


0.005 
0.004 
0.008 
0.002} 


0.06 
0.001 


008 


~< 


plot of A in Ro plot of A in Ri plot of A in R2 


Note that A is greater than or equal to zero in Ro and Ra, but Jess than or equal to zero in Ri. Thus, 
when integrating our spacelike estimator gu,y = 1 / (r - sin(y) + A) over these intervals, to find 
incremental distance; we have to be mindful of the sign of D = r - sin(y) + A, since we are operating 
on /O° guy. Here, we are in £3, with singularities at (+5, 0, 0), and cos(y) = sin(6)cos(9), using 
physical coordinates, where 0 < 0, < 1/2. 


618 


2.4048 1 6.52 
f ———— dx = 4.79665 { = dx = -23,9614 
ho {a2 2.4049 
Jou 
Ac in Ro along x-axis Ac in R; along x-axis 


dx = 100.098 


8.6537 
= | 
\ -1 


Ac in R2 along x-axis 


Above we see the normalized integrals (6 = 1) for incremental distance [Ac], covering off the range 
from 0 to r3, supposing that they do indeed converge. Notice in Ri that A is always less than or 
equal to zero, so we take the negative of the square root of A here, and then the negative of the 
integral, to give us a negative result; which is what we want [p 580]. 


Thus, the net effect of doing this results in a total incremental distance along the x-axis, due to dark 
energy [E], of about 81Vo. And this is plausible, given that € grows exponentially in this particular 
direction [recall that = 20 - cosh(6rcos(y))Jo(Srsin(y))]. Now for the y, z axes ... 


dx = 1.5124 dx = 1.60828 
Ac in Ro along y-axis Ac in R; along y-axis 
dx = 1.1842 


+ hen 


Yar 


Ac in R2 along y-axis 


Notice in this case, that in Ri, the function inside the square root is always positive, so we leave it 
as is, and calculate accordingly. The net effect is a total incremental distance along the y-axis, due 
to dark energy [], of about 4¥o. Again, a plausible result here, since & decreases like Jo(r) in this 
direction. And this result is equivalent to the increase along the z-axis as well. 


619 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXV 


Consider the following estimator for A, where gu,y = 1 / (r - sin(y) + A) in &3, with singularities at 
(+8, 0, 0); where 6 = 1, and cos(y) = sin(®)cos(), using a physical coordinate system ... 


RK = cosh(rcos(y))Jo(rsin(y)) /Jo(r) = (r+ A)/(r-sin(y)+ A) (*) 


Letting 6 = 2/2, so that we are in the x-y plane, we see that (*) becomes 
R = cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin()) / Jo(r) = (r+ A)/(r-sin(o)+A), (4) 
and at @ = 0, reduces to 
R = cosh(r)/Jo(r) = (r+ A)/A; 


which we are familiar with, from recent research notes. Now let > ---» 1/2, so that the expression 
(+) becomes 


R =SJo(r)/Jo(r) = (r+ A)/ (r+ A) = 1 


From a ‘ruler tick’ perspective, this is ideal, since these ticks contract if dark energy is strong, but 
begin to expand if dark energy weakens. So by incorporating the angle into &, one might think 
we have actually improved the estimator for A, which is now 


A = r(L-8:>sin(p)) /(R=- 1) 
And indeed, at = 0 we obtain the familiar result A = r/(&— 1); but at @ = 2/2, the expression, 
just above, becomes (where R= 1) ... 
A = r(l—&-sin(o))/(R- 1) = r-0/0, 


which is indeterminate. And so, the lesson learned here is that just because we think (*) is a better 
estimator for A, it actually isn’t. And so we’ll stay with what we have, for the time being, knowing 
that A is just a function of r, and nothing more ... 


620 


A Simple Case Study, Part XX VI 


Here, we’ll calculate the incremental volume [Ac], due to dark energy, as the sphere S of radius rs 
morphs into an ellipse €, where rs is the third zero of the Bessel function Jo(r) [pp 617-18]. And 
here, we are in RK, where guy = 1 / (r - sin(y) + A), with singularities at (+5, 0, 0); and cos(y) = 
sin(8)cos(), using physical coordinates, where 0 < 0, < 2/2. As well, A=r/(&-— 1), where it is 
the case that R = cosh(r) /Jo(r). 


plot of Jo(r) 


What follows are the normalized (co = 1) snapshots from Wolfram, where x =r, y= 0 andz=9@... 


coshixt 


2.4048 (Se 2 sin 
f f£ fF o) dz dy dx = 5.73955 
° f yl - sin*(y) cos?(z) + —~— 


ow 


Ac in [0, ni] 
Six Six 
$52 pp x sin(y) 
i { i i vy dz dy dx = 43.3693 
oe . x ¥1-sin?(y) cos*(z) + =S— 
“om 


Ac in [r, r2] 


coshix) 


6.6537 tt x sin 
f FL ) dzdydx = 111.901 
id * f ¥1-sin*(y) cos?(z) + —* 


Jou 


Ac in [rz , rs] 


621 


Notice in the second integral associated with Ri = [11 , r2], we can only approximate Ac, because the 
denominator of this expression is both positive and negative, inside the outer square root sign. 


Thus, to an imaginary observer @ situated at the origin O in &, the total incremental volume Ae, 
due to dark energy, is approximately 128860°/” ... after multiplying by 8, which we do, because of 
symmetry. And so @ concludes that the total volume of the ellipse € that S has morphed into, is 
approximately (4/3)zr3? + Ae. 


Finally, it should be said that we are using a default inner block B = [r°, rsin?()], to do the 
calculations. 


There seems to be good consistency between our findings on pages 617-18 and this research note, 
when the radius r is an odd zero of Jo(r). That is to say, r=r1,73, 7s, ... 


For in such a case, incremental length, due to dark energy, increases along the x, y and z axes, and 
so does incremental volume. But if r is an even zero of Jo(r), say r2; then we see a decrease in 
incremental length along the x-axis [pp 617-18, also p 580], but an increase along the y, z axes. 
This is, in fact, directly related to the definition of A = r / (#— 1), which has only been tested in the 
general equivalency theorem [G], when r < 2. Furthermore, since R = cosh(r) / Jo(r), A itself, is 
intimately tied to the zeroes of Jo(r). 


Nonetheless, we’ll retain A in gu,v = 1 / (r - sin(y) + A) for the time being, and note that as r ---» 0, 
gu,v ---> 0, since here A ---» 00. And for large r, gu,y ---» 1 / A on the x-axis, since sin(y) = 0, and 
along the y, z axes, gu,y ---» 1 /r, since sin(y) = | here, and A ---» 0. 


In general, though, where we choose r to be an odd zero of Jo(r), I think we’ll get reasonably good 
results, that demonstrate consistency, when looking at incremental length, area and volume, using 
the spacelike estimator gu,y = 1 / (r - sin(y) + A); and similarly, when using the timelike estimator 
guv=1/(r-cos(y) + A). 


622 


A Simple Case Study, Part XX VII 


Continuing the discussion in Part XXV on page 619 ... we'll now take a look at the following 
estimator for A. Let 


R = cosh(rcos())Jo(rsin(p)) / cosh(r) = A/(r-sin(p)+ A), (F) 


in the x-y plane, so that A =—r& - sin(p) / (R — 1), where > is between 0 and 1/2. One might think 
that R is well-defined, since it too follows the ‘ruler tick’ paradigm. 


10 


plot of A,0 < ¢< 2/2,r=1 plot of A,0 < 6 < 2/2,r=4 


From these pictures, we see that A ---» 00 as  ---> 0, so that gu, = 1 /(r- sin() + A) ---» 0 along the 
x-axis, no matter the choice of r. Thus, integrating \/o « g,,, along this axis, would produce nothing. 


623 


A Simple Case Study, Part XX VII 


In recent notes, we mentioned that our estimator gu,y = 1 / (r - sin(p) + A), could be both positive 
and negative in the x-y plane, if A was negative. For A, the estimator is A = r / (R — 1), where here 
R= cosh(r) / Jo(r) and 0 < $ < 2/2. Thus, A will turn negative if Jo(r) is negative. 


Now dark energy is defined to be € = 20 - cosh(Srcos())Jo(Srsin()) in K2, and for singularities at 
(+6, 0) with 6 = 1, will become negative if Jo(rsin(p)) < 0. In such a case, we impose the condition 
that gu,y < 0 as well. Thus, our only concern, in this case, is what to do with D = r - sin(p) + A, for 
it could be positive or negative, based on the current definition of A. 


If we insist at @ = 2/2, that the pole —p = —A be negative, when traversing the contour below, in 
order to calculate the residue associated with the generating function f(s) [pp 559-62, 575]; then 
necessarily A must be positive. And we can arrange for that by letting R = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)|, since 
cosh(r) is always greater than or equal to |Jo(r)|, and hence A = r/(R — 1) 2 0 [pp 617-18]. 


iBsin(®) 


-— 
) -iBsin(8) 
Palit 


We would then write gu,y = sgn(Jo(rsin())) / (r - sin(p) + A), where this version of sgn is the sign 
function, being +1 if Jo(rsin(p)) = 0 and —1 if Jo(rsin()) < 0. As an example, the first integral on 
page 618, in the range Ri = (11, r2) along the x-axis; where r; and r; are the first and second zeros of 
Jo(r), now becomes [since } = 0 and thus sgn(Jo(rsin())) = 1] ... 


552 1 
dx = 23.7895 


4049 


‘cosh 


| Woot 


And this is very close to the number —23.9614 quoted there, but the sign has changed, as it should, 
since along the x-axis, dark energy is wholly positive with exponential growth. In #? we would 
write guy = sgn(Jo(rsin(y))) / (r - sin(y) + A); where cos(y) = sin(®)cos(¢) in physical coordinates 
and the singularities are at (+6, 0, 0), with O < 0, < 2/2, and 6 =1. And in &, would map toy... 


624 


As another example, the second integral on page 618, in the range Ri = (11 , 72) along the y-axis; 
where r; and r are the first and second zeros of Jo(r), now becomes [since the angle @ = 2/2 and 
thus sgn(Jo(rsin())) =—1) ... 


dx = -1,.58639 


And this is very close to the number 1.60828 quoted there, but the sign has changed, as it should, 
since along the y-axis, dark energy is negative in Ri, as you can see from the picture below ... 


Plot of Jo(r) from 0 to rs at @ = 2/2 


Thus, with these revisions, our imaginary observer © at the origin O, will say the incremental 
distance along the x-axis, due to dark energy, and out to a radius of rs, is approximately 128V6. 
And similarly, the incremental distance along the y, z axes, out to 73, is approximately vo. 


For the second and third integrals on page 620, where we are calculating incremental volume, we 
need to know what sgn(Jo(rsin(y))) is, in this triple integration, since sin(y) can vary between 0 and 
1, 


Thus, rsin(y) can vary between 0 and rs, so that sgn(Jo(rsin(y))) oscillates between —1 and +1, along 
any radial line &», emanating from the origin O. Unfortunately, the Wolfram site is not able to 
calculate the integration in this case; but we may be able to approximate it by knowing the 
incremental distances quoted above, and knowing too, that the volume of the original sphere 
computes to (4/3)z7s? [in reality, the sphere of radius r3 doesn’t morph into an ellipsoid €; rather, 
an object with an undulating surface on either side of the surface of €]. 


Below are some plots of the dark energy € (o = 1) in R2, at different angles @ to the x-axis, and you 
can see just how different the radial patterns actually are ... 


625 


4000 


3 
000 200 


2000 
400 
1000 


600 


1000 00 


& from 0 to r3at ¢ = 0 & from 0 to r3at @ = 2/6 


40 
30 


10 


10 


20 


30) 


& from 0 to rz at $ = 2/4 & from 0 to rz at ¢ = 2/3 


So if, for example, using our estimator gu,» = sgn(Jo(rsin($))) / (7 - sin(y) + A), we were calculating 
incremental distance out to r; when @ = 1 / 4, we'd want to know where Jo(rsin()) changes sign in 
this picture. And that occurs at about r = 3.5 and 7.8. Again, rs is the third zero of Jo(r). 


In my opinion, this approach is better than what we find in the previous research notes, for it allows 
us to align gu,y with the sign of dark energy [&] on the one hand; yet on the other, provides an 
estimator for A that seems reasonable. And, it allows us to calculate incremental distance, due to 
dark energy, out to any arbitrary radius r, along any radial line lem. However, if we want to 
calculate things like incremental area or volume, we will probably have to write custom routines to 
carry out these integrations. 


Finally, for gu,» = sgn(Jo(rsin(y))) / (r - sin(y) + A) we note that as r ---» 0, gu,v ---> 0, since here it is 
the case that A ---» 00. And for large r, gu,y ---» 1 / A on the x-axis, since sin(y) = 0; and along the y, 
Z axes, Quy ---» sgn(Jo(r)) / r, since sin(y) = | here, and A ---> 0. 


626 


The following table shows incremental distances [Ac] out to r3 and r in R?, due to dark energy [€], 
where o is equal to | and the singularities are at S = (+6, 0), with 6 = 1. 


angle Ac . r3 Ac, Ta 
0 128.96 559.79 
n/80 16.15 21.11 
nm/40 12.33 15.85 
m/20 9.34 11.82 
n/6 1.52 0.76 
nm/4 0.47 1.64 
1/3 0.89 0.78 
n/2 1.11 0.13 


You can see from the table that Ac is greatest near the x-axis, but falls away rapidly, even as 
increases, ever so slightly. And this is because S is located on the x-axis, where ¢ is strongest. 


These distances, due to symmetry, would be the same in all four quadrants of £2, relative to the 
origin O. And so, for the imaginary observer @ at O, the circle of radius rz or ra has increased by 
Vo-Ac along the radial lines &, where x = +o or x = (1 — 9). 


Note that gu,v = sgn(Jo(rsin())) / (r - sin(p) + A), and that A = r / (R — 1); where here it is the case 
that R = cosh(r)/|Jo(r)|. And in R3 we would write gu,y = sgn(Jo(rsin(y))) / (r - sin(y) + A); where 
cos(y) = sin(8)cos() in physical coordinates and the singularities are at (+6, 0, 0), with the usual 
constraints; namely 0 < 0, < 2/2, and 5 = 1. 


So if along fm, where 0, = 2/4, we wanted to know what Ac was (o = 1), when r = rg = 11.79 — 
the fourth zero of Jo(r); we note that cos(y) = %, so that sin(y) = V3/2, and hence the result is ... 


dx = 0.775982 


And in this case, Wolfram allows us to use the sgn function for single integrals. Thus, to an 
imaginary observer @ at O, the sphere of radius ra has increased by Vo-Ac along the radial line log, 
due to dark energy, where Ac ~ 0.776. And so, we can map out these incremental distances for a 
sphere of arbitrary radius r = rx, for any lem, where r; is the k-th zero of Jo(r). 


627 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXIX 
In this note, we wish to calculate incremental distance [Ac] in R?, due to dark energy, when there 
are singularities at (+, 0) and (0, +5), where 6 = 1. In this case, the total dark energy function 
computes to 


§ = 20 - {cosh(Srcos($))Jo(Srsin(p)) + cosh(drsin(}))Jo(Srcos())} , 


and our two gravitational components are gu,» = | / (r - sin() + A) and hy,y = 1 / (r - cos(p) + A); 
where the first one is associated with (+6, 0), and the second with (0, +5) [see also pp 623-6]. 


plot of € when = 2/6 


We define the incremental distance [Ac] to be, where rx is the k-th zero of Jo(r) ... 


Tk 
S son®: (Gav + VOT) dr (H) 
fe} 


As an example, if @ = 2/6 and k = 3, then with o = 1 and x =r, Ac computes to ... 


wfc) ese) cee) f (3) 


1 i 
+ dx = 2.19476 


jen wait, ‘ec cali; 
Vos) Bos) 


And this compares favorably with the sum of 1.52 + .89 = 2.41 in the table on page 626, where 
these are the values of Ac, when $ = 2/6 and 7/3, respectively. We could have just added these 


628 


two numbers together, and defined A¢ to be the sum; but I think the method above is more accurate, 
because it takes into account the sign of total dark energy, for any given radius r, and angle 9. 


In &3, the total dark energy function is, with singularities at [(+8,0, 0), (0, +8, 0), (0, 0, +8)] ... 
§ = 20- {cosh(Srcos(y)1)Jo(Srsin(y)1) + cosh(Srcos(y)2)Jo(Srsin(y)2) + cosh(drcos(y)3)Jo(Srsin(y)3)}, 
where | = x, 2=y, 3 =z, using physical coordinates; and from pages 588-9, 
cos(y)1 = sin(®)cos(p) ; cos(y)2 = sin(®)sin(>) ; cos(y)3 = cos(@) . 
We define the incremental distance [Ac] to be, where 1; is the k-th zero of Jo(r) ... 


TK 


S son@ 0 Fas + [OGuv + Tad ar (H) 


ie) 


and here, 


fuy = 1/(r-sin(yi +A); guy = 1/(r-sin()2+A) ; huv = 1/(r- sin(y)3 + A). 


In R2, with singularities at S = [(+8,0), (V2 - 5/2, V2- 8/2), (0, +8), (V2: 8/2, —-V2- 8/2)], so 
that they all lie on a circle of radius Cs; the total dark energy function is [0 < $ < 2/2, 8 = 1; and 
noting that cosh and Jo are even functions] ... 
§ =20- {cosh(Srcos($))Jo(Srsin(p)) + cosh(dsrcos(o — 2/4))Jo(Srsin(p — 1/4)) + 
cosh(Srsin())Jo(Srcos(p)) + cosh(Srcos( + 2/4))Jo(Srsin( + 2/4))} . 
The terms in € correspond to the terms in S, and here, 
fuy = 1/(r-|sin(®)| + A) 5 guy = 1/(r-|sin(p—72/4)| +A) ; 
huy = 1/(r-|cos(p)| +A) 3 kuv = 1/(r- |sin(d +72/4)| +A) . 


We then calculate incremental distance [Ac] along any line &, using the expression below; where 
again, the estimator A = r/(R—1), and KR = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)|. 


Tk 


S sgn®- (Fav + (O-Gun + (OTap) + JO Rap) dr CH) 


Oo 


629 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXX 

We can also consider estimators for A of type A’ = B'~ '7/r, when B > 0 [in this case B = 16/25]. 
These estimators distinguish themselves from A = r/(R— 1), where R = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)|, in that 
they are continuously differentiable, and do not become zero if r is a zero of Jo(r). Thus, the 
estimator guy = 1 /(r- sin(y) + A’) would not become infinite for any choice of r, if sin(y) = 0; 
which it is, along the x-axis in R, using physical coordinates [0 < 0, < 2/2, and 6 = 1). 

As r--- 0, both A and A' ---» «, so that gu,v ---» 0. For large r, the ratio A / A’ ~ 7° |Jo(r)| 2”, if we 
have B = 16/25, so that A ---» 0 much more quickly than A’. If, therefore, we believe A is decaying 
too quickly as r ---» 0, then we might consider estimators of type A’ as an alternative. 

In the case, where r = % or r= 1, guy = 1/(r- sin(y) + A’) approximately satisfies the general 
equivalency theorem [G], if 6 = 1/2, since here A’ = 5/2 or 1 [pp 559-562, 611-12]. However, for 
a radius of r = 2, there is no match for A’ in G, using gu,v; but there is for A [p 614]. Nonetheless, 


we want to retain A’ for the properties that it does have; and in particular, for its slower decay rate 
aS r---) 0... 


1 2 3 1 5 
plot of A' when B = 16/25 
0.10 
0.08 
0.06 
0.04 


0.02 


plot of A 


630 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXXI 
As an alternative to defining incremental distance the way we did on pages 627-8, we can opt for 
the following definition, where there are singularities at (+6, 0) and (0, +5), and 6 = 1. In this case, 
the total dark energy function computes to 
§ =20- {cosh(drcos($))Jo(Srsin(p)) + cosh(drsin(}))Jo(Srcos())} , 

and our two gravitational components are gu,» = | / (r - sin() + A) and hy,y = 1 / (r - cos(p) + A); 
where the first one is associated with (+6, 0), and the second with (0, +5) [see also pp 623-6]. Here, 
A=r/(R-1), where R = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)|. 


We define the incremental distance [Ac] to be, where rg is the k-th zero of Jo(r) ... 


Tk 


S san®@ (0 Gav ¥ OTe dr CH) 
fe} 


As an example, if @ = 2/6 and k = 3, then with o = 1 and x =r, Ac computes to ... 


[se otc) safes) + concen") Jen) x= 


1 1 


x x x 
wig, *005(2) + cae 
Hoe] Ho] 


xsin(2) + 
1.55278 


This number is certainly smaller than 2.19476, which is the value we see on page 627, using the 
definition for Ac put forth there; however, for the sake of completeness we include this approach, 
and will let the reader decide which is more philosophically appealing. 


Notice too, that the number above; namely 1.55278, is only marginally larger than the value of 1.52 
found in the table on page 626 for = 2/6 and k = 3, when the singularities are at (+6, 0). In other 
words, using this methodology, adding the singularities at (0, +5) only contributes about 0.03 to Ac, 
in this case. Personally, I find this contribution to be too small ... 


631 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXXII 


To calculate incremental volume [Ac] in R3, with singularities at S = [(+6,0, 0), (0, +8, 0), (0, 0, 8)], 
we use the same setup on pages 627-8, using the default inner block B = [7° , r’sin?(®)]. The result 
is to be multiplied by 8, using symmetry ... .. 


m/2 /2 1% 
S S S sgn(8) (O° fuv + (O° Juv + JO huy) VorVorsin(®) drdddd (+) 
0 0 oO 


To calculate incremental volume [Ac] in £3, with singularities at S = [(+5,0, 0), (0, +5, 0), (0, 0, 5)], 
we use the same setup on pages 627-8; but now we’ll use a non-standard inner block 8', such as 
the one shown on pages 607-8, and reproduced here [note that it mimics 8] ... 

B' = [1/(r-cos(y) + Auv) , sin?(6) / (7: cos(y) + Auv)] 


Since inner blocks are to be added together if they are uniquely different from one another, let us 
write [pp 627-8] 


B = 1/(r-cos(y)1 +A) + 1/(r-cos(y)2+ A) + 1/(r- cos(y)3 + A) 


Then Ac becomes [which is to be multiplied by 8]... .. 


m/2 m/2 re 
S SS son® le Fav + JF Faw + JF Tap) oBsin(0) drdods (*) 
oO fe) fe) 


And from previous research, we also know that both (+) and (*) preserve volume invariance, so 
that if S were to be rotated about the origin O, in some fashion, Ac would not change [pp 607-8]. 


We can also define (*) as a sum over ‘volume elements’, so that if we let 


WH Jo: fuy -1/(r-cosyi +A) +Jo-guy -1/(r-cos(y)2+A)+Jo-huy -1/(r-cos(y)s + A), 


then (*) becomes 


m/2n/2 1 
S S S sgn(&) - owsin(0) drdOdo (8) 
fe) fo} fo) 


and this may be an improvement over (*) above. 


632 


And finally, were we to adopt the methods on page 630, then (*) becomes 


m/2 n/2 1% 


S SS san®- Faw FO Gav FO Tuy oBsin(®) drdbd (4) 
fe} fe} fe} 


since now, the gravitational components are first added together, before forming ds”; whether we 
are looking at dr’, d@? or d¢’. 


Such is not the case in (§) above, for here each volume element is created individually, and then all 
three are added together. And in (*) above, it’s a hybrid approach — the dr’ elements are created 
individually, but the d@’ and d¢? elements are first added together. 


In my opinion, from a consistency viewpoint, we either choose (§) or ({); and of these two, I would 
say (§) is the preferred option. 


633 


A Simple Case Study, Part XX XIII 


We can also consider estimators of type A’ = {r/(R— 1)} +k, where R = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)| and x is 
some small positive number, such that guy = 1 / (r - sin(p) + A’) still satisfies the general 
equivalency theorem [G] in 82, if 6 = a/2 and r = ¥%, 1 or 2 [pp 559-562, 611-12, 614]. For 
example, k might be 10 ? or 10° [here, the singularities are at (+5,0), where 5 = 1 and 0 <@ < 7/2]. 


For in such a case, R is equal to 2 - Res, where Res is approximately exp (-xr) / J x? + (6¢)?, for 
large r [here « = cos()) = 0, and ¢ = sin() = 1]. Thus R ---y 0, in this case, as r ---» «0. As to the 
harmonic expression Hx, it becomes [where k = | / 27i] 


00 


wf {cos(yr)[1/(« + iy) — 1/(« —iy)] + isin(yr) [1/(« + iy) + 1/(«—iy)]} dy A/y? - & 
€ 


Now since « is small, we can omit it in the integration ... and so for large r, Ax becomes, 
approximately (¢ = 1) ... 


00 


—2In S cos(yr) dy /y,/y? -€? , 


€ 
which will tend to zero as r ---» «, since the integral in kind; namely 


co 


—2/n S cos(yr) dy //y? -€? = Yo(re), 


€ 


is a Bessel function of the second kind; which is known to tend to zero as r ---y © [see page 170 in 
G.N. Watson’s book A Treatise On The Theory Of Bessel Functions, Second Edition, for this 
representation of Yo(re), as well as page 327 in these notes]. 


Finally, we have € = gu,y(5a) - Jo(dre) in G, and since a = 0, it is the case that gu,y = 1 / A’, which for 
large r, becomes | / x; and hence € = (1 / k) - Jo(dre), which will also tend to zero as r ---» ©. Thus, 
G is satisfied for large r, since Az + R and E both tend to zero here. 


No such claim can be made if k = 0, since if, for example, r = rx is the k-th zero of Jo(r), where k is 
large, then we have A'= r/(R— 1) = 0, and Jo(Sre) = 0, since both 8 and ¢€ are equal to 1. Thus, € 
is not properly defined in this case, because 1 / A'= 00. And while we might be able to calculate an 
‘in the limit’ value for € as r ---» r;, there can be no assurance that G would be satisfied here. 


As well, by introducing the constant k, we see that along the x-axis, where dark energy [&] grows 
exponentially; the gravitational component is approximately gu,y = | / x, for large r, giving us more 
control on just how fast incremental distance [Ac] is increasing as r ---» «©. Without k, we are 
constrained by the behavior of A’ = r/(R— 1), which tends to zero very quickly for large r ... 


634 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXXIV 


When r ---> 0, A' = {r / (R — 1)} + « can be written as r / (R — 1), since k is small and RK - 1 
approaches zero. In fact, since R = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)|, and Jo(r) ---» 1 as r ---» 0; we find that R 
behaves as 1 + %-7r° as r---> 0, and so, A'=2/r. Let us now set A= A’, so that Ar = 2, and note 
again that gu,v = 1 / (r- sin(p) + A’), where @ = 2/2. Essentially, the same setup from the previous 
research note. 


Then Res is approximately exp(—Ar) / \/A? + (Se) , which will tend to zero as r ---> 0, since here it 
is the case that A ---» 0. And so, R will also ---» 0, where R = 2 Res. As to the harmonic 
expression Ax, it becomes [noting that Ar = 2, kK = 1 / 2mi, and = 1]... 


2K f {cos(yn[1/(A + iy) —1/(A—iy)] + isin(yr) [1/(A + iy) + 1/(A-iy)]} dy /y?- & 
& 


And this too will tend to zero as r ---» 0, as we see in the example below; where r = 1 / 1000, and 
thus A = 2000. 


i i((- 2000-1 * Fons) £25 aa) ‘3 (aon as Smous) sin( as )) ays 
1 a y-1+y 


0.0000476265 


Finally, we have € = gu,v(6a) - Jo (dre) in G, the general equivalency theorem ... and this now 
computes to € = (1 / A) - Jo(Sre) [a = 0, € = 1 and 6 = 1]; and so € tends to zero as r ---» 0. Thus, G 
is satisfied for r ---» 0, since #éx + R and E both tend to zero here. 


Indeed, the match between Hx + R and E is always exact if p = 0, and as r ---» 0, we expect that 
Hz + Rand E will both tend to zero, no matter the choice of , such that 0 < @ < 2/2. Thus, we 
have shown from the last research note and this one, that G is approximately satisfied by gu,v, for 
small r and for large r. 


635 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXXV 


We didn’t do too much testing on the time component in £? [see pp 592-3], so here we'll do a little 
more on the circle of radius r= Y2. And here, guy = 1/(r-cos(@) + A) where 0 < 0 < 1/2, and 
the dark energy singularities are at (+5, 0), where 6 = 1. As well, we'll let A=r/(R— 1), where 
from past research notes, R = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)|, and thus A ~ 5/2 in this case [pp 611-12]. 


The generating function is 


f(s) = guy « 1//s? + (68)? = 1/ ((s + 6a) -cos(0) + A)» 1/./s? + (6e)?, 


so at 8 = 0, the simple pole associated with the first term in f(s) is sp =—A/ cos(8) — a =—(A + 1), 
since a = cos(0), and ¢ = sin(9). Thus, —p ~ —7/2 if 0 = 0, and so the residue is Res = exp(—pr) / 
Vp? + (Se)? ; so that the R value associated with the general equivalency theorem G is R = 2 - Res, 
which is ~ 0.0993, as shown below. Again, r = 2 in this calculation. 


774 
Decimal approximation 


0.099299396257397 
700223020371... 


And since a = 1, gu,v(6a) = 2/7; and Jo(ére) = 1 because ¢ = 0. Thus, since it is the case that € = 
gu,v(6a) - Jo(Sre), we see that E = 2/7. 


Finally, for r = ¥, the harmonic expression Az computes to 


dy = 0.186425 


yy(_4 1 on(¥)(—3 1 
Lr cos( 3) ( 3.S+iy xn) + isin( 2 ) ( 3.S4iy ba en) 
0 


(ri)y 


Now #z + R evaluates to = 0.285724, while € = 2/7 = 0.285714. The two are very close, as we can 
see here; and from previous notes [pp 559-562] we know the agreement will be exact if the angle 0 
is equal to 2 / 2, since here there is no pole associated with the first term in f(s), and hence R = 0. 


Thus, A = r / (R& — 1) is not only the right choice for the spatial estimator, but also the timelike 
estimator as well; and can be enhanced by writing A’ = {r / (R — 1)} + «, where k is small [see 
pages 633-4]. 


636 


Indeed, if 8 = 2/2, then gu,» = 1/ A, so that € = gu,.(a) - Jo(Sre) = (1 / A) - Jo(re), where r = Ya, and 
a=0; and 6,e=1. 


Now the harmonic expression Az computes to [K = | / 27i] ... 


oo 
2x f {costyn[1/A— 1/A] + isin(yr) [1/A + 1/A]} dy A/y? — & 
g 


and from page 327, this is equal to 


oo 
(1/A)-2/n S sin(yr) dy /y? -e2 = (1/A)- Jo(re). 
& 


Thus, the match is exact, in so much as Fx is equal to €. 


On page 634, we offered some evidence that the harmonic expression Jz, as shown below, does 
indeed tend to zero as the radius r ---» 0 [Ar=2, K= 1/21, ande= 1)... 


wf {cos(yr)[1/(A + iy) —1/(A —iy)] + isin(yr) [1/(A + iy) + 1/(A—iy)]} dy L/y?- & 
& 


Here are some more snapshots from Wolfram that illustrate this idea ... 


A 1 1 y ;(—1 1 y 
ooo E((- + cos +i ( ) ) 
;* (( 20000-iy  20000+iy urd 20000-iy | 20000+iy Ty 
h 


0.0000364697 


r=1/ 10,000 ; A= 20,000 


: 1 1 y A 1 1 . x 
t= + cos| +1 ( + ) sin{ ) 
f aoe (( 200000-iy sono) ( moa) 200000-iy ~ 200000+iy ( ‘moms 
h 


r=1/ 100,000 ; A = 200,000 


dy = 3.68034 10% 


637 


On page 633, we stated the following ... 


Now since « is small, we can omit it in the integration ... and so for large r, Ax becomes, 
approximately (¢ = 1) ... 


C 


—2/n S cos(yr) dy /y,/y? -€2 , 
& 


which will tend to zero as r ---» ©, since the integral in kind; namely 


—2/n S cos(yr) dy //y? -€? = Yo(re), 
€ 


is a Bessel function of the second kind; which is known to tend to zero as r ---> 0. 


We can offer up some evidence of this, by looking at the following snapshots from Wolfram ... 


32” 2cos(48y) 
{ -——— _ dy = -0.00893725 
1 


ny -1+y 


{"- Zeon Becalty) = -0.0101336 


rey 


Here, r = 48 and we don’t require a large upper limit on the integrations to confirm things; for in 
this case Yo(r) = —0.0101335868, and you can see how well it agrees with the second integral. Now 
notice too, that the first integral is small; and indeed, if our assertion is correct, this integral will 
also tend to zero as r ---» ©, just like the second ... 


638 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXXVI 


We can also look at estimators for A of type A = {r/(R— 1)} + K(r), where R = cosh(r) / |Jo(r)| 
and x(r) = arctan(? / 7), where 1 is suitably large. In this case we'll let 7 = 400, and a plot is 
shown below ... 


5 10 1 20 


plot of k(r) when 7 = 400 


Notice that «(r) tends to 2 / 2 asymptotically, and that even for smaller r, it is already pretty close to 
this value. On the other hand, when r is very small, «(r) is virtually negligible, and so won’t affect 
our calculations for the various components of the general equivalency theorem [G] in this range 
{recall that our testing to date was in the range 0 < r < 2, and r ---» 0]. 


Now let’s arbitrarily choose r = 24. Here, for our spacelike component gu,y = 1/(r- sin(@) + A) 
in R2, with 0 = 1/2; Res computes to exp(—Ar) / ,/A? + (5e)?,, and since A ~ 1/ 2, Res is negligible. 
And so R = 2 - Res, associated with G, is also negligible [recall too that a = cos(0), and € = sin(®), 
with 6 = 1, and singularities at (+6, 0)]. 


Now € = gu,\(6a) - Jo( dre), and since a = 0 and ¢ = 1; E = (1 / A) - Jo(re) = — 0.0358. That only 
leaves us with the harmonic expression Ax, and this computes to ... 

oo if + — |si 

Bay ) cos(24y) +é ( +h ) sin(24y)] 


Thus, Az and € are both small, and compare favorably; but the most important thing to observe 
here, is that they are both small, and will tend to zero as r increases. But even for values of r that 
are not large, we see that we can get reasonable agreement in G for this choice of A. 


dy = -0.0705571 + 0: 


In turn, this gives us an estimator for gu,» that just might work for all r > 0, and similarly for the 
timelike component; namely, guy = 1 /(r-cos(®) + A). And, of course, similar remarks apply in 
RB... 


639 


Here is a plot of Jo(r) in the range r = 20 to 33, and below that, a table which compares Hx and € 
for various values of r in this range. Note that for these values of r, the first term in the expression 
A= {r/(R-— 1)} + (7) is very small, and can be omitted. The second term in A; namely «(r) = 
arctan(7° / 7), where 7 = 400, thus implies A ~ x / 2, for the setup described on the previous page ... 


Key € r 
—0.0846 —0.1034 23 
0.0746 0.0993 26 
0.0645 —0.0941 29 
0.0544 0.0879 32 


Notice in the table above, that the sign of #x seems to track the sign of €, which is somewhat 
amazing to me. As well, if r is a root of Jo(r) then E will be zero, so the deviation reduces to Az in 


the range above and beyond. And indeed, # becomes smaller as r increases, so that this particular 
deviation tends to zero, as it should ... 


640 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXX VII 


The following table compares the harmonic expression 4 with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is guy = 1/(r-sin(0)+ A). The angle is 0 = 2/2, with singularities at (+5, 0) and here, 


6 = 1 [similar results hold in 3]. 


r A He é 

1/2 12 079 .078 

1 2 067 .064 

2 2 022 019 

3 2, —.019 —.022 

4 2 —.033 —.033 

5 2 —017 —.015 

6 2 O11 012 

7 2 024 025 

8 es O15 014 

9 2 —.006 —.007 

10 2 —.020 ~.020 

20 2 014 014 

30 2 —.007 —.007 
Now since Res computes to exp(—Ar) / A? + (6)? , and R = 2 - Res, we only need to include R in 
the calculations if r becomes very small. If we do, we get the agreement we expect when 


comparing Hz + R with €. But for the table above, and indeed, for all r > ¥%2, we exclude R, and 
you can see just how well #x and € track each other, in this case. And similar results hold for any 
9 between 0 and z / 2, and also hold true for the time component gu,y = 1 / (r+ cos(8) + A). 


Thus, as an alternative to estimators developed in our previous research, I would suggest we use the 
ones here. And here are a few snapshots from the table above, for Az and €, when r=4 ... 


aa ((- Ter i aan) c08(4y) . i( 
J arr, 


Jo(4) 
12 


12-iy " 12+iy 


4 ) sin(4y)) 
dy = -0.0333277 +0: 


Decimal approximation 


-—0.03309581748865 


641 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXX VIII 


The following table compares the harmonic expression Ax with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is guy = 1/(r-sin(0)+ A). The angle is 0 = 2/2, with singularities at (+5, 0) and here, 
6 = 2 [similar results hold in R3]. We haven’t done any analysis except at 6 = 1, and so when 6 > 0 
is arbitrary, we note that the transformation 7’ = r / 6 implies 6’ = 1 if r = 6. Thus, in this 
transformed space, the estimator gu,» becomes 1 / (r’ - sin(@) + A), where A ~ 12; so that in the 
original space, the estimator is now gu,v = 1 / {(r/ 5) - sin(@) + A}. And this is what we use to 
calculate the various components of the general equivalency theorem G. Here is the table, where 
the R value is omitted because Res is negligible ... 


r A Kx é 
1/2 12 .067 .064 
1 2 022 019 
2 2 —.033 —.033 
3 2 O11 012 
4 2 016 014 
5 2 —.020 —.020 
6 2 .002 .004 
7 2 015 014 
8 2 —.014 —.014 
9 2 —.002 —.001 
10 2 014 014 
20 2 .001 .001 
30 2 —.007 —.008 
And here are a few snapshots from the table above, for #. and €, when r = 2, 0 = 2/2, a = cos(@) 


and ¢ = sin(®); and 6 = 2. Note again that € = gu,.(Sa) - Jo(dre) here [see also page 511] ... 


- dy = -0.0333276 + 0: 


{ 2i((-ay + aus) €05(29) +i(Z5 + wus) sin(2y)) 
2 my-4+y 


Jo(4) 
12 


Decimal approximation 


~—0.03309581748865 


642 


A Simple Case Study, Part XXXIX 


The following table compares the harmonic expression # with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is guy = 1/(r-sin(0) + A). The angle is 0 = 7/4, with singularities at (+5, 0) and here, 
5 = 1 [similar results hold in #3]. A few minor corrections were made to the table below, in a 
previous release. 


r A Ke éE 
1/2 12 .078 078 
1 2 O71 .070 
2 2: 047 045 
3 2 014 012 
4 2 —.014 -.016 
5 2 —.030 —.030 
6 2 ~.030 —.030 
7 2 017 —.016 
8 2 002 .003 
9 2 018 019 
10 2 024 .024 
20 2 013 012 
29 2 009 .009 


Now since Res computes to exp (—pr) / \/p? + (Se)? ; where —p is the pole obtained from the 
generating function f(s), and R = 2 - Res; we only need to include R in the calculations if r becomes 
very small. If we do, we get the agreement we expect when comparing Az +R with €. But for the 
table above, and indeed, for all r 2 %, we exclude R, and you can see just how well #éx and € track 
each other, in this case. And similar results hold for any 0 between 0 and z / 2, and also hold true 
for the time component gu,y = 1/(r- cos(@) + A). 


Thus, we seem to have a pair of estimators here that are valid for any choice of r, 8 > 0; and for 
any choice of 8 between 0 and x / 2 in ? [similar results hold in #3]. As such, we’ll call these 
ideal estimators, since it is unlikely we’ll find another pair that has all of these properties. 


Ifd-r=k, for any k > 0, so that 6 - ris an invariant, then #x, R and € are also invariants; so that 
we only need to test at 6 = 1. For example, if k = 4, then testing at r, 6 = 2 is no different than 
testing at r= 4 and 6=1. The potential hypothesis [P], mentioned on pages 592-3, still applies for 
our ideal spacelike and timelike estimators; but now for all r, 8 > 0 and 0 < 0 < 2/2. Thus, if 2 
holds, the ideal estimators approximate solutions to the coupled equations in R2; since these 
spacelike and timelike solutions will always satisfy Az + R = € exactly. Similar remarks also hold 
in 3. 


643 


To show that #x, R and € are also invariants if 5 - r = k is invariant, let’s start with the generating 
function below, where guy = 5/(r- sin(@) + 5A) and the singularities are at (+6, 0) in R?; and r 
maps tos + 6a... 


Sls) = guy - 1//s? + (Se)? = 6/((s + ba) - sin(@) + 5A) - 1/4/52 + (Se)? 


The simple pole associated with the first term in f(s) is —p = —6A / sin(®) — 6a, where a = cos(8), 
and ¢ = sin(0); and 0 < 0 < 2/2. If we define g = A/sin(®) + a, then it is not hard to show that Res 
computes to exp(—kq) / /q? + €?. Thus, R = 2- Res is invariant, in this case, if 8- r =k. 


Since € = gu,y(a) - Jo(Sre), this computes to {1 / (a - sin(@) + A)} - Jo(ke), which again, is invariant. 
And finally, if we define y = (a - sin(®) + A), then #, computes to [Kk = 1/2zi] ... 


oxo f {cos(yr)[1/(5y + iye) — 1/(Sy —iys)] + 
be isin(yr)[1/ (dy + iye) + 1/(Sy —iye)]} dy //y? - (e)? 


If we now let y = du, then the expression above becomes the following, which is also invariant ... 
oo 


wf {cos(ku)[1/(y + ive) — 1/(y — iue)] + 
€ isin(ku)[1/(y + iue) + 1/(y — iue)|} du Wu? = € 


If 6 = 0, there is no pole associated with the first term in f(s). Thus R = 0, and €= 1 / A; while the 
harmonic expression, just above, with y = A and ¢ = 0, computes to 
co 


ani A-f sin(ku) du /u =1/A 
& 


The match is, therefore, exact in this case ... 


We'll now test Ax + R versus €, using the calculations above for the spatial component, when the 
radius r = 1/16 and 6 = 1; and the angle 8 = 2/2. Since r is small, we'll need to include R in the 
computations. Here, g = A (~ 12) and k = 1 / 16, and the snapshots from Wolfram follow on the 
next page ... .. 


644 


1 1 y 1 1 wry 

i((- 7 ) ‘os > +i( 7 ) =)) 

r- (( ay * Iy)% s( el iy * 1uy sin{ a) 
A 


2 


dy = 0.00474287 


my-l+y 
value of Hex 
1 
Jo(5;) 
exp(-0.75) 12 
¥145 
Result Decimal approximation 
0.0784558... 0.083251972991059 
value of R value of € 


Here #x + R ~ 0.08320, which compares very favorably with €, so that our ideal estimators also 
apply for very small r. And here is an extended table from page 640, where 6 = 1 and@=n/2..... 


r A Ke E 
1/2 12 079 078 
1 2 067 064 
2 2 022 019 
3 2 —.019 -.022 
4 2 —.033 —.033 
5 2. -.017 —.015 
6 2 O11 012 
7 2 024 .025 
8 2: 015 014 
9 2 —.006 —.007 
10 2 —.020 —.020 
20 2 014 014 
30 2: —.007 —.007 
40 2 001 001 
50 2 004 .005 
60 2. —.007 —.008 
70 2 008 .008 
80 2 —.006 —.006 
90 2 .003 .002 


645 


The general equivalency theorem [G] in the plane £2, with singularities at (+5, 0), where a = cos(@) 
and ¢ = sin(8), states that [p 575] 


Hut R=E™ ifandonlyif Cuy © 20+ cosh(ra)Jo(Sre)gu,v(Sa) ? 


Since we now know that our ideal spacelike and timelike estimators satisfy (1) approximately; yet 
everywhere in R?, and that spacelike and timelike solutions to (2) satisfy (1) exactly in R?; one can 
only conclude that the ideal estimators are very likely approximators for these solutions. 


For if we go to any point in the picture above, where a radial line intersects a circle, and calculate 
each of Ax, R and €; we will find that (1) is approximately true for the ideal estimators, and exactly 
true for the solutions. What are the odds that this could be so, and yet no connection existed 
between the ideal estimators and the solutions ? In my view, the odds are zero. 


Similar remarks apply for the corresponding ideal estimators in R3, which have been discussed in 
several places throughout this Simple Case Study series, for different choices of A that were not 
ideal. As such, we should feel comfortable with using these ideal estimators in our calculations, for 
the time being, until something better comes along ... .. 


As to the potential hypothesis [pp 592-3], associated with our ideal estimators, it now reads as 
follows, for the spacelike component ... 


For some smooth function (@), which can be approximated by sin(@), where 
0<0< 7/2, it is the case that 1 /(r- h(O) + A) is a suitable candidate for the 
quantumlike component in (2) above, for all r, 5 > 0, and A some constant 


646 


And for the timelike component, it reads thusly ... 


For some smooth function h(@), which can be approximated by cos(@), where 
0<0< 7/2, it is the case that | /(r- h(@) + A) is a suitable candidate for the 
quantumlike component in (2) above, for all r, 5 > 0, and A some constant 


Thus, we should interpret A as the same constant for both the spacelike and timelike elements here, 
which [hopefully] can be found by solving (2) for h(@) and h(6), according to the following 
template in R? (o, 5= 1)... 


guv=[1/(r-h@) +A), ,1/(7-h@) +A) 


Our expectation is that a solution, if it exists, will show that A ~ 12. Yet again, I would say that 
finding such a solution on paper is highly unlikely, but do believe the potential hypotheses above 
are actually valid, because they are the natural extensions of the ideal estimators, themselves. 


But if a solution can be found, one of the conditions placed on h(8) might be (8) = 0 if 8 = 0, and 
this is because when 0 = 0, (1) is true exactly for the ideal spacelike estimator. Similarly, we might 
require for the timelike element that h(0) = 0 if 9 = 2/ 2, for the same reason. 


Finally, it should be said that solutions to (2), using gu,v, must be fully covariant, so that Vig” = 0 
holds, in particular, for the spacelike and timelike elements. This could help in determining the 
true value of A in guy. 


Note as well, that these are normalized solutions (o = 1), which we call W, so that the general 
solutions are o - W [pp 522-3]. If the singularities are at (+6, 0), then the normalized spacelike and 
timelike solutions would be 6 / (r - h(@) + 5A) and 5/ (r - h(@) + 6A), respectively [p 641]. 


647 


A Simple Case Study, Part XL 


The following table compares the harmonic expression # with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is guy = 1/(r-sin(0) + A). The angle is 0 = 7/ 6, with singularities at (+5, 0) and here, 


6 = 1 [similar results hold in 3]. 


r A Kx € 
1/2 12 079 079 
1 2 076 075 
2 2 062 062 
3 2 042 041 
4 2 019 O18 
5 2 —.003 —.004 
6 2 —.020 -.021 
7 2 —.030 —.030 
8 2 —.032 —.032 
9 2 —.026 —.026 

10 2 —.015 —.014 

20 2 —.020 —.020 

30 2 —.001 —.001 

40 2 013 013 

50 2 .008 .008 

60 2 —.007 —.007 

70 2 —.010 -.010 

80 2 .001 .001 

90 2 009 .009 
Now since Res computes to exp(—pr) / Jp? + (6e)? , and R = 2 - Res, we only need to include R in 
the calculations if r becomes very small. If we do, we get the agreement we expect when 


comparing Hz + R with €. But for the table above, and indeed, for all r > ¥%2, we exclude R, and 
you can see just how well # and € track each other, in this case. And similar results hold for any 
0 between 0 and 7/2, and also hold true for the time component gu,y = 1 /(r- cos(@) + A). 


And here are a few snapshots from the table above, for # and €, when r= 90 ... 


1 1 dt 1 1 
cos| ———_ - ——_ ] t isin(90 (etass t wes) 
f (9») (SGateen uamass) (9 ¥) 12.43340Siy  12.433-0Siy 
0. 


dy= 


s (ri) Vy? = 0.25 


0.00935736 


1 


Result 


90 
ma “(z) 
12.433 °\ 2 


0.00931542... 


648 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLI 


The following table compares the harmonic expression # with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is guy = 1/(r-sin(0) + A). The angle is 0 = 2/3, with singularities at (+5, 0) and here, 
6 = 1 [similar results hold in R#]. In some cases, such as r = 10, 50, 90; Wolfram would not report 
a value for Az, so here we used the next number instead. 


r A Ke é 
1/2 12 077 O77 
1 2 068 .066 
2 2 033 031 
3 2 —.005 —.007 
4 2 —.029 ~.030 
5 2 —.029 -.029 
6 2 —.010 —.009 
7 2 012 013 
8 es 024 .024 
) 2 018 O17 
ll 2 —.015 —.016 
20 2: —011 —011 
30 2 013 013 
40 2 —.008 —.008 
51 2 008 .008 
60 2: 006 .006 
70 2 —.008 —.008 
80 2 006 .006 
91 2 —.006 ~.006 
Now since Res computes to exp(—pr) / Jp? + (6e)? , and R = 2 - Res, we only need to include R in 
the calculations if r becomes very small. If we do, we get the agreement we expect when 


comparing Az + R with €. But for the table above, and indeed, for all r = ¥%, we exclude R, and 
you can see just how well # and € track each other, in this case. And similar results hold for any 
9 between 0 and z// 2, and also hold true for the time component gu,y = 1/ (r+ cos(@) + A). 


And here are a few snapshots from the table above, for Hand €, when r=9... 


1 * ei 1 1 
cm cos(9y) ( 12.433+0.866iy _ 12.433-0. aay) +isin(9y) ( 12.433 40.866 iy aan) 


oa (ri) yy? -0.75 


dy = 0.0183316 


Result 


0.0174187... 


649 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLII 


In this note, we'll demonstrate briefly that the elements of the following diagonal matrix are always 
fully covariant. 


guy =[1/(r-sin(®) +A), , 1/(r-cos(®) + A)] 


If we define T to be g“’”, then from Waner’s book An Introduction To Differential Geometry and 
General Relativity (6" printing], the following hold true, where (1) is the first expression and (2) is 
the second expression, as shown below ... 


aT” 
ee a? +0,,1° +0, iia 
1 py (98 , 98m _ I8nx 


Setting a, b = 1, we calculate the first covariant partial derivative THD associated with the first row, 
and this computes to 


sin(@) — 2 - {% - sin(®) / (r- sin(@) + A)} - (r- sin(8) + A) =0. 
For a= 1, b =2 we obtain 
—(r- sin(@) + A)/r + (r-sin(®)+A)/r=0, 
and for a = 1, b = 3 the result is 
~¥ -(r- sin(@) + A) - cos(®) / (r - cos(8) + A) + % - (r- sin(8) + A) - cos(@) / (r - cos(8) + A) = 0 
Thus, all three covariant partial derivatives are zero, so that Vy g""” = 0 holds in this case, for the 
first row, where u = 1, and v= 1, 2, 3. Ina similar way, we expect this to be true for the second and 


third rows, so that Vy g"*” = 0 holds in general. 


And similarly, from our potential hypothesis [pp 645-6], we expect Vy g“’" = 0 holds true as well, 
for the elements of gu,v below ... 


guy =[1/ (r-h(O) +A), 2,11 (r-h(O) + A)] 


650 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLII 


In &3, with singularities at S = (+6, 0, 0), for 6 > 0, and cos(y) = sin(®)cos(p) in physical 
coordinates, where 0 < 0, < 1/2; the normalized (6 = 1) ideal spacelike and timelike estimators 
are now 6/ (r- sin(y) + 6A) and 6 / (7 - cos(y) + 5A), respectively. Thus the normalized diagonal 
matrix becomes 


N =[8/(r-sin(y) + 8A), 7, Psin%(8) ,8/ (r- cos(y) + 8A), 


so that the general matrix is 6 - W [pp 522-3]. Note that the default inner block B = [7° , rsin?(®)] 
has no dependency on 6, and that A ~ 12, since these are ideal estimators. 


If we are dealing with an ideal non-standard inner block, such as the one mentioned on pages 607- 
8, and reproduced below (but now recalculated to factor in 8) ... 


B = [8/(r-cos(y) + 8A) , 8- sin?(0) / (r- cos(y) + 8A)] ; 
then the normalized diagonal matrix becomes 
N =[8/(r- sin(y) + 6A), B,8/(r- cos(y) + 6A)] , 


and the general matrix is again, o - W. Note that these inner blocks, be it the standard [default] or 
non-standard, both preserve volume invariance [Ac], induced by dark energy, itself. Thus, if the 
singularities [S] were rotated in some fashion about the origin O, Ac would not change [and similar 
remarks apply in 2] ... 


To show that the default inner block & has no dependency on 6, let’s start by examining things in 
contravariant mode, for R?. Here B = 1/7’, so that if we look at the square root of B, this is 1/r. 
If there was a dependency on 6, then 1/r would transform as 6/r [p 641], so that in covariant 
mode, B would now become (r / 8). 


From pages 586-7, we now calculate the incremental area [Ac] of the [distorted] elliptical annulus € 
that our thin annulus @ [containing the unit circle] has morphed into, because of the dark energy 
radial waves generated from the singularities S at (+6, 0); and emanating in all directions, from O. 
If we assume that B = 7°; this is, in the first quadrant, where gu,y = 5/(r- sin(®) + SA) [o = 1]... 


m/2 lt+e 
S S Saw rdrdQ 
0 l-e 


and from page 609; becomes, approximately ... 


651 


m/2 


S 2cfa) ao 
0 


where f(r) = r+ /Guy . Now if we were to let B = (r/8)’, so that B has a dependency on 8; then Ac 
would compute to, in the first quadrant ... 


m/2 


S @craypay ao 
0 


and this integral diverges to © as & ---» 0, because of the term 1 / V6 that now emerges in the 
calculation. Thus, no such dependency on 6 exists if B is the default inner block [and similarly for 
RK). 


For the record, when testing Ax + R against €, using the setup in this note, with 6 = 1; the pole is at 
—p =—A/sin(y) — a, so that Res = exp(-pr) / p? + €2, and thus R is 2 - Res. Here, a = cos(y), and 
€=sin(y). The harmonic expression #x, where 7 = a. - sin(y) + A, computes to ... 


wf {cos(yr)[1/(y + iye) — 1/(9 —iye)] + 
€ isin(yr)[1/(y + ive) + 1/(q — iye)]} dy Ay? - €? 


And finally, € = (1 / 7) - Jo(re). If sin(y) = 0, then there is no pole associated with the generating 
function f(s), so that R = 0, and the match is exact. That is to say, Ax = €, and again, these remarks 
pertain to the spacelike component 1 / (r - sin(y) + A) in R3. But they also apply to the timelike 
component 1/ (r - cos(y) + A) in &3, after making the obvious changes [see pages 635-7 for 
examples of how this is done in £2]. 


Note that testing in £3 is really no different than testing in £2, so that it is always sufficient to test 
in R? only [pp 605-6, 610]. And finally, from our invariance principle [pp 642-6], we only need to 
test atd=1... 


652 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLIV 


In this note, we wish to revisit the associativity principle under addition [APA], relative to o; which 
was discussed on pages 480-91, among other places. But here, we will avoid some of the arguments 
made previously, which relied on a lim 6 ---» 0 argument, when studying the equation below in £2; 
where there are singularities at (+6, 0), and a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@). 


Cuy © 26 - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre) gu,(5a) 

Let us begin by stating that n singularities at O, each with strength o, relative to the dark energy 
density function A(s) ~ o/s, is no different than one singularity at O with strength no. And 
furthermore, we shall note the following equivalency, which we’ll label (+): S is a singularity at O 
of strength o if and only if it is the case that Cuy ~ o- gu,v(0); with a solution gu,v(r, 6), in the 
radial and time components, in particular [the inner block B can be the default, if we like]. 

Now let’s consider the expression 

uv", 26) + guyv(r, -o) 
From (+), guv(r, 26) represents a singularity of strength 20 at O [which is equivalent to two 


singularities of strength o at O], and gu,.(r, -o) represents a singularity of strength —o at O. Thus 
the sum above must represent a singularity of strength o at O, and so we may write, using (7) again 


guv(7, 26) + gur(r,-G) = gur(7,5)  (*) 
But from page 491, we also know that 


gur(r, 6) + gur(r,-6) = gur(r,0) =0, 


so that (*) becomes gu,(r, 26) = 2gu,(r, 6). And this result can now be used on pages 522-3 to 
form the more general principle, concerning APA. 


What is important to see here, is that APA does not depend on a lim 6 ---» 0 argument in (2) above, 
so that when considering possible normalized (6 = 1) solutions to (2) and shown below, from our 
potential hypotheses [pp 645-6]; that is to say, 

N =[8/(r-h(0) + 5A), B,8/(r-h(O) + 6A)] 


in the radial and time elements; we needn’t worry about what happens as 6 ---» 0 in W. The 
general solution will always be o - W, in accordance with our earlier findings ... 


653 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLV 


In &3, with singularities at S = (+6, 0, 0), for 5 > 0, and cos(y) = sin(@)cos(p) in physical 
coordinates, where 0 < 0, < 2/2; the potential hypotheses on pages 645-6 [9] still hold, but now 
the argument to the functions h and h becomes h(7) and h(7), respectively. And in this case, we 
have y = 1/2 —arccos(sin(y)). Thus, when scaling up from &? to £3, all we need to do is remap 0 
in P, accordingly [recall that the ideal spacelike and timelike estimators in R3 are 1 / (r - sin(y) + A) 
and I/ (r- cos(y) + A), respectively, if 6 = 1 and A ~ 12 (p 650)]. 


~ 


fo) _— 
—— N] 


~ 


Let’s do a few examples using our physical coordinates diagram, as shown above. When @ = 0 and 
0 = 0, cos(y) = 0 and thus sin(y) = 1. Hence, 7 = 2/2 so that h(77) agrees with what we see in R?, at 
90 degrees from the x-axis. 


When 6 = 0 and 0 = 2/2, cos(y) = 1 and thus sin(y) = 0. Hence, 7 = 0 so that h(i7) agrees with what 
we see in £2, along the x-axis, where our singularities are. 


Now if @ = 2/2, then cos(y) = 0, no matter our choice of 0, so that again sin(y) = 1. And hence, we 
have 7 = 1/2 so that again, h(7) agrees with what we see in R?, at 90 degrees from the x-axis. And 
similar remarks apply to A(y). 


When testing spacelike and timelike estimators in R?, where A was a function of r [p 611 ff], we 
chose not to map r in A(r) to its complex equivalent in the generating function f(s), Nor did we 
map r in A(r) to its complex equivalent in the harmonic expression #€,. For to do so would have 
made the calculations impossible to carry out. Indeed, A(r) should be seen as a real-valued 
function only; that is now exempt from any mapping associated with Az, R and € in the general 
equivalency theorem G; in so far as any testing is concerned, in these research notes. For the case 
where A is a constant, such as our ideal estimators, we needn’t worry about this distinction ... 


654 


The potential hypotheses [#] in R2, on pages 645-6, read as follows, for the spacelike and timelike 
elements, respectively; where a = cos(@) and ¢ = sin(®), with singularities at (+5, 0) ... 


Cuy © 26+ cosh(Sra)Jo(dre)gu,v(3a) 


For some smooth function (@), which can be approximated by sin(@), where 
0<0< 7/2, it is the case that 1 /(r - h(O) + A) is a suitable candidate for the 
quantumlike component in (2) above, for all r, 5 > 0, and A some constant 


For some smooth function h(@), which can be approximated by cos(@), where 
0<0< 7/2, it is the case that | /(r- h(@) + A) is a suitable candidate for the 
quantumlike component in (2) above, for all r, 5 > 0, and A some constant 


Initially, o and 6 are set to 1, and we see if we can find solutions to (2), subject to certain initial 
conditions [pp 645-6], using the template below; where B = ?° is the default inner block in R? ... 


guv=[1/(r-h(0)+A),B,1/(r-h(0)+A)] (HF) 


By mapping 6 to y, where cos(y) = sin(®)cos($) in physical coordinates, we arrive at the equivalent 
hypotheses in #3, where 0 < 0, < 2/2; so that the argument to the functions h and h becomes 
A(y) and h(y), respectively. Note that we map 0 to y in (2) as well. 


Now we said on the last page that 7 = 2 / 2 — arccos(sin(y)) was, in fact, this argument; and indeed, 
since arccos(sin(y)) = 1 / 2 — y, it must be the case that 7 = y. And if we can find solutions to (2) 
for the radial and time elements in (+), then it is likely that they are also solutions to (2) in R3, 
where & = [?°, r°sin?(0)] is the default inner block, and the matrix is now [o, 5 = 1] 


guv=[1/(r- hy) +A), B,1/(r- hy) + A)] 


For in this case, just above, the radial and time components in gu,v will satisfy He + R = € “? 
exactly. For more on ideal estimators in £3, see pages 650-1. 


655 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLVI 


In this short note, we outline a heuristical proof for the existence of h(®) and h(Q), in the potential 
hypotheses [#] for RK? on pages 645-6, and mentioned again on page 654. We’ll also see how A 
surfaces in the spacelike component in #; namely, | / (r - h(8) + A), and note that similar remarks 
will apply for the timelike element; namely | / (r - h(8) + A), as well. 


To start, the ideal spacelike estimator [o, 6 = 1] is So = 1/ (r- sin(®) + A), where r > 0,0 < 0 < x/ 
2, and A= 12. We’ll refer to this region as Q1; and we see using So in Q1, how well Hz + R tracks 
€ in the tables; starting on page 640, and going forward from there. Let us define fo(8) = sin(®), and 
let us define Ao = 12. 


Now this is not the ‘end of the road’ for our ideal estimator So; for even though the tracking is quite 
good, we can always (in the existence sense) find another ideal estimator S; = 1 / (r - fi(®) + Ai), 
where the tracking is even better in Q1 than it was for So. We expect fi(®) to approximate fo(@) and 
A\ to approximate Ao, as they should. 


Now we continue the process out to , building (in the existence sense) our infinite set of ideal 
estimators {S, | = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...}, where at each stage ... the tracking becomes more and more 
precise. In the limit, we define 1 / (r - h(®) + A) = lim n ---» © {Sn}, and I would submit to the 
reader that this is the function referred to in #. A similar construction can be done for timelike 
estimators, leading to a definition for 1 / (r - h(®) + A). Finally, we scale up to £3, using the last 
research note on pages 653-4 ... .. 


656 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLVI 


The following table compares the harmonic expression 4x with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is now guy = 1/(r-ysin(®) + A). Here 7 = 1/10, A= 11 and y=1/7. The angle is 0 = 
n/2, with singularities at (+5, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(0), ¢ = sin() [similar results hold in 2°]. 


r A Kx € 
1/2 11 0853 0855 
1 1 0699 0695 
2 1 0208 .0204 
3 1 —.0234  -.0236 
4 1 ~.0362 —.0361 
5 1 -—0164 -—0161 
6 1 0135 .0137 
7 1 .0273 .0273 
8 1 0158 0156 
9 1 —.0080  -.0082 

10 1 -.0223 —.0223 
11 1 —.0157 —.0156 
12 1 0041 .0043 
13 1 0188 .0188 
20 1 0152 0152 
30 1 —.0079 = —.0079 


Now since Res computes to exp(—yAr) / (yA)? + (6)? , and R = 2 - Res, we only need to include R 
in the calculations if r becomes very small. If we do, we should get the agreement we expect when 
comparing Az + R with €. But for the table above, and indeed, for all r = ¥%, we exclude R, and 
you can see just how well #, and € track each other, in this case. And similar results hold for any 
6 between 0 and 7 / 2, and also hold true for the time component gu,y = 1/(r- ycos(®) + A). 


And here are a few snapshots from the table above, for Hand €, when r=3 ... 


i}| - ~~ + +~ |cos(3y) +i] 4+— + +~ |sin(3y) 
rie n-Z ne n-2 ne d 
= ly = 
1 x J-14+y 


-0.0233793 + 0: 


Jo(3) 
11 


Decimal approximation 


—0.02364108680926 


657 


The potential hypotheses [Pf] still apply, but now our starting point is the ideal estimators 
mentioned above. As well, the heuristical argument put forth on page 655 still holds; and if 
anything, is made stronger by virtue of the table above ! A few minor corrections were made to the 
table below, in a previous release ... 


The following table compares the harmonic expression # with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is now guv = 1/(r-ysin(@) +A). Here 7 = 1/10 and A= 11. The angle is 6 = 2/4, with 
singularities at (+5, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(9) [similar results hold in #3]. Wolfram 
would not report a number for A, when r= 12 or 30. In this case, that number was skipped ... 


r A Kx € 

1/2 11 0878 0877 

1 1 0797 .0795 

2 1 0508 .0506 

3 1 0142 0140 

4 1 —0176  -.0178 

5 1 —.0347 — —.0348 

6 1 —.0336  —.0335 

qd 1 —0177 — -.0175 

8 1 0040 .0041 

9 1 0213 0214 

10 1 0271 0271 

11 1 0199 0199 

13 1 0122  -.0122 

14 1 —0217 -.0217 

20 1 0137 0136 

31 1 —0100  -.0100 
You can see again, just how accurate the tracking actually is, and so I would say with a high degree 
of confidence, that the ideal spacelike and timelike estimators mentioned in this research note, can 
be used in our calculations to measure dark energy effects in our space-time fabric; such as 
incremental length, area and volume. And here are a few snapshots from the table above, for Ax 


and €, when r= 14... 


0 cos(14-y) 1 = L +isin(14y) 1 z+ 1 ; 
fi (Grea iy 11.05-0.0707 a) ( 11.05+0.0707 iy 11.05-0.0707 >) dy = ~0.0217176 


a (xi) Wy -05 


Jo(14 
11.05 


Result 


-0.0217472... 


658 


The following table compares the harmonic expression # with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is now guy = 1/(r-ysin(®) + A). Here 7 = 1/20, A= 10 and y=1/y. The angle is 0 = 
m/ 2, with singularities at (+8, 0); and 6 = 1, « = cos(6), € = sin(6) [similar results hold in R3]. 


r A Ke € 
1/2 10 .0940 0938 
1 0 0768 .0765 
2 0 0227 0224 
3 0 —.0259 0260 
4 0 —.0398 —.0397 
5 0 —0179 -.0178 
6 0 0149 0150 
7 0 .0300 .0300 
8 0 0173 0172 
9 0 —.0089 =-.0090 
10 0 —.0246  -.0246 
11 0 0172 -.0171 
12 0 .0046 .0048 
13 0 0207 .0207 
20 0 0168 0167 
30 0 —.0087  —.0086 
The first thing to notice here is that the table is very accurate, even though y and A differ from their 


values in the table on page 656. The second thing to notice is that as 77 ---» 0, gu,v ---» 1 / A, so that 
testing at 7 = 0 will become exact for any r > 0, and any angle 0 < 8 < m/2; which we call QI. 
And in this case, the choice of A > 0 won’t matter; but from a physics perspective, gu,y = 1/ A in 
all of Q1, with singularities at (+6, 0), makes no sense. 


When doing the testing, I noticed that at A = 10 or 12, I could achieve high accuracy, if I set 7 to a 
small value, such as 1/20 (similar remarks apply to values of A greater than 12 or Jess than 10). At 
A= 11, however, I could achieve this same degree of accuracy without imposing such a constraint 
on 7. Indeed, a value of 7 = 1/10 was sufficient, as you can see in the tables on pages 656-7. 


Therefore, we have two types of ideal spacelike and timelike estimators here — those that are 
biased, and those that are unbiased. So far, the only pair of unbiased ideal estimators that surface 
in the testing, are those for which A = 11 and 7 = 1/10... 


For the record, when testing Ax + R against €, using the setup in this note, with 6 = 1; the pole is at 
—p =—A/ nsin(®) — a, so that Res = exp(—pr)/./p? + €2, and thus R is 2 - Res. Here, a = cos(8) and 
€ = sin(9), irrespective of the form for gu,y, which is the spacelike component, in this case. 


659 


From the definition of gu,v, we set € = nsin(@) and let 1 = a- € + A, so that the harmonic expression 
Hx now computes to ... 


co 


wf {cos(yr)[1/(u + iye) — 1/(u—iye)] + 
€ isin(yr)[1/(u + ive) + 1/(u— iye)]} dy //y? = & 


And finally, € = (1 /p) - Jo(re). If € = 0, then there is no pole associated with the generating 
function f(s), so that R = 0, and the match is exact. That is to say, He = €, and again, these remarks 
pertain to the spacelike component 1 / (r - ysin(0) + A) in R?. But they also apply to the timelike 
component 1/ (r - qcos(0) + A) in &?, after making the obvious changes [see pages 635-7 for 
examples of how this is actually done]. 


Note that testing in £3 is really no different than testing in £2, so that it is always sufficient to test 
in R? only [pp 605-6, 610]. And finally, from our invariance principle [pp 642-6], we only need to 
testatd=1... 


As we said on the previous page, setting 7 = 0 will give us an exact match, but it is not realistic 
physics. Therefore, if 7 is too small, it may be introducing bias into the estimator gu,y, that 
shouldn’t be there. Similarly, choosing a very large value for A may also be unrealistic. 


Thus, we probably want 7 to be small, but not too small, and A large in comparison to 7. Based on 
the tables in this note, a value of 7 ~ 1/10, and A = 11 (or perhaps a little higher) might be suitable. 
But ultimately, the correct choice for 7 and A, which gives us high accuracy in the tables, will only 
emerge when there is agreement between theory and experiment ... 


660 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLVIII 


The following table compares the harmonic expression Hz + R with €, for the spacelike component 
in R, which is now guy = 1/(r-nsin(®) + A). Here, r= 2, and 7, A vary as per the table below. 
The angle is 0 = 2/ 2, with singularities at (+6, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(®) [similar results 
hold in £3]. 


n A He+R € 
0.1 12 0191 0187 
0.2 ul 0213 0204 
03 10 0241 0224 
04 9 0277 0249 
05 8 0325 0280 
0.6 7 0391 0320 
0.7 6 0486 0373 
08 5 0632 0448 
0.9 4 0881 0560 
1.0 3 1362 0746 


The first thing to notice about this table, is that the R value is negligible, except for the last two 
entries. The second thing to notice is that as 7 increases and A decreases, testing gets worse. In 
fact, the only worthwhile entry is the first one. 


And from the table on page 640, where 6 = x / 2 and 6 = 1, we also know that at r = 2, Hx ~ .022 
and € = .019, if 7 = 1 and A= 12. Still, this is not as good as the first entry above, when 7 = 0.1. 
Thus, the conclusion here is that smaller 7 and larger A, relative to 7, is the best combination; but to 
avoid bias, we don’t want 7 too small, nor do we want A too large. 


For if we let 7 ---» 0, testing becomes exact at y = 0; and if, for a fixed r, we let A ---» 00, then each 
of Ax, R and € will tend to zero. Similarly, if we let r ---> 0, then again, each of Ax, R and € will 
tend to zero, provided ¢ > 0. Thus, we accomplish nothing by choosing A to be too large. 


Note that the harmonic expression on the last page, and reproduced below, 


co 


wf {cos(yr)[1/(u + iye) — 1/(—iye)] + 
€ isin(yr)[1/(u + ive) + 1/(u— iye)]} dy //y? = & 


reduces to the following if 7 = 0 [pp 636, 327] ... 


co 


(1A) - 2h f sintyr) dy Jy? =e = (1/A)-Jo(te). 


& 


661 


A Simple Case Study, Part XLIX 


The following table compares the harmonic expression 4 with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is now guy = 1/(r-ysin(®) + A). Here 7 = 1/10, A= 30 and y= 1/7. The angle is 0 = 
n/2, with singularities at (+5, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(0), ¢ = sin() [similar results hold in R°]. 


r A Hx € 
1/2 30 .0313 .0313 
1 30 0256 0255 
2 30 0075 .0075 
3 30 ~.0087 —.0086 
4 30 ~.0132 -.0132 
5 30 0059 = —.0059 
6 30 0050 .0050 
7 30 0100 .0100 
8 30 0057 .0057 
9 30 -.0030  -—.0030 

10 30 —.0082  -.0082 
11 30 ~.0057 —.0057 
12 30 0016 .0016 
13 30 0069 .0069 
20 30 0056 .0056 
30 30 —.0029  -.0029 


This table can be compared to the one on page 656, where 7 = 1/10, A=11. You can see here, that 
with 7 = 1/10, A = 30, we are virtually exact, out to four decimal places. And this table could be 
made more exact, were we to increase A further, or even reduce 7, Thus, smaller 7 and larger A is 
the general principle here, for high accuracy tables; and somewhere within these ranges for 7 and 
A, we are probably going to find the correct values, where theory and experiment agree, for both 
the spacelike and timelike components. 


And here are a few snapshots from the table above, for #zand €, when r= 1... 
1 | 1 7 
+ —— |cos(y) + ¢] —— + —— |sin(y) 
30+ 30-35 
7 y-1 +y° 


Jo(1) 
30 


dy = 0.0255917 


Decimal approximation 


0.025506589551932 


662 


A Simple Case Study, Part L 


For the record, when testing #4. + R against E, using the timelike component, with 6 = 1; the pole is 
at -p =—A/ ncos(@) — a, so that Res = exp(—pr) / J p? + €*, and thus R is 2 - Res. Here, a = cos(@) 
and € = sin(@), irrespective of the form for gu. = 1 / (r - ycos(@) + A); which is the timelike 
component, in this case. 


From the definition of gu,v, we set € = ycos(8) and let p = a - € + A, so that the harmonic expression 
HH, now computes to ... 


af {cos(yr)[1/(u + iye) — 1/(u—iye)] + 
€ isin(yr)[1/(u + ive) + 1/(u— iye)]} dy //y? = & 


And finally, € = (1 /) - Jo(re). If € = 0, then there is no pole associated with the generating 
function f(s), so that R = 0, and the match is exact. That is to say, Ax = €, and again, these remarks 
pertain to the timelike component 1 / (r - qcos(0) + A) in R?. 


Note that testing in £3 is really no different than testing in R2, so that it is always sufficient to test 
in R? only [pp 605-6, 610]. And finally, from our invariance principle [pp 642-6], we only need to 
test atd= 1. 


Tf at 0 = 0, we set 7 = 0.05 and A = 10, then p: = 10.05; and no matter our choice of r 2 ¥% (so that R 
will always be negligible), we find that Az ~ 0.0995; which exactly matches €. Here are some 
snapshots from Wolfram, so you can see this effect [note that a = 1 and ¢ = 0, so that €= 1/ p, 
which is 0.0995, out to four decimal places]. In this case, we let r= 2 and 8 in Az below ... 


1 1 = ot 1 1 
sing cos(2y) ( 10.0540.05iy  10.05-0.05 =) + isin(2y) ( 10.0560.057y * ces) dy= 


(xi) fy? -0 


0.0995329 


SS ES ae aie = 
ft cos(8y) ( 10.05+0.05iy acter) ah sin(8y) ( 10.05+005iy * ary ly 
ye ee dy = 
0 


(ri) yy? 0 
0.0994966 


1 


10.05 
Result 


0.0995024875) 


663 


A Simple Case Study, Part LI 


The following table compares the harmonic expression Hz + R with €, for the spacelike component 
in R?, which is now guy = 1/(r- nsin(@) + A). Here 7 = 1/100, A = 30 and y = 1/7. The angle is 
0 =7/ 2, with singularities at (+6, 0); and 5 = 1, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@) [similar results hold in £3}. 


r A Hxrt+R € 
001 30 0300 .0333 
002 30 0332 .0333 
.003 30 .0333 .0333 
004 30 .0333 .0333 
010 30 .0333 .0333 
.020 30 .0333 .0333 
090 30 0333 .0333 
-100 30 .0333 .0333 
.200 30 .0330 .0330 
300 30 0326 .0326 
400 30 0320 .0320 
500 30 0313 .0313 
1 30 0255 0255 
2; 30 0075 .0075 
3 30 —.0087  —.0087 
9 30 ~.0030 -.0030 


You can see from this table, that down to about r ~ .002, we achieve high accuracy, and at r ~ .001, 
where the R value matters, accuracy is reasonable. To improve on the accuracy as r ---» 0, would 
mean lowering the value of 4 even further, as increasing or decreasing A doesn’t seem to help 
much, in this case, and can actually make things worse. 


Therefore, based on these findings, which apply to both the spacelike and timelike estimators, I 
would suggest the values of 7 ~ 1/100 and A ~ 30, when doing calculations for dark energy, such as 
incremental length, area and volume; if we also want high accuracy for very small r. And if we 
don’t, then as we have seen in our previous notes, /arger choices for 7 and even smaller choices for 
A are available to us. 


The following table compares the harmonic expression Hz + R with €, for the timelike component 
in 2, which is now guy = 1/(r-ncos(8) + A). Here 7 = 1/100, A = 30 and y = 1/7. The angle is 
6 = 0, with singularities at (+5, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(@), € = sin() [similar results hold in £3, but 
see also the comments on page 662] ... 


r A Hart+R € 
001 30 0300 0333 
002 30 0332 0333 
003 30 .0333 0333 
004 30 0333 0333 
010 30 .0333 0333 
020 30 0333 0333 
090 30 .0333 0333 
100 30 .0333 0333 
200 30 .0333 0333 
300 30 0333 0333 
400 30 .0333 0333 
500 30 .0333 0333 
1 30 .0333 0333 
2, 30 .0333 0333 
3 30 .0333 0333 
9 30 .0333 0333 


Even with 7 = 1/20 and A = 30, for the spacelike component; we can still get high accuracy at r= 
.01, as you can see in the pictures below, for #éx and €, when 8 = 1/2. Thus, it becomes a trade-off 
of sorts — how much accuracy do we really need for very small r, versus higher values for 7, in 
particular ... .. 


1 1 * oh 1 1 
r cos(0.01y) (saan ~ 30-0.05iy ) +isin(0.01y) ( 3000.051y naan) 


h (ni) yr -1 
0.0331735 


dy= 


Jo(0.01) 
30 


Result 


0.0333325... 


665 


A Simple Case Study, Part LIT 


We know from pages 554-5, that the following expression is exact for all r > 0, where A > 0 and R 
is equal to 2e" 4T7 A. Let us label this expression (7) ... 


co 


a f {cosynLl / (A +iy)—1/(A—iy)] + isin(yr) [1 /(A + iy) +1/(A-iy)]} dy/y + R=1/A 
0 


Now our harmonic expression #. for the timelike component | / (r - ycos(8) + A); where ¢ = 0, p= 
ntA,e=n, is... 


xf {cosnil1/(u + iym) ~ 1/4 iy] + 
é isin(yr)[1/(u + yy) + 1/(u—iyn)]} dy Ly? = 


Thus, if we factor out 1 / 7 in #z,we now have a form for the integrand which is compatible with 
the integral J in (+), where in J, A is now 1/4. Hence, from (+), it must be the case that Hz is 
exactly equal to 1 / 7A — R, where R is now equal to 2e~ ATT DA, 


Thus, we may write H. = 1/p — 2e 4"/p, which is equal to (1 / w) - (1 — 2e” 4"); where again, A 
is now equal to p/ 7. From this, we see that as r ---» 0, Aéx becomes | / 1, and indeed, approaches 
this limit much sooner if A= 1/7 is large. And that is why the integrals on page 662 converge to a 
value of 1 / 11, even when r = 2 or 8, as we see in the pictures there. For in that very case, 7 = .05 
and A = 10, so that A = 200. 


On the other hand, as r ---» 0, Az becomes, perhaps surprisingly, —1 / 1, as we can see in the image 
below; where here 7 = .01, A = 30, and r = 0.000001 ... .. 


10000000 1 1 1 
{ ———— |cos(1x 10 “| - |. 
“ (xi) yy -0 30.01+0.0liy 30.01-O0.0liy 
1 1 
isin(1x 10 “»| + l= —0.0331223 
30.01+0.0liy 30.01-O0.0liy 


666 


A Simple Case Study, Part LHI 


The following table compares the harmonic expression Sx + R with €, for the spacelike component 
in R?, which is now guy = 1/(r-ysin(®) + A). Here 7 varies, A = 30, and the data indicates just 
how low we can go with r, and still achieve reasonable accuracy, for a given y. The angle is 0 =7/ 
2, with singularities at (+5, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(0), € = sin() [similar results hold in 3]. 


r n Hx+R € 
001 01 0300 .0333 
002 02 0301 .0333 
.003 03 0301 .0333 
004 04 0301 .0333 
010 10 .0303 .0333 
020 .20 .0307 .0333 
090 90 0330 .0333 
-100 1 .0333 .0333 
-200 2 0365 .0330 
300 3 0396 .0326 
400 4 0426 .0320 
500 s) 0455 .0313 


For example, if r = .02, I can achieve reasonable accuracy if 7 = .20. If I want higher accuracy for 
this choice of r (and there is no need to suppose we really do, when calculating the integrations for 
incremental length, say, induced by dark energy); I know this can be done by Jowering the value of 
n, without changing the value of A [see the picture below, where 7 = .05]. Similarly, if r= 1/10, we 
achieve high accuracy at 7 = 1, A = 30; and needn’t go any lower with 7 in this case, if we don’t 
want to. 


But if we do, accuracy will only improve here, for this choice of r, if A= 30. For example, we may 
decide to lower 7 to 1/10. Then not only would the accuracy improve for r = 1/10; but we also see 
from the table above, that at r = .01, we would now achieve reasonable accuracy ... .. 


1 1 
je cos(0.02y) ( 30+0.05iy 30-0, aay naan) oe sin(0. 02y) (aa 3040.05 iy re aan) 


1 (ti) yy -1 
0.0333355 


667 


A Simple Case Study, Part LIV 


In this note, we wish to compare the ideal spacelike estimator gu,y = 1 /(r- ysin(®) + A) with an 
alternate; namely hy,y = 1/ (r- (r)sin(®) + A), where n(r) = 7 if r 2 ro; otherwise 4(r) = yr / ro if 
it is the case that 0 < r < ro [we’ll call this restricted range R.]. We suppose there exists a small ro 
such that for r < ro, there is no longer high accuracy for gu,y, when comparing Ax + R with €; but 
that there is when using hy,» in this restricted range R.. Such an assumption makes sense, since we 
already know in gu,y that 7 must decrease in R. as r tends to 0; if we are to achieve high accuracy, 
especially if A is fixed. 


Let’s begin by assuming 8 = 2/2 and 6 = 1, so that gu» = 1/ (r+ +A). Now let us define the 
function f(c) = 1 / VA +€, so that for small € relative to A, the Taylor series expansion of f(€) 
computes to | / A1/2 — ¢/ 2A3/2. Letting «= r- 7, where r is in Re, we see that fg, expands as 


1/A12 — pn / 203/72, (1) 


provided r - 7 is small relative to A. We now integrate (1) over &. and find that the result computes 
to 


ro AY? = ro - 9 1 4A3/2 (2) 


Now we repeat the exercise for hy» , where € = r- (r), and so find that the integration over Re 
computes to 


ro AY? = ro2 + 1 6A3/2 (3) 


Subtracting (2) from (3) leaves us with A = ro? - 7 / 12A3/2, and this is the difference between the 
two integrations; one where we use our ideal estimator gu,v in Re, and the other being hy,y in Re. 
The difference [A] is really quite small; for if we look at the table on the previous page, where ro ~ 
.02 if 7 = .20, and A = 30; we find that A~ 4- 10°. 


Thus, replacing 7 with 7(r) in the estimator gu,y, where y(r) is some decreasing function of r in Re, 
as r decreases [7(r0) = 7 and (0) = 0]; may give us high accuracy when comparing Ax + R with € 
here, but it will make no difference when carrying out the integrations in this restricted range. 


And so, we should feel comfortable with using the ideal spacelike and timelike estimators; namely 
1/(r- ysin(®) + A) and 1 / (r - ncos(®) + A), respectively, for all r > 0, where 7 is small and A is 
large relative to 7; and 7 itself is small, if not very small ... 


668 


A Simple Case Study, Part LV 


In this note, we wish to study regions of instability, when comparing #x with €, which normally 
occur when we are evaluating these expressions near a root of Jo(re). So we’ll begin by letting the 
angle @ = 2/2 for our spacelike component gu,y = 1 / (r- qsin(@) + A), so that ¢ = 1; and here we'll 
set 7 = 0.1 and A = 30. As always, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(®) and 6 = 1. 


In the diagram above, we see a picture of Jo(r), where the first and second roots, r: and rz, are at 
roughly 2.405 and 5.520. The unstable regions are depicted by the vertical magenta lines, and are 
defined to be Ux = [% —€ , % + €], for some small € > 0. In such a region, Az and E will both be 
very small, but the variation can be rather extreme, as you can see in the pictures below near r; ... 


ja cos(2.4048 y) ( aaiy~ wa ) + ésin(2.4048 y) (=> 


dy= 
: (ri) \y?=1 
0.0000581928 
Jo(2.4048) 
30 
Result 
4.42276... x 10°77 


Here, the value of Az is about 5.8 - 10>, whilst € is about 4.4 - 10°’. Outside Ux, this type of 
instability or uncertainty does not exist, so what we want to do here, is examine the integrals for 
[Guy over all Ux, and develop a measure which establishes a connection between € and 7. 


669 


For as we already know, the smaller 7 becomes, the higher the accuracy when comparing Az with 
€in Ux [the R value can be omitted, because r is not small here and A is arge in comparison to 7]. 


We begin by noting that the dark energy function is § = 2c - cosh(Sra)Jo(Sre), so that at 9 = 2 / 2 
with 6 = 1, this reduces to is € = 2c - Jo(r); and thus the sign of € is simply sgn(Jo(r)), since o > 0 
holds true here. We now integrate sgn(Jo(r)) guy over U1, noting that in the interval [71 — €,71] 
the result will be larger positive, and in the interval [71,171 + €] the result will be smaller negative, 
due to both the construction of Bun and sgn(Jo(r)). 


Defining 1 = 11-7 + A, and v = ye, we find that this integration becomes ... 


(2/) (2Vn -Ja-v-VvEFv), 


and since v is small in comparison to fl, we can expand the expression above as a Taylor series to 
second order; that is to say, with 


vty ~ Jn t+ v/2 fu — 2 / 8y3/2 
the expression (*) becomes A; = (4/1) - v2 / 8u3/2, which is equal to 7 - € / 2(r1 - 7 + A)3/2. 


We can now go on to Up, noting that in the interval [72 —€,r2] the result will be larger negative, and 
in the interval [r2,r2 + €] the result will be smaller positive, due to both the construction of VSuy 
and sgn(Jo(r)). Hence, Az becomes —7 - 2 / 2(r2 - + A)3/2. We thus wind up with an infinite 
alternating series, which can be written as ... 


a) 


AR 12H ZX CVE (ret (Alps? 


And this is the amount [A] that can be attributed to uncertainty in the integration of ./g,, over all 
U, . It is a very small number indeed, especially if € ~ yn holds true; and 7 is small and A is large 
relative to 7. For if 7 =0.1, A =30 and € ~ Vn: A is approximately 10°, summing from k = | to 6. 


Outside Ux, this type of instability or uncertainty does not exist, and we can see this in the pictures 
below, where again 7 = 0.1, A = 30 and € ~ Vn ~ 0.32. For if we choose a value of r just outside 
U1, Hx should once again agree with €, with a fair degree of accuracy. Since r; ~ 2.405, let’s move 
to the left of r; — € ~ 2.08, by setting r= 2. Here are the snapshots from Wolfram ... 


7, sin(2 ») 


uw dy = 0.00752712 


Decimal approximation 


0.007463025971374 


670 


A Simple Case Study, Part LVI 


In this note, we will show that there is actually only one choice for y that gives us high accuracy in 
the tables, when comparing Ax + R with €, as r ---» 0; and that this value is 7 = 1. This is true for 
both the spacelike and timelike components, as we shall see below. Here, the singularities are at 
(+6, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(0), € = sin(®). As always, we’re working in £2, where 0 is between 0 
and m/2. 


For the timelike component | / (r - ycos(®) + A), let us bring back our expression from page 665 for 
Hx, where = 0, p= +A,e=y, andA=p/7... 


ax J {cosonil1/(u + iym) ~ 1/4 iy] + 
€ isinQyr)[1/(u + iy) + 1/ (tu — iyn)]} dy Ly? - © 


We note here [p 665] that Az = (1/p)- (1 -2e Ar) and so tends to —1 / was r ---» 0. On the other 
hand [p 662], for @ = 0, the pole is at —p = —A/ycos(8) — a =—p/ 7, so that the value of Res is now 
exp(-pr) / /p? + €?, which tends to 1 / p as r ---» 0. Thus ... since R = 2 - Res, R tends to 27 / pas 
r ---» 0, and since € = (1 / y) - Jo(re) = 1/1; high accuracy can only be achieved if Az + R agrees 
with € in this case, which means —1 / 1 + 27/1 must be equal to 1/1. In other words, there is only 
one choice for 4, and that choice is 7 = 1. 


And this is also true for the spacelike component as well; namely 1 / (r - ysin(8) + A), as we can see 
in the pictures below, where 7 = 1, A= 30, r=.001 and@=7/2... 


1000000 i(-s5 +— Jeos(=) +i(S- + — sin( >) 
{ 30-iy 304i 1000 30-iy 30+ 1000 ly 
———— ty 
1 my-1+y* 
-0.0313451 + 0: 
value of Ax 
Jo(0.001) 
exp(—30 0.001) 30 
V307 +1 
Result Result 
0.064660456... 0.0333333... 


value of R value of € 


671 


From these pictures above, we see that Aéx + R ~ .03332, which is very close to the value of €. And 
so we may conclude that reasonable to high accuracy can be achieved for all r > 0, if 7 = 1 and Ais 
large, relative to 7. 


The following table compares the harmonic expression A with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is guy = 1/(r-nsin(®) + A). Here 7 = 1, A= 30 and y=1/y. The angle is 0 = 7/2, 
with singularities at (+5, 0); and 5 = 1, a = cos(0), € = sin(@) [similar results hold in #3]. The R 
value is negligible, in this case ... 


r A Ke € 
1/2 30 0315 .0313 
1 30 0260 0255 
2 30 0081 .0075 
3 30 —.0083 -.0086 
4 30 0133 —.0132 
5: 30 -.0063 -.0059 
6 30 0047 .0050 
7 30 0100 .0100 
8 30 0060 .0057 
9 30 0027 -.0030 
10 30 —.0081 —.0082 
11 30 0059 = —.0057 
12 30 0013 .0016 
13 30 0068 .0069 
20 30 0056 .0056 
30 30 -.0030  -.0029 


This table can be compared to the one on page 661, where there, 7 = 1/10, all else being equal. 
Clearly the table there is more accurate than the one here, but the one here preserves high accuracy 
as r ---» 0, whereas the table on page 661 does not [but see also page 667]. Thus, it becomes a 
trade-off of sorts; we can leave 7 = 1, if we’re satisfied with the accuracy in the table above; or we 
can lower the value of 7 to 1/10-th, say, and not worry about the loss of high accuracy as r ---» 0 
[again, see page 667 for more on this issue]. 


The following table compares the harmonic expression # with €, for the spacelike component in 
R?, which is guy = 1/(r-nsin(®) + A). Here 7 = 1, A=50 and y=1/y. The angle is 0 = 7/2, 
with singularities at (+5, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@) [similar results hold in R3]. The R 
value is negligible, in this case ... 


672 


r A Ke € 
1/2 50 0189 0188 
1 50 0155 0153 
2 50 0047 .0045 
3 50 ~.0051 —.0052 
4 50 0080  -.0079 
> 50 —.0037  -.0036 
6 50 0029 .0030 
7. 50 0060 .0060 
8 50 0035 .0034 
9 50 0017 = —.0018 

10 50 —.0049 — —.0049 
11 50 —.0035 -.0034 
12 50 0009 .0010 
13 50 0041 0041 
20 50 0034 .0033 
30 50 0018  -—.0017 


You can see from this table, that by increasing A to 50 and leaving 7 = 1, we achieve high 
accuracy, which will persist, even as r ---» 0. However, to get this kind of accuracy means a higher 
value for A, as it is now the only free variable we can change. Similar results apply to the timelike 
component; namely guy = 1 /(r-qcos(®) + A), where again, 7 = 1 and A= 50. 


And here are some snapshots from Wolfram, for the spacelike component, where 7 = 1, A= 50, r= 
.001 and @=7/2. In this case Hz + R ~ 0199962, which is extremely close to €... .. 


1 i 


. y : ¥ 1 . pf 
i((- + cos +i + ) sin ) 
(a (( 50-iy aw) ( om (ay SO+iy ( i005 
1 


dy= 
cd V-1 +y° 
-0.0180454 + 0: 
value of Hx 
Jo(0.001) 
exp(—50 0.001) 50 
V507 +1 
Result Result 
0.03804157... 0.0200000... 


value of R value of € 


673 


A Simple Case Study, Part LVII 


The following table compares the harmonic expression Hz + R with €, for the spacelike component 
in 2, which is now guy = 1/(r-nsin(0) + A). Here 7 = 1, A= 300 and y= 1/7. The angle is 0 = 
n/ 2, with singularities at (+5, 0); and 5 = 1, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(6) [similar results hold in 3, and 
also hold true for the timelike component | / (r - ycos(@) + A)]. 


r A He tR € 
000001 300 00333 00333 
00001 300 00333 00333 
0001 300 00333 00333 
.001 300 00333 00333 
O1 300 00333 00333 
Al 300 00332 00332 

1/2 300 00313 00313 
1 300 00256 00255 
2 300 00075 00075 
3 300 -.00087  -.00086 
4 300 00132 -.00132 
5 300 -.00059 =-.00059 
6 300 00050 00050 
7 300 00100 00100 
8 300 00057 00057 
9 300 -.00030 -—.00030 
10 300 —.00082 -.00082 
11 300 —.00057 -—.00057 
12 300 00016 00016 
13 300 00069 00069 
20 300 00056 00056 
30 300 ~.00029 -.00029 


The first thing to note about this table is that the R value is negligible if r > .01. The second thing 
to note is just how accurate the table is, whether r is very small or large. Now since it is the case 
that guy = 1/(r-qsin(@) + A), this means 7gu,v = 1 / (r- sin(®) + A/7). Thus, if we were content 
with values of 7 = 1/10 and A = 30 for the table on page 661; then we should also be content with a 
value of A/7 = 300 in 7gu,y, where here 7 has been normalized to | in the r- sin(@) term. And this 
is why high accuracy holds for all r > 0 here, in 7 gu,v, as per the last research note. 


To show the reader that such accuracy does not hold if 7 = 1/10 and A = 30, we note from the table 
on page 666, that high accuracy starts to break down if r ~ .01; for in this case #éz + R ~ .0303 and 
€ ~ .0333. Thus, below this threshold value of r ~ .01, high accuracy starts to degrade rather 
quickly as r decreases, if 7 = 1/10 and A = 30. Only when 7 = 1, with A sufficiently large, do we 
obtain high accuracy for all r > 0, as we now know... 


674 


A Simple Case Study, Part LVI 


In this note, we are going to provide an upper bound for the expression below [pp 668-9], where for 
the spacelike component gu,y = 1 / (r - ysin(®) + A), 7 = 1 and A = 300. 


2 
A=2/2/n = CD88 D1 (re + [A/ 3/2 
ome 


Recall this is the amount [A] that can be attributed to uncertainty in the integration of /g,,, over all 
Ux . It is a very small number indeed, especially if € ~ vn holds true; and 7 is small and A is large 
relative to 7. For if 7 =0.1, A = 30 ande ~ Vn; A is approximately 10°°, summing from k = | to 6. 


Now from the table on the previous page, we note that for r = ¥%, the R value is negligible, so that 
the values for #, and € are exactly one-tenth of the corresponding values in the table on page 661, 
where 7 = 1/10 and A = 30. We’ll now use the expression for A above, with 7 = 1/10 and A = 30 in 
gu,v[and € ~ vn ~ 1/3], to begin our calculations; and we’ll also define y = «2 / 2/n ~1/6. To 
complete the calculations, we'll simply multiply A by /n , since here, this is the equivalent of 
integrating af Mise + where 7gu,v is now 1 / (r- sin(®) + A), and A = 300 [p 673]. 


Out to roughly 500,000, I can see from plots that the zeroes [r] of Jo(r) are spaced about three 
apart, so we'll replace them with the sequence {3k—1|k=1,2,3...}. Thus, the summation S in A 
now becomes 


{1/30237 — 1/3059? + 1/3089? — 1/3113? +...} 


Taking the first two terms, we see this can be written as n = (1 / 302°”) - (1 — 1 / (305 /302)*”); and 
since (305 /302)?2 = (1+3/302)%2 ~ 1+ 9/604, we see that n ~ (1 / 30232) -9 / 613, which is 
less than (1 / 3027”) - 3 / 200. Similarly, we find by combining the third and fourth terms and 
calling it n, it is the case that n < (1 / 308%”) - 3 / 200, and so on. Thus, 


S < (3/200)- {1/302%? + 1/3089? + 1/31492+...} 


Now | / 302°” is less than the integration of 1 / x*? from x = 301 to 302; which in turn, is /ess than 
one-third of the integration of 1 / 2°? from x = 301 to 307, using some empirical analysis here. 
Similarly, the number 1 / 308%? is Jess than the integration of 1 / x*” from x = 307 to 308; which in 
turn, is Jess than one-third of the integration of 1 / x*? from x = 307 to 313, and so on. Thus, with 


the constant k = y / 200 and ¢ = 301, it is the case that 


00 


A< wf dese? 
& 


Calculating the expression just above, we find A < 10%, if 7 = 1/10 and A = 30. A virtually 
insignificant number over all Ux, along the x-axis [again, see pages 668-9]. Thus, if 7 = land A= 
300, we see that A < 1074/3 ~ 3- 10>. 


675 


A Simple Case Study, Part LIX 


Although high accuracy in the tables, for both the spacelike [S] and timelike [4] components, can 
be achieved as r ---» 0 with 7 = 1 [pp 670-3]; it was only validated if 0 = 2/2 for § and 0 = 0 for J. 
In fact, further testing shows that at 9 = 2/4, with 7 = 1, high accuracy is actually lost for S as the 
radius r ---» 0; and I suspect a similar effect holds true for J. Here are some snapshots from 
Wolfram for S$, when 6 = 1,0=72/4, r=.001, 7 =1 and A= 300... 


f. 000000 


1 
cos(0. oo1,) - |: 
4 (ni) Vy -05 al 300.5+0.707iy 300.5 -0.707iy 


1 1 
La + } 
300.5+0.707iy 300.5-0.707iy 


dy = —0.00102327 


value of Ax 
Jo(0.001 
2exp(- V2 (300.5 x 0.001) 300.5 
V2» 300.57 +0.5 
Result Result 
0.00307686... 0.00332779... 
value of R value of € 


In this case, Hz + R ~ .002, which does not match €, but we do find that high accuracy returns 
when r = .01; for here H, + R ~ .0033 and € ~ .0033, if @=a/ 4, 7 = 1 and A = 300. Thus, 
whether or not 7 = 1, high accuracy as r ---» 0, seems to be an issue which we can ignore for the 
time being; but see also page 667 on how we might deal with it ... 


676 


A Simple Case Study, Part LX 


Although high accuracy in the tables, for both the spacelike [S] and timelike [F] components, can 
be achieved as r ---» 0 with 7 = | [pp 670-3]; it was only validated if 9 = 2 / 2 for S and 6 =0 for J. 


We note again [p 673], that high accuracy [0 = 1/2] does not hold for S as r ---» 0, if 7 = 1/10 and 
A = 30, since from the table on page 666, high accuracy starts to break down if r ~ .01. For in this 
particular case, Ax + R ~ .0303 and € ~ .0333; and thus, below this threshold value of ro ~ .01, high 
accuracy starts to degrade rather quickly, as r decreases, if 7 = 1/10 and A = 30. Indeed, only when 
n = 1 with A sufficiently large in S$, do we obtain high accuracy for all r > 0, as we now know, if 
the angle 8 = 2/2 [p 673]. Yet at the same time, we have to realize that we can also achieve high 
accuracy for S if 7 = 1/10 and A = 30, provided r > ro [note that A / 7 = 300 in both cases]. And 
furthermore, we also know from page 667, that there is a way to deal with the loss of high accuracy, 
in this particular case. 


Now as we have seen, further testing shows that at @ = 2 / 4, with 7 = 1, high accuracy is actually 
lost for S as the radius r ---» 0 [p 675]; and a similar effect is likely true for J (indeed, it will be so 
atO=7/4). Yet even at 0@=7/4, with r= .001, 7 = 1 and A = 300; we see that Hz + R ~ .002 and 
€~ .003 [p 675]. 


Clearly these are fairly decent numbers for such a small value of r; and we should not expect the 
same or similar comparisons if 7 = 1/ 10 and A = 30, for this particular angle. Indeed, if r = .001, 
then éz + R ~ —.007 and € ~ .033 here; but accuracy returns if r = .01, with A + R ~ .032 and € ~ 
.033; when 0 = 2/4, 7 = 1/10, and A = 30. 


So from a philosophical standpoint, were we to make a decision about what value we should 
choose for 7, based on the information above ... which way should we go ? Both options [7 = 1/ 10 
and A = 30, versus 7 = | and A = 300], will give us high accuracy in the tables for all r > ro, and 0 
between 0 and z /2; but clearly 7 = 1 seems to do the better job as r ---» 0. Is this enough to justify 
this choice of 7, over all others ? It’s hard to say, but in the end, the answer is likely to be decided 
by the empirical evidence, for both n and A, should we decide to use § and J as our pair of ideal 
estimators in R3 ... 


677 


A Simple Case Study, Part LXI 


In this note, we wish to look at the spacelike estimator gu,y = 1 / (r-(r)sin(®) + A) from page 667, 
where (r) = 7 if r = ro ; otherwise (r) = nr / ro if it is the case that 0 < r < ro [we'll call this 
restricted range R.]. Now normally, we consider 4(r) to be an unmappable function, so that in Re 
the argument r in 7(r) does not map to its complex equivalent in the generating function f(s), nor 
the harmonic expression Ax [see also the comments on page 653]. Going forward, we’ll assume 
that 6 = 2/2 and 6 = 1, with a = cos(6), ¢ = sin(@) ... 


Now if we were to allow r in y(r) to map to its complex equivalents in R., we could ask what 
would happen here. In this case, the generating function would become 


f(s) = guy « L/yfs? + (Se)? = 1/((y/ ro) (s + 5a) - sin(@) + A) - 1/fs? + Ge)? , 


where the poles associated with the first term in f(s) are at ti/Arg /71. And by traversing the 
contour below, according to the Laplace inverse 


xfer fis)ds , 


PS 
v 
zg 
= 


/ 


we find that Res = /7% /A- sin(/arg 77-1) [fn — Ar « 


Now we see from Res that the term /7 — Arp implies ro < 7 / A“; and so in particular, when it is 
the case that 7 = 1/ 10 and A = 30 [and thus 7 ~ .01 from page 666], we now find from (*) that ro 
must, in fact, be < 1 / 300. Such an artificial constraint, brought on by mapping r in 7(r) to its 
complex equivalents in &., cannot really be justified; and so the recommendation here is to treat 
n(r), and for that matter A(r), as unmappable functions in gu,y, should they arise in the future. 


Notice too, that since Aro / 7 < 1, the poles actually lie on the y-axis between the branch points, 
which are located at +isin(8), where in this case, 9 = 2/2 and6=1... 


678 


A Simple Case Study, Part LXII 


In this note, we wish to study the ‘specialness’ of 7 = 1 in our spacelike [S] and timelike [J] esti- 
mators, when A / y is an invariant, and A is large, relative to 7. We begin with S, where here, we 
have guy = 1/(r-ysin(®) + A), with singularities at (+6, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(8), ¢ = sin(@). 


From page 658, the pole is at —p =—A/nsin(@) — a, so that Res = exp(—pr)/ Vp? + €2, and thus R is 
2. Res. Furthermore, because A / 7 is an invariant, the pole is also an invariant; and hence Res and 
R are invariants, as well. 


From the definition of gu,y, we set € = ysin(@) and let 1p = a- € + A, so that the harmonic expression 
Hx now computes to ... 


wf {cos(yr)[1/(u + iye) — 1/(u—iye)] + 
€ isin(yr)[1/(u + ive) + 1/(u— iye)]} dy //y? = & 


Factoring out | / 7 in x thus gives us an integrand where y = | in €, and A maps to A/ 7, where 7 
is what we had in Ax. And so, it must be the case that Hx = 7 - Ax, where Hx is now the harmonic 
expression associated with these new mappings for 7 and A. And similarly for € = (1/ yw) - Jo(re), 
where now E=1- €. 


Our recent notes [p 670 ff.] seem to indicate that 7 =1 gives us better accuracy as r ---» 0 in QI, 
where Q1 is defined to be r > 0 and @ between 0 and 1 / 2 [pp 670-3, 675-6]. Supposing this to be 
true if A/ 7 is an invariant, and A is sufficiently large relative to 7; we thus have Hy + R ~ E in this 
case [p 676]. And indeed, for this to be true for any 7 > 0, would mean # + R ~ E; or equivalently, 
the expression Hx/7 + R ~ E/ x must hold true, since R is an invariant here. Thus, we must 
have 4 equal to 1, and so we see the specialness of 7 = 1, in this case. Similar remarks apply to the 
timelike component J in Q1 ... .. 


The key here is to see that if A / 7 is an invariant, and if for some suitably large A relative to 7 it is 
the case that Hx + R ~ E [where 7 = 1, ris small and R is not negligible], then = 1 is unique. For 
if in this case HA + R ~ E were to hold true for some 7 > 0, then as we have shown above, 
necessarily 7 must be equal to 1. 


The result is important because it narrows our search in S and J, to a search for A, if we believe 
that reasonable to high accuracy, as r ---» 0, should be given due consideration when selecting a 
value for 7 [p 676]. 


679 


A Simple Case Study, Part LXII 


The following table compares the 
[S] in R2, which is now guy = 
writing itas Hx+R| €. 


harmonic expression Az + R with €, for the spacelike component 
/ (r- nsin(®) + A). In this table, we compare Hx + R with E by 


Here 7 = | and A = 300; and the angles are shown below, with singularities at (+6, 0); where 6 = 1, 
a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@) [similar results hold in 3, and also hold true for the timelike component [J], 


defined to be 1 / (r - ycos(®) + A) 
with A, =€=1/ A, since there is 


Note that even at the threshold of 


. We also recall that for S, testing is exact at 0 = 0 for all r > 0, 
no pole here and thus R = 0. 


ro ~ .O1, we still achieve high accuracy, which now continues for 


all r > ro and any angle 8. Indeed, even out to six decimal places high accuracy persists, as it 


should. Note that at r = .001, we 


lose high accuracy, particularly in the range 2 / 6 < @ < 2/3; but 


high accuracy returns for this radius as 0 ---» 0 or 6 ---» a / 2. Also recall that if A / 7 is an 
invariant, better accuracy is achieved as r ---> 0, if 7 = 1 [p 676]. 


0=1/4 G=n/3 O=n/2 


r 0=2/6 
.001 00150 | .00333 
O1 .00332 | .00333 
il .00333 | .00333 

1 .00312 | .00312 
2 .00255 | .00255 
3 00171 | .00170 
4 .00075 | .00075 
5 —.00016 | -.00016 
6 —.00086 | —.00086 
7 —.00126 | -.00126 
8 —.00132 |-.00132 
9 ~.00107 | -.00107 
10 —.00059 | —.00059 
20 —.00082 | —.00082 
30 —.00005 | —.00005 


00205 | .00333  .00270 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 
00330 | .00333  .00330 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 
00332 | .00332 .00332 | .00332 .00332 | .00332 


00292 | .00292 .00273 | .00273 .00256 | .00255 
00186 | .00186 .00126 | .00126 .00075 | .00075 
.00005 | .00005 -.00032 |-.00032 -.00087 |-.00086 


~.00006 |-.00006 -.00125 |-.00125 -.00132 |-—.00132 
~.00128 |-.00128 -.00118 |-.00118 -.00059 |-—.00059 
~.00123 |-.00123 -.00037 |-.00037 .00050 | .00050 


~.00065 |-.00065  .00055 | .00055 .00100 | .00100 
00015 | .00015  .00099 | .00099 .00057 | .00057 
.00077 | .00077 .00072 | .00072 -.00030 |-.00030 


00100 | .00100 0 0 ~.00082 | —.00082 
.00005 | .00005 -.00043 |-.00043  .00056 | .00056 
0 0 00052 | .00052 -.00029 |-—.00029 


680 


A Simple Case Study, Part LXIV 


In our testing so far, we have restricted ourselves to the range 0 < 7 < 1; and indeed, the statement 
“if A/ y is an invariant, better accuracy is achieved as r ---» 0, if 7 = 1’ seems to hold true here, as 
we can see in the table below. In this table, for the spacelike component; r = .001, 8 = 72/4 and n, 
A vary in such a way that A / 7 does not change. Going forward, we’ll define A to be Az +R- E... 


n A Hat+R-€E 
05 15 08394 
10 30 04043 
50 150 ~.00562 
75 225 00272 
1 300 00127 
1.5 450 00018 
2.0 600 00090 
3.0 900 00163 


Note that up to 7 = 1, A does, in fact, decrease; and were we to stop here, our statement above 
concerning accuracy, would be true for this value of r. But notice now, in the table, that at 7 ~ 1.5 
the value of A is fairly close to zero; so that for this choice of 7 > 1 [roughly], we achieve high 
accuracy. 


However, from the table on page 673, we also know that at @ = 7 / 2, high accuracy can only be 
achieved as r ---> 0, if 7 = 1 and A = 300 [in this case A ~ 0 if r= .001]. And indeed, were we to 
let 7 = 1.5 and A = 450 in that table [p 673], we would find that A ~ .00165, if r= .001. 


Thus, the statement ‘if A / 7 is an invariant, better accuracy is achieved as r ---> 0, if 7 = 1’ is really 
only consistent with the range 0 < 7 < 1. As to whether or not we want to include 7 > 1 in our 
study of ideal spacelike and timelike estimators, where A / y is an invariant; that is another matter. 
For here, the consistency we just spoke of when 0 < 7 < 1, no longer applies ... 


Finally, if guy = 1/(r- nsin(®) + A) is our spacelike component, and A / y is an invariant; then if 
WN is the normalized variant of gu,y; that is to say, W = 1 /(r- sin(®) + A/ 7); then guy > WM ifn < 1 
and guy < W if 7 > 1. Only when y = | do these inequalities vanish, if 0 < @ < 2/2. Similar 
remarks apply to the timelike component | / (r- ycos(@) + A), if 0 < 8 < 2/2. Recall again, that for 
the spacelike component, testing is exact at 0 = 0, and for the timelike component, testing is exact at 
0 =7/ 2; since in both cases there is no pole, and thus the R value is zero. 


681 


A Simple Case Study, Part LXV 


We have learned from our more recent studies, that as r ---» 0, high accuracy holds for the spacelike 
component [S] at 8 = 2/2, if 7 = 1. Similarly, as r ---» 0, high accuracy holds for the timelike 
component [J] at 8 = 0, if 7 = 1. Going forward, we shall suppose A / 7 is an invariant. 


Since testing is exact for S at 8 = 0, and exact for F at @ = 1/2, we'll simply define 7 to be | here, 
since the choice of 7 really doesn’t matter in this case. Now we could ask if for any 8 between 0 
and z / 2, there exists a fixed y and a fixed A, such that A / 7 is an invariant and as r ---> 0, high 
accuracy holds, for both § and J. 


The answer is roughly yes, as we can see in the table below, where for S; r = .0001, 0 = 2/4 and y, 
A vary in such a way that A/ 7 does not change [going forward, we’ll define A to be Az +R—- €]. 


n A Het+R-€E 
05 15 12306 
10 30 05927 
50 150 00825 
75 225 00399 
1 300 00187 
1.5 450 00026 
2.0 600 00132 
3.0 900 00238 


For here we see that if r= .0001, A ~ 0 if 7 ~ V2; and similarly on the previous page — if r= .001, A 
~ 0 if 7 ~ V2. In fact, for 7 = 1 / sin(®), high accuracy will hold for any 0 < 0 < 2/2, as r---» 0, 
where again, the choice of 7 is arbitrary if 8 = 0 [and this is the approximate generalization of page 
670]. And in this specific case; A ~ 2- 10°7 if r= .001 and A ~ 3 - 10° if r= .0001, when  ~ V2. 


But the problem with this approach is that 7 now varies with 8; and indeed, as 0 ---» 0, 7(8) ---» 20. 
And this means A ---> 00, since A / 7 is an invariant. So while we could choose 1 to be V2, for S in 
QI, where r > 0 and 0 < 0 < m/ 2; we are now also equally justified in choosing 4 = 1/ sin(®) for 
any 0 < 0 < 2/2, within reason. And once we make this choice, 7 is fixed for S in all of Q1, where 
S is defined to be 1 /(r- ysin(®) + A). And a similar argument applies to J = 1 / (r - ycos (8) + A). 


So is there a ‘best choice’ for the constant 7, given what we now know ? It does not appear there 
is, unless we appeal to the theoretical argument on page 670, which is exact for the timelike 
component as the angle @ ---» 0. And in this case, 7 = 1 as r---> 0... 


682 


A Simple Case Study, Part LXVI 


To see the power of 77 = | in action, for the spacelike component [S] when @ = 1 / 2, and the timelike 
component [J] when 6 = 0; some snapshots have been included below, when r = .000001, 7 = 1 and 
A = 300. Only here, at these angles, is it true that high accuracy is achieved as r ---» 0; and indeed, 
n = 1 is unique if A/ 1 is an invariant [p 678}. 


P 1 1 y 1 1 
i((- + } cos +i ( ) 
re (( 300-iy | 300+iy ( Tosoans? 300-iy  300+iy 
h 


nJ-14+¥ 


—0.00333131 +0: 
Jo(1x 10-*) 
exp(—300 « 1x 10-6) 300 


Result Result 


0.006664629941... 0.00333333... 


For S, just above, Hz + R computes to .00333332, whilst € = .00333333 [below Az and to the left 
is R, and to the right is €]. 


6 1 1 A -6 1 1 
i cos(1x 10° y) (sup 7 a) + isin(1x 10° y) (snp * ner dye 
: (ri) yy -0 
-0.00332026 

Input 
2 : 301 «1x10 as 

Fa on mere) 301 
Result Decimal approximation 
0.006642518573... 0.003322259136212 


For J, just above, Hz + R computes to .003322259, whilst € = .003322259 [below Hz and to the 
left is R, and to the right is €] ... .. 


683 


A Simple Case Study, Part LX VII 


A mistake was made in the calculations for the table on page 681, which has been corrected. I 
would encourage the reader to reread this page; for there we asked the question ‘if for any 0 
between 0 and 7 // 2, there exists a fixed n and a fixed A, such that A / 7 is an invariant and as the 
radius r ---» 0, high accuracy holds, for both § and J’. 


The original calculations led me to believe the answer was no, but the revised calculations indicate 
that the answer is roughly yes. In turn, this means that within reason, there is no preferred choice 
of 7 when considering high accuracy as r ---» 0; unless we defer strictly to the theoretical proof on 
page 670, where it is shown that 7 = 1 when 0 = 0, for the timelike component. 


The revision on page 681, in particular, gives consideration to the spacelike component [S], where 
now 7 = 1 / sin(®) is some fixed value in S$ = 1 / (r - nsin(®) + A), for all of QL. 


Both the tables and the calculations on pages 680 and 681 have been checked and rechecked for 
accuracy, and I am satisfied at this point that they are correct ... 


684 


Corrections 
When dealing with a function f(z) that has a pole at Zo, the residue is actually defined to be 


lim (z— zo ) f(z) 


Z---) Zo 


Thus, f(z) must be properly factored to compute this limit; and what this means for us when looking 
at the generating function for the spacetime component [S$]; namely 


f(s) = guy > 1/./s?2 + (6e)* = 1/((s + da) -nsin(6) + A) - 1/./s? + e)?, 


is that Res = exp (-pr) / nsin(®) - Jp? + 2, if 6 = 1. Similarly for the timelike component [J], 
where sin(@) is replaced with cos(®) in Res. Here S is defined to be 1 / (r - nsin(@) + A) and J is 
defined to be 1 / (r- ycos(@) + A). 


Now beginning on page 559 and going forward from there, the term 7sin() was omitted in Res for 
S, as was the term 7cos(@) in J, regrettably. But including this term in Res actually doesn’t affect 
the calculations very much, if at all, for pages 559-655; and has no effect on residue calculations 
prior to page 559. 


Indeed, most of our computations [pp 559-655] set 8 = x / 2 for S and 0 = 0 for J; where in all 
cases 7 was equal to | [the variable 7 only took on other values, starting at page 656]. Now from 
pages 640-655, all of the tables involved testing where the R value was negligible [R = 2 - Res]; 
and this won’t change under the new definition for Res above. And so, our starting point for any 
fixes is page 656, which we shall now look at. 


The first table of interest to us is on page 663, and within that table, the first nvo lines, as shown 
below ... 


r A Ha+R € 
001 30 .0300 .0333 
002 30 0332 .0333 


Under the new definition for Res, and thus R, Az + R now computes to .0333, which exactly 
matches €, for both lines above. All other lines remain the same, because R is now negligible. In 
fact, even at r = .000001, the match is exact here, thus showing us that high accuracy as r ---» 0 
does not depend on any particular value of 7 [in this case 7 = .01 and A = 30]. And similarly for the 
table on page 664. 


685 


The following table compares the harmonic expression #z + R with €, for the spacelike component 
in R2, which is now guy = 1/(r- nsin(®) + A). Here 7 varies, A = 30, and the data indicates at 
least how low we can go with r, and still achieve reasonable accuracy, for a given 7. 


The angle is 0 = 2/ 2, with singularities at (+6, 0); and 6 = 1, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(®) [similar results 
hold in R3]. This table was copied from page 666, but has now been updated for the new version of 
Res, and thus R. You can see just how accurate the data is, even down to r= .000001 ... 


r n HrtR € 
-000001 01 .0333 .0333 
-000001 02 .0333 .0333 
-000001 03 .0333 .0333 
-000001 04 .0333 .0333 
-000001 10 .0333 .0333 
-000001 .20 .0333 .0333 
-000001 90 .0333 .0333 
-000001 1 .0333 .0333 
-000001 2 .0333 .0333 
-000001 3: 0332 .0333 
-000001 4 .0330 .0333 
-000001 5 0329 .0333 


The proof on page 670, while interesting, must now change. And here, using the syntax on that 
page, the new Res tends to | / yp = 1/,, so that R tends to 2 / «as r ---y 0. Thus, we are simply left 
with the identity —1 / 1 + 2/= 1/,; and hence there is no preference for 7, when considering high 
accuracy as the radius r shrinks to zero. In this case, we are dealing with the timelike component, 
where the angle @ = 0, but you can also see the effect in the table above for the spacelike component. 


Notice too, that in the tables on pages 670-673, 7 = 1 and 0 = 1 / 2, for the spacelike element, so 
that the old and new Res are one and the same thing. The comments at the bottom of page 673 no 
longer apply, using the new Res. 


On page 675, we show some snapshots from Wolfram for $, when 6 = 1, 0=2/4,r=.001, 7 =1 
and A = 300. Here S is the spacelike component; and the old Res is being used there. Using the 
new Res, the R value now becomes ~ .00435133, since we now multiply the old Res by v2. Inso 
doing, Hx + R ~ .003328 and € ~ .003328. The two are now identical for this angle and a relatively 
small r, and it should be pointed out that there is no change to the way we calculate A and €. 


686 


The comments on page 676 are no longer valid using the new Res; and speaking of residues, the 
calculation on page 677 was done correctly. Page 678 speaks about the specialness of 7 = 1, when 
considering high accuracy as r ---» 0; but these comments are also no longer valid. 


On page 679, we prepared a rather detailed table comparing A. + R with €, by writing this using 
the expression Hz, +R| €. A portion of the table is shown below for the spacelike component [S] 
in R2, which is now gu,y = 1/(r-ysin(@) + A). Here 7 = 1 and A = 300, and we note that this data 
was compiled using the old Res. But the second table shows what happens when we use the new 
Res ... 


r 0=2/6 O=1/4 O=12/3 O=n/2 


001 00150 | .00333  .00205 | .00333 .00270 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 


r 6=72/6 O=1/4 O=12/3 O=n/2 


001 .00333 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 


Here are some snapshots from Wolfram showing us what happens at @ = z / 3 in the second table, 
just above, where the R value is below Az and to the left; whilst € is below Az and to the right. In 
this case #€x + R ~ .00332839 and € ~ .00332853. Note that the R value has now been divided by 
v3/2. 


| ie 1 
2 (ri) Vy? - 0.75 


1 1 
(<os(0.0015)( ~ IF 
300.433 +0.866iy 300.433 -0.866iy 


1 | 
i sin(o.001,)[ + JJey 
300.433+0.866iy 300.433-0.866iy 


—0.00137708 


re Jo(0.001 x ~*) 

2) exp(- <4; (300.433 « 0.001)) a at 

[2 | — 300.433 
V3! I(<2; «300.433)' + 0.75 

Result Result 


0.00470547... 0.00332853... 


687 


Thus, our spacelike and timelike estimators now demonstrate high accuracy as r ---» 0, and also 
demonstrate high accuracy as the radius r increases, away from the origin. And furthermore, the 
choice of 7 is arbitrary, so long as A is sufficiently large, relative to 7. 


The tables on pages 680-681 are no longer useful to us, as they were calculated using the old Res. 
But they did inspire me to go back and check my calculations on pages 559-62, where it all started ; 
for in these tables I saw patterns in the numbers, that indicated to me something was amiss with the 
way Res was being calculated. The calculations on page 682 are acceptable, because there the old 
and new Res agree. Page 683 is simply some commentary on where I was with my thoughts, on 
that day ... 


Note that the invariance principle for the harmonic equation Hz + R ~ € on pages 642-6, still holds 
for the new Res = exp(—pr) / nsin(0) - Jp? + €?, in the case of the spacelike component [S], if 6 = 1. 
If 7 or @ ---» 0, the dominant term in the pole —p = —A / nsin(®) — a is —A / ny sin(@), so that the 
denominator in Res is now ~ A. The numerator in Res now tends to zero, and thus, so does the R 
value. 


Thus, there are no convergence issues with Res here, and similarly for the timelike component [J], 
where Res = exp(—pr) / ncos(0) - Jp? + €?, and 7 ---» 0 or 0 ---» 2 / 2. In this particular case, the 
pole —p =—A/ncos(®) — a, if 6 = 1. We presume, of course, that A > 0. 


688 


Are 1 / (r+ nsin() + A) and 1 / (r- qcos(0) + A)* Ideal Estimators For All B > 0 


In this note, we wish to investigate the possibility that 1 / (r - ysin(®) + A) and 1 / (r- neos(@) + A)* 
are ideal estimators, for any real number B > 0, provided A is sufficiently large, relative to 7. We 
now know this is so if B = 1, in so much as high accuracy holds true for r > 0 and 0 < 0 < m/ 2; 
where the choice of 7 and A are arbitrary, but greater than zero [pp 684-7]. 


Let us begin with B = %, where 7 = 1, A = 300, 8 = 7/2, and r= .001, for the spacelike estimator 
[S]. In this case, we use the example on pages 556-7, according to the contour below, where the 
branch point —p = —A, 6 = 1, and a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(®). Thus, the R value is the integration over the 
horizontal branch lines, doubled. Again, S = 1 / (r - nsin(®) + A)’ and FJ =1/(r- ncos(0) + A). 


idsin(6) 


-i8sin(8) 


Here are the snapshots from Wolfram, where R is below Az and to the /eft, whilst € is below Hx 
and to the right. Now Hz + R ~ .0577343 and € ~ .0577350, and the two are remarkably close; so 
this is our first hint that we have a family of ideal estimators for S and J, for all B > 0. 


: 1 1 y : 1 1 «(2 
i|| -—— _ + —— ]cos + i| —— + —— Jsin 
re (( ¥300-iy  \300s1y ) (00 ) ( ¥300-iy  \300+/y ) (000 )) 
i 


dy= 
ny-1+y 
0.00709185 
Jo(0.001) 
¥300 


~10000 2. g(-300-xy'1000 
{ dx = 0.0506424 


bax 1+ (300 +x)7 KEEL 


0.0577350... 


689 


Now we’ll set r = 2, and repeat the testing. In this case the R value is negligible, and here are the 
snapshots for #z and €, which also agree rather well. 


: 1 1 : 1 1 - 
i((- \300-1y - \300+iy Jeos(ay) * i( \300-iy (300+ )sinfay)) 


rn 
o dy= 
1 ny-14+y 


0.0129818 


Decimal approximation 


0.012926340160626 


Now we’ll set B = 2 and r = .001, with all other parameters the same as above. In this case the 
generating function is ... 


S(s) = Suv - 1/ ys? + (68)? = 1/(s+ Ay - 1/Vs? +1, 


and the pole p at —A is of order 2; so Res is calculated as lim s -- p {(s — p)* f(s) exp(sr)}', where 
the tick means differentiate with respect to s. And this computes to 


Res = [r+A/(A?+1)]- [1 / VA? +1] - exp(-Ar). 


Here are the snapshots from Wolfram, where R is below Az and to the left, whilst € is below Hx 
and to the right. Now Hx + R ~ 0000111109, which is remarkably close to €... 


3 i((- 1_+—1 ) cos * )+i( +_4— ) sin( 5) 
| aa (300-iy}? — (300+/y/? 1000 (300-iyP — (300+4y/? 1000 
1 


a dy= 
ny-1+y 
-0.0000102902 + 07 
Jo(0.001) 

2 [( 001 =o } : (—300 = 0. oon) ~~ 

.! + ——— |X oe E 

300° +1) {3007 +1 

Result Result 


0.0000214011... 0.0000111111... 


690 


And here are the images when f = 2 and r = 2, with all other parameters the same. In this case, the 
R value is negligible. Note that the agreement is fairly decent for the integration range, which is as 
high as I could go on Wolfram for this value of r ... 


: 1 1 z 1 f . 
26000 i((- (300-iy? + (300+iy? Jeos(2y ) +i des * sootae) sin(2y ) 
f dy= 
1 


2.53042 x 10% 


Decimal approximation 


2.4876753237915074 
567615... x 10° 


Thus, at this point, from the empirical evidence above, we can say with reasonable confidence that 
S=1/(r- ysin(@) + A)P and F=1/(r- ncos(@) + A)? are very likely ideal estimators for all B > 0, 
if A is sufficiently large relative to 7 ... 


Here is the complete table from page 679, using the new Res [pp 684-7]; which compares the 
harmonic expression Hz + R with €, for the spacelike component [S] in R?. Note that $ is defined 


691 


A Few More Things 


to be 1 /(r- nsin(®) + A). In this table, we compare Hz + R with E€ by writing it as H.+R| €. 


Here 7 = | and A = 300; and the angles are shown below, with singularities at (+6, 0); where 6 = 1, 
a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@) [similar results hold in 3, and also hold true for the timelike component [J], 
defined to be 1 / (r - ycos(8) + A)]. We also recall that for S, testing is exact at 6 = 0 for all r > 0, 


with #, = €=1/A, since there is no pole here and thus R = 0. 


Note that high accuracy will persist, even down to r ~ .000001 [and likely lower], using the new 
Res [pp 684-7]; and that the choice of 7 > 0 is arbitrary, so long as A > 0 is sufficiently large, 


relative to 7. Also note that at r ~ .03 [and higher], the R value is negligible. 


ig 0=2/6 0=1/4 G=n/3 O=n/2 
.001 00033 | .00333 .00033 | .00333  .00033 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 
O1 .00333 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 00333 | .00333 .00333 | .00333 
il .00333 | .00333 .00332 | .00332 .00332 | .00332 .00332 | .00332 
1 00312 | .00312 .00292 | .00292 .00273 | .00273 .00256 | .00255 
2, 00255 | .00255 .00186 | .00186 .00126 | .00126 .00075 | .00075 
3 00171 | .00170 .00005 | .00005 -.00032 |-.00032 -.00087 |-.00086 
4 .00075 | .00075 -.00006 |-.00006 -.00125 |-.00125 ~-.00132 |-.00132 
ss) ~.00016 |-.00016 -.00128 |—.00128 -.00118 |—.00118 -.00059 |-—.00059 
6 —.00086 |-.00086 -.00123 |-.00123 -.00037 |-.00037 .00050 | .00050 
7 —.00126 |-.00126 -.00065 |-.00065  .00055 | .00055 .00100 | .00100 
8 ~.00132 |-.00132  .00015 | .00015  .00099 | .00099 = .00057 | .00057 
9 ~.00107 |-.00107 —.00077 | .00077 ~—_.00072 | .00072 -.00030 | -—.00030 
10 —.00059 |-.00059  .00100 | .00100 0 0 ~.00082 | —.00082 
20 —.00082 |-.00082  .00005 | .00005  -.00043 |-.00043 .00056 | .00056 
30 —.00005 |-.00005 0 0 00052 | .00052 -.00029 |-—.00029 


Some additional testing was done on the spacelike component S = 1 / (r’ - ysin(®) + A), and also on 
the component § = 1 / (r - ysin’(@) + A), where v > 0. In the first case, testing was not acceptable 
{or free from artificial constraints (p 677) when calculating Res] if v # 1; but in the second case, 


high accuracy was achievable on the testing that was done, when @ = 1/4. 


692 


Here are some snapshots from Wolfram, for the second case, when y = 1, A = 300, and v = 2; with 
singularities at (+5, 0), where 5 = 1, a = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@). Note that the pole —p is —A / sin"(®) — a, 
and that Res computes to exp(—pr) / nsin’(@) - /p? + €2, if 6 = 1 [pp 684-7]. In these snapshots, just 
below; r= .01, and R is below #, and to the left; whilst € is below #, and to the right. In this case 
KH. + R ~ 00332939, which is very close to € ~ .00332937. 


1 1 i si 1 1 
iG cos(0.01y) (seasnasy ~ mmsass) ais sin(0.01y) (a5sn0s iy = mass) dy = 0.003313 
a (ri) Wy -0.5 


Jo(0.01 
2exp(—600.707 * 0.01) 300.353 


 600.707° + 0.5 


1 
2 
Result Result 


0.0000163893... 0.00332937... 


When r = 2, the R value is negligible, and here are the snapshots for Az and €, where we see that 
the agreement is fairly decent ... 


1 1 Ft 1 1 
cos(2. (sosstoen ~ oastasy) tésin(2 (sateen t momen) 
| ( y) 300.35340.5iy  300.353-0.Siy ( y) 300.35340.5iy  300.353-0.Siy 


(ri) Vy? -0.5 


al~ 


Vv 


dy = 0.00186372 


Result 


0.00186159... 


693 


A Few More Things, Part II 


In the case of the spacelike component, S$ = 1 / (r’ - nsin(®) + A), some progress has been made 
when v = ¥2; and we’ll also discuss the case when v = 2. The generating function for S is 


S(s) = 1/ {((s + 6a)” nsin(O) + A) y's? + (6)? }, 
and if 7 =1,0=2/2, v= % and 6 = 1; this function reduces to 


fis) = 1/1 {(s" + A) Vs™ +4}. 


idsin(6) 


-idsin(8) 


If we now agree that in the contour y above, s" is positive along the positive x-axis, where v = ¥2; 
then we can use y to find the R value [a doubling of the expression below, along the horizontal 
branch lines], by setting the branch point p to zero. We do this because of the s’ term in the denom- 
inator of f(s). 


xfer Sis)ds 


In so doing, we find that R computes to 
oo 
(2/n) S Vxexp(-rx) / ((x + A?) Vx? +1) dx 
° 


and here are some snapshots from Wolfram, when r= .001 and A = 300 ... 


694 


In the snapshots that follow; r = .001, and R is below Az and to the left; whilst € is below Hz and 
to the right. In this case Az + R ~ .003327, which is close to € ~ .003333. 


A 1 1 P . 1 1 . EA 
il|- + cos +i + sin| 
(( 300+y-iy 300+ yiy ) ( rf (ae 300+Viy ) ( 33)) 


re 
1 ny-1l+y* 


dy = 0.00294503 


Jo(0.001) 
300 
"10000 2 e-*/1000 vx 
f ——— dx = 0.000382325 
0 (90000 +x) ¥1+427 7 
Result 
0.00333333... 


In the snapshots that follow; r = 1, and R is below #z and to the left; whilst € is below Az and to 
the right. In this case At + R ~ .0025502, which is very close to € ~ .0025506. 


i(( 14 = Jeosy) +: 14 += Jing) 


300+\-1y — 300+yiy 300+y-1y 3004 yiy 


{ 
1 nm -14+y" 


0.00254625 


a 20% vx 300 
{ __2etve 3.99946 x 10° 
© 1(90000+x) 1427 


Decimal approximation 


0.002550658955193 


Thus, the estimator § = 1 / (r’ - ysin(®) + A) looks promising if v = %; but unfortunately if v = 2, 
then with 0 = 2/2, and 6 = 1, Res computes to 


V1/A-sin(/A/n-n/Jn-A, 


thereby placing an artificial constraint on A, in so much as A must now be less than 7 [p 677]. 


695 


A Few More Things, Part IIT 


On pages 563-5, using a rather intuitive approach, we showed that the R value over the branch lines 
U and £ (before doubling), computed to the the following, after replacing .707 with V2 /2 in the 


original integrals on page 564. Here, we wanted to know if 1 / (Vr# + A*) was a suitable template 
for Cu,y ~ ogu,(0), where A > 0; and in this case,6=0, A= 1,r=1. 


“12 jeA-p/V2 -x 
f ===": dX = 0.0581038 + 0.0702193 i 
) 


(= +x) 14+(= +x)" 


“12 je (to/V2 -x 
f dx = 0.0581038 — 0.0702193 i 
lo 


(4 +x) 1+ (+x) 


We then went on to say in Part II [pp 570-2], that by using phases, the same should hold true; and 


indeed, on page 571 produced the integrals for U& and £ below, that very closely match the results 
above in Part I... 


i’ exp(—(x + 0.707 — 0.707 i)) 


° a( + 0.707 — 0.707 i) y (x (0.707 + 0.707 i) + 1)4-1 ) 
0.0581305 + 0.0702366 i 


dx= 


“12 exp(—(x + 0.707 + 0.707 i)) 


(ce + 0.707 + 0.707 i) V (x (0.707 — 0.707 i) + 1)*-1 ) 


0.0581305 — 0.0702366 i 


dx= 


And when we replace .707 with V2/2, in the integrals just above, we obtain an exact match with the 
Jirst set of integrals at the top of the page, in keeping with our comments on page 572 ... 


“12 etl N2-« 
f dx = 0.0581038 + 0.0702193 i 
+ 4 
7 (22 +2 -14(14 Se 
v2 vz 
“12 ethti/ N2-x 
f dx = 0.0581038 — 0.0702193 i 


696 


A Few More Things, Part IV 


In the case of the spacelike component, S$ = 1 / (r” - nsin(®) + A), some progress has been made 
when v = ¥; and we’ll also briefly discuss the case when v = 3. The generating function for S is 


f(s) = 1/ {((s + 8a)”: nsin(O) + A) V's? + (6)? }, 
and if 7 =1,0=2/2,v=¥% and 6 = |; this function reduces to 


fis) = 1/1 {(s" +A) Vs™ FT}. 


idsin(6) 


-idsin(8) 


Since the phases along the upper and lower horizontal branch lines are x and —1, respectively; the 
term s” + A is not zero here if s = —A*, when v = ¥3. Thus, we can use the contour y above to find 
the R value [a doubling of the expression below, along the horizontal branch lines], by setting the 
branch point p to zero. We do this because of the s” term in the denominator of f(s). 


«J efs)ds 
In so doing, we find that R computes to 
oo 
(2/1) Se exp(—rx) sin(1/3) / ((x"? exp(iz/3) + A) (x! exp(-in/3) + A) Vx? +1) dx 
° 


and here are some snapshots from Wolfram, when r= .001 and A = 300 ... 


697 


In the snapshots that follow; r = .001, and R is below #, and to the left; whilst € is below Hx and 
to the right. In this case Aa + R ~ .003326, which is close to € ~ .003333. 


: (- ES = PE Jos Z)+i( te a PE sin( 3) 
h 


7 n-14+y 


dy = 0.00318002 
Jo(0.001) 


300 


dx = 0.00014553 Result 


a. NE} e-/1000 
(300 +e (ls/3 x) (300 + off V/3 x) Vl4x 


0.00333333... 


In the snapshots that follow; r= 1, and R is below Az and to the /eft; whilst € is below Hz and to 
the right. In this case Az + R ~ .0025477, which is close to € ~ .0025506. 


; 1 1 ; 1 1 : 
sooo * ( 300+ iy + iy Jose is ( 300+¥-iy 7 300+ Yay J sino) 


J lay ia 
0.00254407 
JoQ) 
300 


oo 3 en dx 
> (300+ els fx) (300 +el'*/3 qx) VI+2 


dx = 3.68181 x 10% 


Decimal approximation 


0.002550658955193 


Thus, the estimator § = 1 / (7” - ysin(®) + A) looks promising if v = ¥; but if v = 3, simple poles 
exist when s” + A=0. These poles are at A! and A" - exp(+iz/3); and so the first issue we face 
is whether to include the complex poles in the contour y, by setting Re(AB) > A! . cos(a/3), since 
A is always greater than 0. We'd have to test both ways — with and without the complex poles — 
and see if either approach gives us a match for Hx + R ~ €. Personally, I’m not optimistic here, and 
while our testing, for the most part, has been successful for these variants [p 688 ff.]; I still believe 
that the best choice for our ideal estimators is the simplest choice; namely 1 / (r - ysin(@) + A)é and 
1/(r- noos(®) + A)’, where B is equal to 1 ... 


698 


Are 1 / (r+ nsin(®) + A)? and 1 / (r- qcos(0) + A)’ Ideal Estimators For All B > 0, Part II 
In this note, we’ll look at the time component JF = 1 / (r - ycos(@) + A)®, when B = % and A is 
sufficiently large, relative to 7. We now know that if B = 1, high accuracy holds true here, for r > 0 
and 0 < @ < 2/2; where the choice of 4 and A are arbitrary, but greater than zero [pp 684-7]. 
The generating function for this case is 
f(s) = 1/ {((s + 8a)- yoos(0) + A)? /s? + (Se)? }, 
where o = cos(@), ¢ = sin(@); and if 7 = 1,0 =0, B = % and 6 = 1, this function reduces to 
f(s) = 1/{(s +A 4+ 1)8 Vs? +0}. 
Let us set A = 300 and r = .001, for the timelike estimator [J]. In this case, then, the branch point 


is at p =—(A + 1); so that the R value is the integration over the horizontal branch lines, doubled, 
in the contour y as shown below ... 


isin(®) 


-iésin(®) 


In this case, the R value computes to 


21m) f exp-rex + p)/ VE +p) dx 


oO 


and here are the snapshots from Wolfram, where R is below Sx and to the left, whilst € is below 
Hz and to the right. Now Hx + R ~ .0576384 and € ~ .0576390, and the two are remarkably close, 
as we can see in the calculations ... 


699 


\301-4y = 301+/y 


{= nye 


0.00716783 


: 1 1 y ri 1 1 - 7 y 
i ——— ++ —=——— | 0 +i + ——— |sii 
+1000000 (( ) s( Too0 } ( Y301-iy —-301+iy ) n( 25)) 


1 


V301 


10000 2 g(-301-x/1000 
. ——— dx = 0.0504706 
Decimal approximation 


n x (301 +x) 
0.057639041770423 


Now we'll set 7 = 2, and repeat the testing. In this case the R value is negligible, and here is the 
snapshot for Hx, which agrees closely with € above. 


1 


, 1 1 - 1 . 
16000 i(( 301-1 + \301+i1y )cos(2y) + i( \301-iy + \301+iy )sin(2y)) 


| ny 


0.057639 


dy = 


In the case of the timelike component, J = | / (r’ - ncos(®) + A), some progress has been made when 
v=. The generating function for J is 


fis) = 1/ {((s + 8a)": neos(®) + A) Js? + (68)}. 


where o = cos(@), € = sin(9); and if 7 = 1,0 =0, v= % and 6 = 1, this function reduces to 


f(s) = 1/{(s + 1)" +A) Vs? F 0}. 


700 


Tf we now agree that in the contour y above, (s + 1)" is positive along the x-axis if s > —1, where v = 
¥; then we can use y to find the R value [a doubling of the expression below, along the horizontal 
branch lines], by setting the branch point —p to—1. We do this because of the (s + 1)” term in the 
denominator of f(s). 


xfer fis) ds 


In so doing, we find that R computes to 


(2/1) S veer: +1))/ (r+ A®) (x + LD) dx 


oO 


In the snapshots that follow; r = .001, and R is below Az and to the left; whilst € is below Hx and 
to the right. In this case Ax + R ~ .00332227, which is very close to € ~ .00332226. 


; 1 1 y : 1 1 inf 2. 
- + Cos| ——— | + +——= |sni— 
| ae i(( 300+\1-iy — 3004y1 ) (sono (sone cd (cs ) 


dy = 0.00294979 


10000 2 g(-1-xy1000 Vx 301 
f ———————_ dx = 0.000372483 
0 (14x) (90000 + x) 


Decimal approximation 
0.003322259136212 


In the snapshots that follow; r = 1, and R is below #z and to the left; whilst € is below Az and to 
the right. In this case Az + R ~ .00332229, which is very close to € ~ 00332226. 


= dy= 


0 ry 


0.00332118 


. 1 1 : 1 1 
ty -——— + — = |cosy) +? ( = +. = 
, (( 300+V1-iy 300+ 1+iy ) & 300+V1-iy — 300+y/1 


dx = 1.11675 10 
m(1+x) (90000 + x) Decimal approximation 


fe 2e1> Vx 301 


0.003322259136212 


Let us recall too, that € = gu,.(6a) - Jo(dre), where da is a radial measure, and that testing for the 
timelike component is exact if 0=1/ 2... 


701 


A Necessary Condition For Pseudo-Roots 


In previous research, we discussed the undecidable nature of pseudo-roots, when looking at the 
Riemann Hypothesis [pp 302-4, 315-16, 342-3, 359, 376-83]. 


Initially, we showed by the use of Fourier transforms, that we could generate a signal S$ from either 
the a-line or the B-line in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line [pp 294-6]; where here, it is 
the case that @ is a root or pseudo-root of Cs), lying on both the a-line and the B-line. Thus, it is 
the case that ¢(p) = C(q), where p = a + ie, and gq = B + ée, for some ¢ > 0 and B=1-a. 


a-path 


B-path 


From Riemann’s Functional Equation, as shown below and labelling as (*) ... 


(8) = 20° sin( SP — 8) 8) 


we see immediately that by setting s = p in (*), and calling this equation (1); and by setting s = g in 
(*), and calling this equation (2); we arrive at the following result, after dividing (1) by (2) ... 


(2n)8~ sin(xg / 2) TA — 4) / sin@ep /2) Tp) = |CMP/IG)P 


Defining the /eft-hand side of (7) to be w, the first thing we note is that along the critical line, 
where a = B = ¥%, w is equal to 1, which agrees with the right-hand side of (7). And this is because 
p =q on this line. 


Now in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line — if p and g are pseudo-roots, so that C(p) = C(q) 
#0; then y must also be equal to | in (+). But since pseudo-roots are not verifiable, the statement 
w = | cannot be verified in this case. We can simply say that y = 1, but nothing more; and this is 
the necessary condition for pseudo-roots in C*. 


On the other hand, if y = 1, then from (+) we see that |C(p)| =| C(q) |®, in which case p and q may 
or may not be pseudo-roots. If they are, yw = 1 cannot be verified; but if they aren't, our 
methodology cannot say if ({) is or isn't an undecidable state, since the condition C(p) # &(q) 
excludes p and qg from the analysis [pp 382-3] in this case. 


702 


Now let’s consider the state C(p) + C(q) = C(p) + Gq), so that at p, we are comparing the /eft-hand 
side of (§) with the right-hand side of (§), at g. If ¢(p) = C(q), then p and g are pseudo-roots and (§) 
is an undecidable state. And this is because the /eft-hand side of (§) is now 2C(p), and the right- 
hand side of (§) is now 2€(q). 


On the other hand, if C(p) # C(q), then for an observer ©, in the signal’s frame of reference, that is 
situated at p or q, (§) is most certainly not undecidable. © is ‘blind to the line’ and so, won’t know 
if it’s really at p or at g [pp 382-3], but will know that (§) is always true, in this case. And thus, the 
points (p, g) are excluded by ©, based solely on algebraic considerations. 


But since @ knows C(p) # G(q)™, then © will know that being situated at p is not the same as being 
situated at g. © is still ‘blind to the line’ but now knows there is a difference between €, and é,, at p 
versus at g, because of (3). However, relative to the signal S, it should never be possible to detect 
such a difference between €, and és, at these two points“ [pp 382-3]. 


And so, the condition C(p) # €(q) excludes p and qg from the analysis, in this case, as it should. And 
this is based solely on (4), which is the exclusion principle [Pf]. Thus, the algebraic approach 
supports #, and conversely, # supports the algebraic approach, in this instance. But we can go 
further now and conclude that our analysis on pp 382-3 is also correct, in so much as (4) is indeed 
true, at the point level. 


Thus, we see the importance of the exclusion principle here. Were we to disregard this principle, in 
general; then on the previous page, we might have concluded that | C(p) | = | (gq) | was an 
undecidable state for all (p, q) on the lines & and és, respectively, where ({) was true. But this is 
not necessarily so ... 


The notes above have been rewritten somewhat, to clarify the exclusion principle, and justify its 
use, particularly on pages 382-3. There, we came to the conclusion that roots and pseudo-roots 
cannot be verified in @* ... 


To show that pseudo-roots may exist, consider the case where p = % + 6.288i, and q = 94 + 6.288. 
The moduli squared and values for {C(p), G(g)} are shown below; and while they are not pseudo- 
roots in this case, it is quite possible that pseudo-roots might exist somewhere in @*, even though 
they are not verifiable. Notice here how close the moduli squared are to one another. 


{|c(0.25 + 6.288), \c(0.75 + 6.288.)|*} {¢(0.25 + 6.288 i), (0.75 + 6.288 i)} 


{0.91657 


. 0.916583} {0.86573 + 0.408758 i, 0.90174 + 0.321635 i} 


703 


Now consider the case where s = %4 + 6.289, and t = %4 + 6.289%. The moduli squared and values 
for {C(s), C(t)} are shown below; and while they are not pseudo-roots in this case, we note here that 
| G(s) P > |G P, whereas in the previous case just above, | C(p) - < | Cg) P. 


{|c(0.25 + 6.289%)|°, |¢(0.75 + 6.289 :)/} {0.25 + 6.2891), ¢(0.75 + 6.289 i)} 


{0.916969, 0.916909} {0.865919 + 0.408843 i, 0.901899 + 0.321695 i} 


Thus, as we move from (p, q) to (s, t), we see from a continuity argument, that there must be some & 
such that 6.288 <  < 6.289; and u = %4 + ie and v = % + ie, for which | Gu) P =| (v) ?. Clearly w 
and v won’t be pseudo-roots, but the argument does tell us that | C(p) | = | C(g) | is not a fully 
undecidable state if C(p) # C(q), more generally. And in this particular case, ¢ ~ 6.28817, as we can 
see in the images below ... 


{|c(0.25 + 6.288174), |¢(0.75 + 6.28817;)/} —_{¢(0.25 + 6.288174), ¢(0.75 + 6.28817 :)} 


{0.916638, 0.916638} {0.865762 + 0.408772 i, 0.901767 + 0.321645 i} 


In fact, there are probably infinitely many (p, g) in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line, for 
which ({) is true; where p = a + ée and q = B + ée, for some ¢ 2 0; and B = 1 — a with C(p) 4 ((q). 
Still the mystery remains if p and q are pseudo-roots, so that C(p) = ((g). For here our methodology 
implies they cannot be verified in @* ... 


Some additional commentary was added to the notes above. In particular, an estimate for ¢ is 
shown in the second set of images on this page ... 


704 


On The Implicit and Explicit Nature of The Fourier Transforms 
Concerning The Riemann Hypothesis 


From page 294, let us bring back one of the Fourier transforms that is directly involved in our 
analysis of the Riemann Hypothesis [&]. 


(oo) 


S {(A+C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
° 


ne™!~®{9(1 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {UI —a +22}... (3) 


Now we said there, that the following coefficients implicitly reference the a-line, 


A = {(atiy—is) + (a—iy +ie)}/2 
B = {(a+iy—ie) — a—iy +ée)}/ 26 
C = {Catiy+ic) + Q(a—iy—ie)}/2 
D = {atiy+ie) — (a—iy—ie)}/2i, 


but we can go further now, and note that in the coefficients; both y and ¢ can be thought of as real 
variables that attach to the a-line [€:] as imaginary parts. Seen in this light, (3) becomes a Fourier 
transform over a, and the reference is no longer just implicit; but rather explicit. 


And similarly for the Fourier transform on page 295 over the B-line [€]; namely 


JS toncostyndy, 
where 
fy) = (e+y)/(B+e+y) + @-y/P+e-y). 
and the denominators can be written as 
(P+ ery?) = G+e+yGB-+y 
(+ (e-y) = B+ -yB-(e-y’) 


The Fourier transform over é is now no longer just implicit; but rather explicit, where the variables 
y and ¢ attach to the B-line as imaginary parts. 


Notice too, that for this transform over 65, it is to be multiplied by the constant —2« /{(1 — a)? + £7}, 
which is equal to —2e /{ B? + e?}; and thus the constant attaches to the B-line quite naturally [p 295]. 


705 


The offset to (3) is (1/2) g(0), where g(s) = Ga — s + ie) + (a — s — ie); and for pseudo-roots, 
computes to the same value, whether we are on €, or é; [pp 302-3]. So we needn’t worry about 
which line we are calculating on here ... 


In the diagram above, the Fourier transform in (3) occurs explicitly along €., because y and € attach 
to the a-line. However, the Fourier transform in (*) [previous page] occurs explicitly along &, 
because y and ¢ now attach to the B-line. Using the methods on pp 294-5, the entire signal S in (3), 
and shown below, can be generated either from & or &;, where here two Fourier transforms are 
actually used on é, along with their respective constants. 


net (9(1 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / (1-0)? + &?} 


Now when we look at S, just above, we notice the parameter ¢ appears; and indeed, if S was gener- 
ated from the Fourier transform on &, we could say in S that ¢ attaches to &. On the other hand, if 
S was generated from the Fourier transforms on &, then we could say in S that ¢ attaches to &. 


Thus, asking ‘which line’ the signal S came from, is equivalent to asking which line ¢ actually 
attaches to in S. We could also ask ‘which line’ the signal S came from, relative to the Fourier 
transforms themselves, as we do in previous notes; and hence the equivalency between the two 
approaches here. Either way, it is not possible to decide; and this is why it is not possible to decide 
which line [€, or é] the root or pseudo-root, itself, actually comes from. 


Said a little differently, there is no way to distinguish the root or pseudo-root on €, from the root or 
pseudo-root on és, and hence there is no mathematical method M which can prove their existence in 
@* — the critical strip minus the critical line — or disprove their existence in @* without ambiguity 
[pp 376-83]. In short, roots and pseudo-roots cannot be verified in @* ... 


706 


Are All States In C* Decidable If €(p) # C(q) ? 


So far, we’ve discussed three states in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line — that are 
decidable; where the term decidable means there exists at least one pair of points (p, g) for which 
the state is true. Here p = a + ie, and g = 8 + ie, for some ¢ 2 0, and B = 1 — ain @*. These three 
states are: ((p) # C(q), Ep) + 6g) = Kp) + (q) where C(p) # C(q), and | Cp) | = | 6(q) |, where 
again C(p) # ((q). 


The first and second states above are all (p, g) on & and &, respectively, after removing all roots 
and pseudo-roots from these two lines; thereby making both (1) and (2) everywhere true, and thus 
fully decidable states [pp 701-3]. The third state, however, is just decidable at this point in time 
[pp 701-3]. 


So the question, quite naturally, arises as to whether all states in @* are decidable, if C(p) # C(q). 
This question, in its broadest form, now becomes the natural extension to the Riemann Hypothesis 
in its original form, concerning the zeroes of C(s) in the critical strip. At the present time, I don’t 
believe we can answer the question, one way or the other; but do feel further research is warranted 
here ... 


707 


The Game of Darts and Pseudo-Roots 


Imagine playing a game of darts, where the dartboard is of arbitrary radius, and darts are randomly 
thrown at the board, two at a time. 


We shall imagine the game goes on forever; and we observe that most of the time, the two darts 
land at different distances from the center [C] of the board, and at different angles relative to the x- 
axis [this horizontal axis splits the dartboard in half]. 


Sometimes, the darts land equidistant from C, but at different angles; and on rare occasions, the 
darts land on top of each other. This last outcome is akin to | C(p)| = | C(q) |, where C(p) = C(q) #0, 
and it is the case that p = a + ie, q=B tic, ¢ > 0 and B = | —a in C* — the critical strip minus the 
critical line. In other words, pseudo-roots, which can’t be verified. 


Now in our analogy using the dartboard, it is the randomness of ‘throwing darts’ that leads to 
different outcomes; and we could argue the same will be true for justifying the existence of pseudo- 
roots in the infinitely long strip; namely @*. The underlying generator of randomness in @* that 
could well lead to the existence of pseudo-roots is the zeta function itself [C(s)]; and there can be no 
doubt that in @*, C(s) is extremely volatile when walking any particular a-line here, both in terms of 
magnitude and phase. 


If G(p) = Cg) = 0, this is akin to two darts landing on the dartboard at its center C; again, something 
that will happen on rare occasions driven by the underlying randomness, itself. Thus, whether it’s 
roots or pseudo-roots in @*, there is a good chance that the random nature of C(s) allows for their 
existence, even though they can never be verified ... 


In the images below, we look at the values of ((p) and C(q) and their magnitudes, when a = % and 
B = %; with ¢ = 116 and 117. You can see from the images just how much they change, over such 
a small range for ¢ ... 


708 


{c(0.25 + 1164), ¢(0.75 + 1164), |¢(0.25 + 116 i)}, |¢(0.75 + 116 &)]} 


{0.1092 - 1.43577 i, 0.694317 - 0.0215604 i, 1.43991, 0.694652} 


es + Re 


-10 


0.0 05 10 1S 


{¢(0.25 + 1174), ¢(0.75 + 1174), \¢(0.25 + 117 )], ¢(0.75 + 1174)]} 


{1.46907 + 3.39011 i, 1.38817 + 1.11195 i, 3.69473, 1.77861} 


& 


709 


SOME MORE THOUGHTS ON THE RANDOMNESS OF ((s) 


Now let’s go back and discuss the case where the two darts land equidistant from C, but at different 
angles relative to the x-axis‘! [the horizontal axis splits the dartboard in half]. This is akin to the 
state |G(p) | = | C(g) |”. where C(p) # C(q); and we have already proved that (p, q) exist for which (2) 
is actually true [pp 701-3]. Indeed, for a= % and B = %4, ¢ = 6.28817. 


Since the dart game [9] goes on forever, we expect (1) to occur infinitely often; and indeed, we 
also expect (2) to be true infinitely often as well, in @*. For if we proved the existence of one such 
pair where (2) holds, with C(p) # C(q), it is likely true for infinitely many pairs. Supposing this to 
be the case, we can now argue that the inherent randomness associated with C(s) in @*, is roughly 
the same as the inherent randomness of , when comparing (1) and (2), where C(p) # C(g). And 
this is an important observation, in my opinion. 


Now since on rare occasions, the darts land on top of each other; which is akin to |C(p)| = | G(q) |” 
where C(p) = C(q); and since we now know the inherent randomness of C(s) in @* is similar to the 
inherent randomness of 9; we should also expect (3) to hold true in @*, when C(p) = ((q). That is to 
say, there is a good chance that roots and pseudo-roots really do exist in C*, even though they can’t 
be verified, if we embrace this rather heuristical argument ... 


The following images plot the function f(a) = |C(a + ie)? — |((1 — a + ie)P, where 1/5 < a < 4/5. 
Notice how close f(a) comes to touching the x-axis, when a. # ¥% and ¢ =200z:; and how different the 
behavior is for f(a) here, versus € =1997x and ¢ =2011. This could be evidence for (2) above, when 
C(p) # C(qg) in C*, for larger values of € ... 


\ \ 
aa \ 
ss 
Og o4 03 06 07 0.8 Os O4 05 06 —~07 08 
we. \ 
\ 
\ 

50 \ \ 

\ 5 § 
x 
€= 1997 e€= 2002 


€=201n 


710 


The Game of Darts and Pseudo-Roots, Part IT 


Consider the following three states in @*: |C(p)| #|C(q) | where C(p) # Gq); |G(p)| = | Gg) | where 
Cp) # Cg); and |C(p)| =| C(g) | where C(p) = Cg). Here, we have p = a tie, g=P +ée, ¢ > Oand 
B = 1 — a; where again, we are in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line. 


The first state is akin to two darts landing on the dartboard at different distances from its center C, 
and is fully decidable, after removing all (p, g) from the lines on é, and é;, for which (2) is true. 
The third state is akin to two darts landing on top of each other, and is fully undecidable, because 
we are dealing with pseudo-roots and roots here, which can’t be verified. 


Now the second state, which is akin to two darts landing equidistant from C, but at different angles, 
is a hybrid of sorts. It sits right in between the first and third states, and could be characterized by 
saying that it is partially decidable and partially undecidable. That is to say, (2) is true for points 
(p, q) which can be verified, but undecidable for points (p, q) that can’t be verified. The 
implication here, for this second outcome, is therefore rather subtle — points (p, g) could very well 
exist that make (2) true; but because these points can’t be verified, (2) is marked as indeterminate, 
in this case. And similarly for (3) mentioned above. 


Now we already know that points (p, g) exist for which (2) is actually true [pp 701-3]; and indeed, 
fora = % and B = %4, ¢ ~ 6.28817. But we can go further here, and show quite easily that in the 
region R, where 0 < a < 1 and 2a < € < 20 + A, (2) is actually true for infinitely many (p, gq), where 
A > Ois small. 


For example, if a = 0.45 so that B = 0.55, there exists an ¢ close to 6.28975 that satisfies (2); but the 
extent to which (2) is true over the whole of @* is not known right now; and that is because we 
don’t know to what extent (2) is decidable versus undecidable here, as per our remarks above. And 
similarly for (3), which is fully undecidable. 


Thus, there is a good chance that roots and pseudo-roots really do exist in @*, even though they 


can’t be verified, especially if we combine the notes in Part I [pp 707-9] with what we’re saying 
here ... 


Of interest to us is the following boundary condition for @*, where we examine | ¢(0 + 2m) | and 
also |C(1 + 2mi)|. Notice from the images that they are virtually identical ... 


{c(0 + 274) 


, {¢(1 + 2z3)|} 


{0.957806, 0.957806} 


711 


We can see these states as though they were orbitals, so to speak, so that the points (p, g) in @* map 
to an orbital via the definition for that state. Note that in state 1, the angle does not matter. 


state 1 state 2 state 3 


Also note that in state 1, the points (p, g) map to different orbitals, via the definition for that state; 
whilst in states 2 and 3, they map to the same orbital. This is highly reminiscent of what we might 
see in an atom, for example; where two electrons occupy different orbitals (state 1, more common), 
or sometimes the same orbital (state 2, Jess common); according to the Pauli Exclusion Principle. 


The third state is somewhat ‘ghostlike’, perhaps representing a particle we know nothing about. For 
here the points (p, q) are roots or pseudo-roots. If they are roots, it becomes an orbital of radius 
zero under the definition for this state, else a positive radius; but either way, the points occupy the 
same position in that orbital, according to the definition here. 


Roots and pseudo-roots cannot be verified in @*, so that if a mathematical method M came along 
saying there were no roots or pseudo-roots over the whole of @*; always remember that it would 
have said the same thing even if they did exist in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line. 


For more related commentary on the subject, see pages 305-16, and also the dialogue between Joe 
and Jim on pages 333-4 ... 


712 


The Game of Darts and Pseudo-Roots, Part II 


Consider the function f(s) = |C(a + is)P — |G — a + is)? in C*, where a = % and 1040 < & < 1080. 
A plot of f(e) is show below on the /eft, and you can see just how volatile f(¢) is here. 


400 
30 
300 25 
20 
200 
15 
10 
100, 
Lal 
1040 1050 1060 1070 1080 F 1055 1056 1057 
On the right is a plot of f(e), in the range 1054 < ¢ < 1058; and we see just how close f(e) comes to 
touching the x-axis. Given the highly volatile, if not aberrant behavior of C(s), which we can infer 


from these pictures; might we surmise that f(e) could very well touch the x-axis, or even hop into 
negative territory, if ¢ was suitably large ? If so, this could be evidence for states (2) and (3) [pp 
710-11] for large ¢, where we classified (2) as being hybrid, and (3) as being fully undecidable. 


A Stronger Necessary Condition For Pseudo-Roots In @* 


We can develop a stronger necessary condition for pseudo-roots in @*, the critical strip minus the 
critical line — where C(p) = ((q) and p=a tie, q=B tie, ¢ => O0andB=1-—a. We did develop such 
a condition on page 701, and shown below, which looked at the ratio on the right-hand side of (+). 


(2n)®~® sin@ag /2) PU —q) / sin@p/2) TU =p) = |G F/G 


But here, we improve on that, solely by considering the equality C(p) = C(g). Using Riemann’s 
Functional Equation, we calculate expressions for (1 — a + ée) and multiply them together. After 
the dust settles on the calculations, this necessary condition is (which may also apply to roots) ... 


4B Tg) P-|sin@ap/2)P = 1 (*) 


Note that (*) is also valid everywhere on the critical line, where a = ¥2, and thus B = %. Setting ¢= 
0, we see immediately that (**) is true, since [(4)? = x, and p is equal to q. Setting ¢ = 10, we see 
again that (*) is true, from the images below ... 


Result 


™ 


2 F 2 
= |r(0.5 + 10:)P sin( = (0.5 + 101)} 1.00000... 
n 


Number line 


1058 


713 


Further analysis shows that (**) is also a necessary condition for | C(p) | = | (q) | where C(p) # (q), 
as we can see in the images below. Recall from pages 701-3 that for ¢ ~ 6.28817, (2) holds true if it 
is the case that p = %4 + ie and q = % + ie; but here (p, g) are not pseudo-roots. 


\2 |r(0.75 + 6.28817 i) |sin(= = (0.25 + 6.28817 i))|? 


ms 


Result 
1.00000... 
Thus (*) is a necessary condition for both (2) and (3), where |C(p) | = | G(q) | and C(p) = C(q) is the 


state for pseudo-roots; and it may also be true that (*) holds when (p, q) are roots. For in (+) on the 
previous page, there is a direct reference to | C(q) |? / | (p) ?, which does not appear in (*). 


Indeed, the expressions for (1 — a + ée), when multiplied together, remove any such references, 
leaving us with just (*), as you see it below. In this sense, (*) may be a stronger necessary 


condition than (7) ... 


274 7B r(g) P- | singgp/2)P = 1° 


714 


The Game of Darts and Pseudo-Roots, Part IV 


Consider the function f(x) = x - sin(z / rnd(x)) for x = 0, where y = rnd(x) is a randomly generated 
number from x, which is real-valued and greater than zero. Most of the time, y is going to be an 
irrational number, but sometimes it might be rational, and even lie in the range 0 < y < 1. But this 
will depend on just how random the function rnd(x) really is. 


Thus, we might conclude that if rnd(x) was sufficiently random, then y should eventually compute 
to 1 /n, where n = 1, 2, 3 ..., so that there would be infinitely many zeroes of f(x), along with the 
zero atx = 0. But even if this were the case, we would never know where these positive zeroes 
were along the number line, and so would not be able to verify them. 


On the other hand, if rnd(x) was not sufficiently random, then we might conclude y would never 
compute to 1 /n, where n= 1, 2,3 ..., so that the only zero of f(x) was at x= 0. Thus, the existence 
or inexistence of the positive zeroes [P], depends wholly and completely on the randomness of the 
function rnd(x); and even then, the most we can do is surmise that these positive zeroes do or don’t 
exist. 


And this is how it is with the Riemann zeta function [C(s)] in @*, the critical strip minus the critical 
line. Ultimately, the likely existence or inexistence of roots and pseudo-roots in @* depends on just 
how random Cs) really is here. 


It is my view, based on the recent notes [p 701 ff.] and universality theorems concerning C(s), that 
roots and pseudo-roots are more likely to exist than not exist in @*; but like the example above, can 
never be verified, as per our methodology [pp 701-3]. In other words, if we were an imaginary ob- 
server approaching a root or pseudo-root [p] of ((s) in C*, we would probably see ((s) becoming so 
random, that no mathematical method M would ever be able to pinpoint the exact location of p. 


And this is why roots and pseudo-roots cannot be verified. Our methodology, through the use of 
Fourier transforms, says they can’t; but the real reason they are unverifiable is due to the explosive 
volatility of C(s), as we approach them in C* ... 


bp 
oa 


In the diagram above, our imaginary observer © heads toward a root or pseudo-root [p] in C*. The 
dots, which could be anywhere in the larger disc D centered at the origin O in the complex plane, 
represent the inherent randomness of C(s) that © observes as it gets closer to p. The unverifiability 
of p and the explosive randomness of C(s) in D go hand in hand here ... 


715 


To continue the example with f(x), let p > 0 be some point on the number line, such that in a small 
neighborhood [Wp] of p, rnd(x) is sufficiently random to allow for the outcome | /n, where n is 
some positive integer. Outside Wp, we'll define rnd(x) = 2, so that there are no zeroes of f(x) here, 
except at x = 0. 


Thus, in VW, we'll presume a zero of f(x) does exist, but we see immediately that there is no way to 
pinpoint its location. Our function f(x) has become so random here, across a continuum of points in 
N>, making it impossible to say just where the root actually is. 


And similarly for a root or pseudo-root [p] of Cs) in @*, the critical strip minus the critical line. 
The inherent randomness of ((s), which is necessary for their existence in C*, is so great in a small 
neighborhood [>] of p, that it becomes impossible to pinpoint its location. 


Thus, we see again how the unverifiability of p and the explosive randomness of ¢(s) in Wp), go 
hand in hand here ... 


716 


The Game of Darts and Pseudo-Roots, Part V 


The Green Tao theorem [G] was used in many places in this essay; most notably pages 53-128, and 
also pages 129-30, where we showed that the cardinality of undecidable theorems over the set of 
primes [P#] was at least c. We also used G, along with Noetherian principles, to show that the 
generalized Twin Prime Conjecture was true [pp 247-253]. 


According to the literature, there is a rather deep connection between the zeroes of the Riemann 
zeta function C(s) on the critical line, and the primes [#] themselves; so we’ll use this idea, along 
with G, when working in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line [2]. 


We’ll begin by stating that we don’t expect roots and pseudo-roots to occur as frequently on any 
line €, in @*, as they do on 12; and indeed, on a we expect pseudo-roots to appear more frequently 
than roots. Thus, if there is a connection between roots and pseudo-roots on é, and the prime 
numbers"); it must be some subset @ of F that is even ‘more random’ than the primes, themselves. 


To this end, we define the ‘level of regularity’ [£] in @, using G. For the primes #, we know from 
G that there are infinitely many arithmetic sequences of arbitrary length in #, so that Lis maximal 
here. Now if it is the case that the connection (1) above exists, then we would be looking for some 
set @ in # where £ is not maximal, using G as the measure. 


Let @ = {pu, pa, ps, ...} be some subset of P, where the distance between pn+1 and pn+2 is greater 
than or equal to twice the distance between pn and pn+1. Let the distance between p; and pz be 2. 
Then G is no longer true, as defined above; for while there may be infinitely many arithmetic 
sequences in @, they won’t be of arbitrary length. Any such sequence @ will terminate once the 
space between neighboring primes in @ exceeds the common difference in Q. 


Thus, @ is an example of a subset of # where the ‘level of regularity’ in @ is less than that in P, and 
so we say @ is ‘more random’ than #, using G as the measure. Such sets like @ may have a 
connection to roots and pseudo-roots on & in @*; and indeed, the mere fact that these sets exist 
could be a telling sign that roots and pseudo-roots also exist in C* ... 


Under our construction, it is not hard to show that the number of primes in @, up to some arbitrarily 
large number N, is no more than Q ~ log N/log2. Thus, measured against 1(N) ~ N / log N; which 
is roughly the number of primes Jess than N, this ratio is Q / 2(N) ~ (log N) / (N - log 2), which 
tends to zero as N tends to infinity. And so, according to the literature, G does not hold in this case, 
as we noted above ... 


We can also work with sets @ = {pu, pz, pa, ...} in #, where pn+2—Pn+1 2 ¥(Pn+1— Pn), with y > | 
and p2— pi =2. In such a case the ‘level of regularity’ in @ increases as y ---» 1, and decreases as y 
increases away from 1. And while there may be infinitely many arithmetic sequences in @, they 


VAT 


won't be of arbitrary length here; but we do expect the /ength of these sequences to increase as y 
decreases to 1, and to decrease as y increases away from 1. 


And in this case, Q ~ log (y — 1)N / log y, so that Q / 2(N) ~ (log N) - log (y — 1)N/ (N - log y). 
Thus, as N ---> 00, the ratio Q / 2(N) ---» 0, and hence, G does not hold in this instance, if y > 1. But 
again, sets like @ may have a connection to roots and pseudo-roots on & in @*, as we said earlier; 
and we should also note that y = 2 is a special case of this result, which was discussed on the 
previous page ... 


Consider the function f(x) = (-1)"* !sin(2"zx), where n = 1, 2,3 ..., and 1/2" <x < 1/2">), Now 
as n ---) 0, f(x) begins to oscillate more rapidly; and in the limit, at n = %, there is no way to know 
just what the value of f(0) actually is. The function f(x) remains continuous for all n = 1, 2,3 ..., 
but is now indeterminate at n = «0; where here f(0) could be any number between —1 and 1. 


bp 
foe 


And similarly for our imaginary observer © heading toward a root or pseudo-root [p] in @* — the 
critical strip minus the critical line. The dots, which could be anywhere in the larger disc D 
centered at the origin O in the complex plane, represent the inherent randomness of C(s) that 
observes as it gets closer to p. And in a small neighborhood [>] of p, which shrinks to zero as 0 
tends to p, the true value of C(s) at p cannot be determined, just like it can’t for f(x) at x = 0. 


And so, this is another way of seeing how the unverifiability of p and the explosive randomness of 
&(s) in D, go hand in hand here. Below are some plots of f(x) for n = 1, 2, and3 ... 


718 


In the diagram below, we see a function g(x) which is continuously differentiable, and behaves 
similarly to f(x) above. But in this case, the amplitude of g(x) grows as x ---> 0, and could be large 
or even infinite at x = 0. And even if the true value of g(0) was zero, we could never know this by 
looking at g(x) as x ---» 0; for here, the limiting value could be anything between —co and , if the 
amplitude were to grow without bound. 


And similarly for our imaginary observer © heading toward a root or pseudo-root [p] in @* — the 
critical strip minus the critical line. The function C(s) now retains its holomorphic properties as 0 
tends to p; but in the limit [at p], ‘breaks down’, so that the true value of ((s) at p cannot be 
determined, just like it can’t for g(x) at x = 0. 


Now the true value of €(s) at p will be zero, if p is a root; but to @, it will seem like C(s) could be 
any one of an infinite number of possibilities here. In fact, once @ arrives at p, it won't even know 
Pp is a root; only that the behavior of C(s) has become ‘so strange’, it defies explanation [we can 
imagine ((s) to be rapidly oscillating, just like g(x), as © gets closer to p; so that there are infinitely 
many such oscillations when @ reaches p]. 


And this is what it means, when we say roots and pseudo-roots in @* can’t be verified, presuming 
that C(s) does retain its holomorphic properties as © ---» p. The behavior of C(s) becomes so bizarre 
that no mathematical method M could ever verify them. 


Perhaps in the years to come, we’ll be able to produce indirect evidence for the existence of roots 
and pseudo-roots in @*, either via mathematics or the physics lab; and we may also be able to estab- 
lish a wave function for them as well [pp 305-316]. But I don’t think, on the other hand, we’ll ever 
be able to produce direct evidence for their existence ... 


719 


It is important to note here, that even the true value of C(s) at p is not relevant to us; only that p is 
connected to some state, which itself, is undecidable. For example, let us again examine the 
undecidable state |C(p) | = |C(q) | where C(p) = Cg), and p= atic, q=B +éc, = 0 with B=1-a. 
Again, we are in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line, and there are two possible outcomes: 
either C(p) and C(q) are equal to zero, or C(p) = ((q) £0 [roots and pseudo-roots]. 


But either way, as our imaginary observer © approaches p in a small neighborhood [,] of p; the 
behavior of €(s) becomes ‘so strange’ that the true value of C(s) at p cannot be determined, when ( 
finally reaches p (we suppose C(s) does retain its holomorphic properties as © ---» p). But what this 
true value [J] is, does not matter, because J depends only on the definition of the state, itself. 


Indeed, the only thing that does matter is the behavior of €(s) as © ---» p, and once © reaches p. It 
must, as we’ve noted before, be sufficiently random to allow for this undecidable outcome at p. 


Some minor corrections to the text, in these recent research notes [pp 701-19], were made in a 
previous release ... 


X Marks The Spot For Our Ghost 


Suppose G is a ghost located at some position X, and let @ be our observer heading toward X, with a 
detector D. © expects to see a vague image of G on the detector’s screen at X; and indeed, as 0 
approaches X, it does notice ‘odd behavior’ on the screen, which becomes more random as © gets 
closer to X. But at X, © doesn’t see the vague image of G it expected; instead, just a screen full of 
static, as shown in the picture below on the /eft; that has completely masked the vague image of the 
ghost, in the picture below on the right ... 


And so it is for our imaginary observer @ heading toward a root or pseudo-root [p] in @* — the 
critical strip minus the critical line. © notices the behavior of ¢(s) becoming more random here — so 
much so, that the true value [J] of C(s) at p cannot be determined, when @ finally reaches p [the 
true value is akin to the image of the ghost, which has now been ‘masked’ by an array of outcomes 
associated with C(s) at p, as per our earlier commentary in this research note] ... 


720 


Irreducible Traces and The Prime Numbers 


Consider the number 6. It can be factored as 2 x 3, and when we add these two numbers together, 
we obtain 5 = 2 + 3. We define 5 to be the irreducible trace [J], since it is prime, and can’t be 
factored any further, as a product of primes. And we define the operation to be the sequential 
decomposition [D) of 6, leading to J. 


Now let’s look at the number 8. It can be factored as 2 x 2 x 2. When we add these three numbers 
together, we obtain 6; and in turn, 6 reduces to an irreducible trace of 5. For any integer n > 4, 
such a decomposition [Q] exists for n; and more often than not, FJ computes to 5. If n = 4, F does 
not exist, and for any prime p, it is the case that F = p. 


Let’s take the three numbers 721, 722 and 723. In the first case, 721 = 7 x 103, so that D leads to a 
value of J = 5. In the second case, 722 = 2 x 19 x 19, so that D leads to a value of J = 11. And in 
the third case, 723 = 3 x 241, so that again, D leads to a value of J =5. 


More often than not, I have found that J = 5, whether n is small or large. So much so, that I now 
wonder if there is some underlying property concerning the primes, that allows for this outcome 
more than any other. Perhaps further research is warranted here ... 


Some additional commentary titled “X Marks The Spot For Our Ghost’, was added to the base of 
page 719 in a previous release ... 


Separating Truth From Fiction 


When looking at functions like f(x) = (-1)"* 'sin(2"xx), n= 1, 2,3 ...,and 1/2" <x <1/2°>); or 
g(x) [pp 717-18], we recall that as n ---» ©, f(x) begins to oscillate more rapidly; and in the limit, at 
n = ©, there is no way to know just what the value of f(0) actually is. The function f(x) remains 
continuous for all n = 1, 2,3 ..., but is now indeterminate at n = 0; where here f(0) could be any 
number between —1 and 1. Such a function like f(x), at n = 0, could be described as pathological 
[counterintuitive or even bizarre], as could the set of outcomes [S$] ranging from —1 to 1, when x = 0 
in f(x). And similarly for g(x) at x = 0. 


And the same idea holds for C(s) at s = p — a root or pseudo-root in @* — the critical strip minus the 
critical line. Seen as a rapidly oscillating function like g(x), as our imaginary observer © gets 
closer to p [so that there are infinitely many such oscillations when @ reaches p]; C(s) could also be 
described as pathological at p, along with its associated range of outcomes [S] here. 


This, then, becomes the pathological account of what may be happening to ((s), when @ finally 
arrives at p. And just like the ‘masking effect’ discussed on the previous page in our ‘ghost and 
detector’ note; we see how a pathological set of outcomes [S] associated with C(s) at p, is able to 
mask the true value of C(p), which follows directly from the definition of the undecidable state itself 
[p 719]. Perhaps it is a case of separating truth from fiction, after all ... .. 


721 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane 


Consider the function f(x) = (1/ Vx) - exp(1/ix) in the complex plane @. As x ---» 0, we see from 
the picture below that the real and imaginary parts of f(x) oscillate more rapidly; and that the 
magnitude of these oscillations begins to increase. And in the limit, at x = 0, they become infinitely 
large. 


plot 0.025 to 0.05 
: 
O = ‘ Yi 
a 040 0.04 (0.050 
a | 2 
y ae real part 


— imaginary part 


Moreover, we also see that the real and imaginary parts of f(x) are never zero at the same time, 
unless x = 0 or. And at x = 0, Re(f(x)) is all of the y-axis, and Jm(f(x)) is all of the imaginary z- 
axis, in the picture above on the /eft. Thus, at the origin O, f(x) = 0 is one of infinitely many 
pathological outcomes, where all other outcomes are non-zero, since the oscillations compress into 
single lines, that are now infinitely long. 


And the same idea holds for C(s) at s = p — a root or pseudo-root in @* — the critical strip minus the 
critical line. Seen as a rapidly oscillating function like f(x) above, as our imaginary observer © gets 
closer to p [so that there are infinitely many such oscillations when @ reaches p]; C(s) could also be 
described as pathological at p, along with its associated range of outcomes [S] here. 


In the diagram below, our imaginary observer © heads toward a root or pseudo-root [p] in @*. The 
dots, which could be anywhere in the larger disc D centered at the origin O in the complex plane, 
represent the inherent randomness of C(s) that © observes as it gets closer to p. The unverifiability 
of p and the explosive randomness of ¢(s) in D go hand in hand here, as we’ve said before ... 


722 


We can now appeal to the universality property [2] associated with the zeta function [C(s)] in @* — 
the critical strip minus the critical line. According to the Wiki page, this property states that ‘there 
exists some location p in the critical strip, where here, C(s) approximates any holomorphic function 
g arbitrarily well’ in a neighborhood [>] of p. In other words, given g, we can always find p. 


Tf this is so, and we look at f(x) from the previous page, as x --- 0 ; then there ought to exist a point 
p in @* where C(s) approximates f(x), arbitrarily well, as s ---» p. In other words, C(s) mimics f(x), in 
a neighborhood of p, as s ---> p and x ---» 0 [we can always translate f(x), if we like, so that x ---» 0 
is replaced by x ---» {1 , where jt is some number]. 


But in the limit, at x = 0, f(x) becomes a pathological function, with infinitely many pathological 
outcomes; and this could also be true for ¢(s), in the limit, at s = p, where p is now a root or pseudo- 
root in @*. For here, we know from our research that roots and pseudo-roots in @* cannot be 
verified. 


Thus, by studying functions like f(x), and invoking U, we may be witnessing indirect evidence for 
the existence of roots and pseudo-roots in and if so, it brings us one step closer to unravelling 
the deep mystery of the Riemann Hypothesis, itself .... .. 


If | were to awaken after having 
slept for a thousand years, my first 
question would be: Has the 


Riemann hypothesis been proven? 


723 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane, Part II 


Consider the function f(iy) = (1/ y) - exp(1/iy) in the complex plane @, where A = 1/72? Now as 
y ---» 0, we see from the picture below, that the real and imaginary parts of fliy) oscillate more 
rapidly; and that the magnitude of these oscillations begins to increase, albeit slowly at first. And 
in the limit, at y = 0, they become infinitely large. 


plot 0.025 to 0.05 


— real part 
— imaginary part 


From page 294, let us bring back one of the Fourier transforms that is directly involved in our 
analysis of the Riemann Hypothesis [&]; namely, 


foe) 
S {(A+C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
oO 
ne"! -® {91 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {Ua +22}... (3) 


Now in the coefficients below, we’ll set a and & to zero, and map € over to f above. What we want 
to know, in carrying out this exercise, is whether or not the integral in (3) converges at the origin 
[O], after making these changes. Thus, the right-hand side in (3) doesn’t matter to us, in this case; 
rather, just the issue of convergence, itself. 


A = {(atiy—is) + (a—iy +ie)}/2 
B = {((a+iy—ie) — a—iy +ée)}/ 26 
C = {Catiy+ic) + Q(a—iy—ie)}/2 
D = {(atiy+ie) — (a—iy—ie)}/2i 


724 


When the dust settles on the calculations for the coefficients, just above [where ¢ has been replaced 
with f]; we find that there are two integrals of interest, left for us to consider. And you can see 
from the following images, that both do indeed converge at O, according to Wolfram ... 


ile cos(*) sin(y) ggg 


dy = 0.0000375385 dy = 0.00413308 


141 f/x? 1+1/ 


y y 
And so, it is now reasonable to suppose the integrals above also converge in the range 0 to °%, 
though the real issue is at O [we chose r = 1 in these integrals, but any r > O is acceptable]. 


Thus, we have another example of a pathological function f, that ((s) should be able to approx- 
imate arbitrarily well, in a neighborhood [W,] of p in @*, where p is a root or pseudo-root. This 
follows from Part I [pp 721-22], where we discussed the universality property [UU] associated with 
the zeta function [¢(s)] in the critical strip; and more specifically, in @* — the critical strip minus the 
critical line [and again, we can always translate f(iy), if we like, so that y ---» 0 is replaced by y ---» 
11, where pt is some number]. 


Moreover, since the integrals above [associated with f] converge at O, we expect the same to be 
true for the integral in (3) at O; where here, we are using C(s) in the calculations, and p = a + ée. 
Thus, by allowing C(s) to mimic a function like fin W> [via U], we see that the integral in (3), as it 
stands, should also converge at O; and indeed, in the range 0 to °%, as well [see pages 258-304 for 
many more calculations of type (3), as we developed our methodology concerning the Riemann 
Hypothesis]. 


You'll notice in f that A = 1 / x”, whereas in Part I, we set A= %. Either way, it is the case that f 
becomes a pathological function at y = 0; but the difference here [according to Wolfram] is that 
both integrals above converge at O if A = 1 / 2°, whereas if A = %, only the integral above on the 
left converges at O. 


Thus, to secure convergence in both integrals above at O, we must have 0 < A < y, where y is some 
upper bound, that is somewhere around 1 / x?. This will allow the magnitude of the oscillations in f 
to increase slowly; and in the limit, at y = 0, they will become infinitely large. 


Some minor corrections to the text, in this research note, were made in this update .... 


725 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane, Part IIT 


From Part II, let us bring back our function f(iy) = (1/ y) - exp(1/iy) in the complex plane @, where 
A=1/7’; and let 5 > 0 be the arbitrary, but fixed radius of some small circle Cs, centered at O, as 
shown in the picture below. Let € > 0 be the arbitrarily small radius of some circle Ce, also 
centered at O, and inside Cs. 


On the y-axis, let y travel from Cs to Ce [though the path here may be arbitrary], and we’ll call this 
path Pc. Then according to the universality property [U] for ¢(s) [pp 721-24], there ought to exist a 
point pe somewhere in the critical strip @; where C(s) approximates f arbitrarily well, in a neigh- 
borhood [pc] of pe, as y traverses Pe. And this is so, because f is holomorphic here. 


Now let € ---» 0, so that in the limit, at € = 0, either pe converges to some meaningful complex 
number p, or it doesn’t. If it does, C(s) will approximate f arbitrarily well in a neighborhood [Wp] of 
pin @, as y traverses Pe; but could become pathological at p, just like f itself, since the oscillations 
in f compress into infinitely long straight lines, when € = 0 [again, we can always translate f(iy), if 
we like, so that here y ---» 0 is replaced by y ---» 11, where 1 is some number]. 


And if €(s) is pathological at p, then p cannot be verified, and so could easily be a root or pseudo- 
root in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line. This is the gist of our arguments in Parts I and 
II [pp 721-24], where we invoke U to make our case for the existence of roots and pseudo-roots in 
@*; but here, with a little more detail ... 


726 


The literature seems to suggest, that for integrals of the type shown below, convergence in the 
range 0 to 0 holds if 0 < p < 2. If this is so, then in our function f(iy) = (1/ y*) - exp(1/iy), we 
can allow 0 < A < 1, in order to secure convergence in the integral (3) discussed on pages 723-4. 
This convergence, for the integrals below, has at times, been described as conditional; and not all 
the literature agrees on what the range for p should actually be. But the general consensus points to 


(*). 


And by choosing 0 < A < 1, this will allow the magnitude of the oscillations in f to increase; and in 
the limit, at y = 0, they will become infinitely large ... 


© anc 25 " @ 
/ en a! de dx [ i sin ( 1 ) cos(x) dx 
0 xP o x? x 


The path #c, from Cs to Ce, when looking at the universality property [U], doesn’t seem to matter. 
For if we were to define f = (1/ p4) - exp(1/ip), where p is now a radial measure emanating from 
O; and travelled along the green line from Cs to Ce, as shown in the picture below; this path [Pc] 
could be at any angle to the x-axis. And that is because ((s) approximates f arbitrarily well, in a 
neighborhood [Mp<] of pe; over the whole of the annulus bounded by Ce and Cs, which is the 
domain of f. 


iv 


And as the radius p ---» 0, the oscillations in f increase; and in the limit, at p = 0, they will become 
infinitely large, no matter the angle for p [and again, we can always translate f, if we like, so that 
here p ---> 0 is replaced by p ---> 11, where p1 is some number]. 


— Some of the text, on this page, was rewritten in this update — 


727 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane, Part IV 
Our methodology M [pp 258-304] states that if p is a root or pseudo-root in @* — the critical strip 
minus the critical line; then p cannot be verified if the integrals in (3) and (4) [p 294] converge. 


oo) 


S {(A + C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr) }dy/y = 
° 


ne™ {91 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {U-a +22}... (3) 


Catiy—ie) + Ga—iy +ie)}/2 
Ca +iy—ie) — C(a—iy +ée)}/ 26 
Catiy+ie) + Q(a—iy—ie)}/2 
Gatiy+ie) — Ga—iy—ie)}/ 2i 


Gam Y 
"ou 


{ 
{ 
{ 
{ 


We don’t really expect any issues with convergence as y ---» 2, so let’s focus on the case where we 
have y ---» 0. If we can secure convergence here in (3) and (4), our methodology JM holds true. 
And this is akin to C(s) approximating [arbitrarily well] a function like f = (1/ p*) - exp(1/ip), in Mp; 
where the domain of f is the whole of the annulus bounded by Ce¢ and Cs, with € ---» 0,0 < A < 1, 
and p a radial measure [p 726]. And at p, ¢(s) becomes pathological, because M is true. 


But if we can’t secure convergence at O, then we can infer C(s) must either be singular at p, or 
oscillating [with increasing magnitude] so rapidly in a neighborhood NW, of p, as s ---» p; that 
convergence in the integrals fails at O. 


And so, C(s) is either singular or pathological at p, thus making it impossible to verify the true 
value of C(p), anyway. And indeed, this is akin to ¢(s) approximating [arbitrarily well] a function 
like f= (1/ p4) - exp(1/ip), in Mp; where the domain of f is the whole of the annulus bounded by Ce 
and Cs, with € ---» 0, A > 1 and p a radial measure [p 726]. 


So either way, it becomes impossible to verify the true value of C(p), under this scenario [do or 
don’t have convergence at O]; and thus, it is sufficient in our methodology M, to prove the 
unverifiability of p when convergence holds true at O, in the integrals (3) and (4). And this is 
precisely what we did, where in the integrals and offsets, the true value of C(s) at p is used, by 
definition. 


The offsets to the Fourier transforms (3) and (4) are defined on page 265; and they are (1/2) g(0) 
and —(mé/2)h(0) respectively; where p = a + ée is the root or pseudo root, and 


g(s)=C(a—stie) + Ca—s-—ie) 
h(s) =C(a—s+ie) — (a-—s-—ie) 


728 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane, Part V 


Our methodology M [pp 258-304] states that if p is a root or pseudo-root in @* — the critical strip 
minus the critical line; then p cannot be verified if the integrals in (3) and (4) [p 294] converge. 
Here, we’ll begin by assuming that if p is any point in the complex plane @, and C(s) retains its 
holomorphic properties in a small neighborhood [WV,] of p, and at p; then in the limit, as s ---» p, 
¢(s) converges to some meaningful complex number C(p). 


Now suppose p = a + ée€ is a root or pseudo-root in @*, and that in Mp, G(s) is holomorphic 
everywhere. Then C(p) exists and is equal to its true value here. Thus, to first order, we may write 
a Taylor series expansion [J] in W, for the coefficients A, B, C, and D ... associated with the 
integral (3) below. 


oo) 


S {(A+C)sin(yr) — (B + D)cos(yr)}dy/y = 
0 


ne*!-® {91 — a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {(l-ay +22}... 3) 


12 
12% 
/2 
126 


C(a + iy —ie) + C(a—iy + ie) 
C(a + iy —is) — C(a-iy + ie) 
C(a+iy+ie) + C(a—iy —ie) 
C(a+éy +és) — Ca—iy —ie) 


Gam YS 
"ou 


{ 
{ 
{ 
{ 


Now to first order, for the following elements, we may write J as ... 


a. + ty —ie) = Cp) + C@)- ty ; Wa-iy +i) = Cp) + Cp) - -iy 
Ca + iy + ie) = Cp) + Op): ty s Ga-ty—ie) = Cp) + C@)- -ty 


Thus, if (p) = a + ib and C'(p) = c + id, then A + C = 2a and B + D=2cy. And from this, we see 
immediately that the integral in (3) above converges, in the range [0, €], where € > 0 is small. And 
since we don’t really expect any issues with convergence as y ---» «©, we can say, with confidence, 
that (3) converges in the range 0 to ©, if €(s) is holomorphic everywhere in Wp. 


Similar remarks apply to the other integral (4) on page 294, which also plays a role in M. But from 
M, if (3) and (4) converge, then p cannot be verified, if p is a root or pseudo-root. Thus, by 
assuming that C(s) is holomorphic everywhere in W,, we have a contradiction; in so much as the 
unverifiability of p implies (s) must be singular or pathological at p. 


And so we conclude that ¢(s) can never be holomorphic everywhere in Np, after all; if it is the case 
that p is a root or psuedo-root in C* ... 


For the record, using the argument above; D — B = 2b and C — A = —2dy, for the integral in (4); and 
thus we have convergence here, in the range [0, €], where € > 0 is small ... .. 


729 


It seems to me, that the real power in our methodology M, is proof by contradiction, as shown 
above. For in our original development of M [pp 258-304], we assumed that C(s) had a simple pole 
at s = 1; but otherwise, was well-behaved. And this, as we know, led to the unverifiability of p, 
itself; meaning C(s) must be singular or pathological at p, when p is a root or pseudo-root in C* — 
the critical strip minus the critical line. 


There is nothing at all wrong with this approach, in my view; since the assumption that C(s) retains 
its holomorphic properties in a small neighborhood [W,] of p, and at p, is fully consistent within the 
original framework of JM, on the one hand; but ultimately leads to a contradiction, on the other 
hand — when, and only when, p is a root or pseudo-root in C*. 


As such, the issue of convergence at O for our integrals in (3) and (4) [p 294]; where in Wp, C(s) 
mimics a function like f = (1/ p4) - exp(1/ip) [pp 723-7]; is not likely to be of much relevance to us 
anyway, because the original premise in M assumes the well-behavedness of (s) in Wp, ab initio. 
Indeed, it isn’t just the convergence of the integrals in (3) and (4) that matters; but also, what they 
compute to, based on residue calculations carried out in M. 


Nonetheless, there is still some useful commentary in this series [p 721 ff]; and indeed, it is this 
commentary that eventually led to the proof by contradiction, above. 


730 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane, Part VI 


Suppose p is a root or pseudo-root in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line, and that C(s) 
approximates [arbitrarily well in W,] a function like f= (1/p*) - exp(1/ip); where 0 < A < 1, and p 
is a radial measure [p 727]. Then at p, ¢(s) becomes pathological, since here p --- 0. 


In the diagram below on the /eft, we see what C(s) might look like in W, when p is a root; and in the 
diagram on the right, what ((s) becomes, after halting the oscillations after n cycles; and replacing 
what’s left with a smooth curve from A to O. We’ll call this function on the right C(s, n), and note 
that it is holomorphic everywhere in Mp, and that C(s, n) = 0 (its true value), when s = p. 


&(s) &(s, n) 


Now since C(s, n) is holomorphic everywhere in Mp, the methods [M] on pages 258-304 apply, so 
that the integral in (3) below computes to the expression on the right-hand side of (3), which we’ ll 
call €. And here, we replace C(s) with C(s, 1) in the coefficients A, B, C, D. 


foe) 
S {A+ Osingyn — (B + D)cos(yr) }dy/y = 
ie) 
ne™ {91 —a)cos(er) — 2esin(er)} / {U1 —a +22}... (3) 
A= {Catiy—is) + Ga—iy +ie)}/2 
B = {(a+iy—ie) — (a—iy +ée)}/ 26 
C = {Catiy+ic) + Q(a—iy—ie)}/2 
D = {Catiy+ie) — Ga—iy —ie)}/ 2i 


731 


Now let n ---» 20, so that C(s, 2) ---» ¢(s). Then the integral in (3) still converges [p 727], and indeed, 
computes to €. And so from ML, we conclude that p cannot be verified, which means that ¢(s) must 
be singular or pathological at s = p; which is essentially a confirmation of what we knew to be true, 
all along. And this echoes some of our earlier commentary on pages 723-7. 


I suspect we could do something similar with C(s), if it suffered a simple discontinuity at s = p, or 
even if there was a pole at p; though in the latter case, the residue associated with this pole would 
have to be factored into .. We’ll not do this in the research note here; as we already know from 
Part V [pp 728-9] that C(s) must be singular or pathological at p, if p is a root or pseudo-root in C*, 
using a proof by contradiction. 


In the pictures on the previous page, for the purpose of illustration, we can think of the axes as 
being the real or imaginary parts of Cs) and C(s, n), respectively; so that the true value of C(s, n) is 
reached, only at O, if p is a root in C* [see diagram below]. In (3) on the previous page, there is no 
offset here [p 727] because p is a root; but even if p was a pseudo-root [so that the offset is non- 
zero], the argument would not change. We have shown (3) in the way you see it here, throughout 
this series [p 701 ff:], simply for the sake of simplicity. 


Since in this note, ¢(s) approximates [arbitrarily well in ,] a function like f = (1/ p4) - exp(1/ip); 
where 0 < A < 1, and p is a radial measure [p 727]; convergence of the integral in (3) at O should 
not be an issue, when C(s) is associated with the coefficients A, B, C, D. 


In fact, as n ---» 0, the integral in (3) [associated with C(s)]; in the range [0, €], where € > 0 is small, 
should tend to zero, as € ---» 0. And that is because this is the piece in C(s), that is removed to make 
way for C(s, n), along the segment from A to O, in the pictures above. As such, € will now tend to 
zero as n ---> 0; and since ((s) is akin to the function f here, we expect the integral in (3) 
[associated with C(s)] to converge to zero in [0, €], as € ---» 0. 


Thus, when we pass over to the limit at n = 0, (3) will still hold true; that is to say, the integral in 
(3) will still compute to €, where now ((s) is associated with the coefficients A, B, C, D. 


Strictly speaking, C(s) will have a real and imaginary part, both of which oscillate, if C(s) is akin to f 
in W, [see below]. Thus, the ‘cut and paste’ operation that maps C(s) to C(s, n), as shown in the 
pictures on the previous page, should be done for both parts here ... 


Lop 
ple on Z} ©0025: 00 
ve 


eal part 


732 


When reviewing the testing that was done, as our methodology M was being developed [pp 258- 
304], we saw there that theory and experiment routinely agreed to a few parts in 10,000. This tells 
us a few things: first, that the methodology is correct; and second, that the integrals in (3) and (4) 
mentioned in Part V [pp 728-9], do indeed converge; and compute to their right-hand sides, 
respectively [in the case where p is a root in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line]. Here, we 
assumed in M [and in Part V], that G(s) was holomorphic everywhere in the complex plane [@], 
except at s = 1. 


In the case where p is a pseudo-root in @*, a non-zero offset is factored into (3) and (4) [p 265], 
using the true value of C(p); but other than that, the logic is the the same in Part V [see also pages 
302-4]. And so here, we really shouldn’t worry about the convergence of the integrals in (3) and 
(4), at O or at 0; because the agreement between theory and experiment is too close to ignore. As 
such, we should be confident that our proof by contradiction in Part V, is indeed valid; when p is a 
root or pseudo-root in @*. That is to say, C(s) must be singular or pathological at s = p, since p is 
now unverifiable, according to M ... 


In 1940, the Tacoma Bridge collapsed, due to high winds approaching 40 mph. But before it broke 
apart, the bridge went into a state of oscillation, which became more extreme, leading to its even- 
tual collapse. There is actual footage of this event on YouTube, which you can see using the link 
https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=X ggxeuFDaDU. 


Something similar is going on with C(s) in @* — the critical strip minus the critical line — as we 
approach a root or pseudo-root [p] here; but like the bridge collapse, is giving us advance warning 
of this impending event at p. That warning could well be the rapidly oscillating behavior of C(s), in 
a neighborhood [MW] of p; which becomes more extreme, and ultimately leads to the singular or 
pathological behavior of C(s) at p. 


In my opinion, this is the most likely explanation of what actually happens in W,, thus making p 
unverifiable ... 


733 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane, Part VII 


It is important to see, in the construction of C(s, m) in Part VI, that it is only taking place in a small 
neighborhood [>] of p, where the root p is on the a-line. The other root q is on the B-line, but no 
such construction for C(s, n) is done here in Wq; and hence ¢(s, 2) is holomorphic everywhere in Vp, 
only. 


Thus, the most we can say is that the integral in (3) [p 730], along the a-line, computes to its right- 
hand side [€] for all n, but nothing more. And here, we replace ¢(s) with C(s, 1) in the coefficients 
A,B,C, D. 


Now as n ---) ©, so that C(s, 1) ---» C(s), the integral in (3) still converges, and indeed, computes to € 
at n =o. And so from our methodology .M, we conclude p cannot be verified, which means that 
¢(s) must be singular or pathological at p; which is essentially a confirmation of what we knew to 
be true, all along, in Part VI. Indeed, since by M it is no longer possible to distinguish between p 
and q when integrating along é,, say; C(s) must be singular or pathological at both these points. 


We could also reverse the argument by letting a and trade places in (3), and integrate along the B- 
line; but in so doing, we would come to the same conclusion, as above. Here, though, the construc- 
tion of C(s, n) would be done in Wg ... 


An earlier version of this note appeared in a previous release, but has been replaced with what you 
see above, since this version is logically correct, in my opinion ... 


It is my view that our methodology M, in its original form [pp 258-304], probably applies to a 
larger class of functions in the critical strip, where a functional equation ¥ binds together the 
values at s and 1 — s. For example, Dirichlet L-functions may qualify. 


We should not underestimate the importance of ¥ here, for it acts as a band of tension [B] which 
snaps, when dealing with roots or pseudo-roots of C(s) in @* — the critical strip minus the critical 
line. Thus, ¥ plays an important role in our understanding of the behavior of C(s), as we approach 
a root or pseudo-root [p] in @*; and ultimately, its pathological behavior at p. 


734 


An Interesting Pathological Function In The Complex Plane, Part VIII 


Everything follows from the state we are working with. So for example, in the state |C(p)| = | C(q)|, 
where ((p) = C(q)*, which is known to be undecidable; we interpret C(p) = (q) using the true value 
here, even if C(s) is pathological at p and q. In other words, if p and q are roots or pseudo-roots in 
@* — the critical strip minus the critical line; then C(s) will be pathological at (p, q), but the true 
value of (s) at these two points will always be zero for a root, and a + ib for a pseudo-root [where 
not both a and b are 0]. Said another way, the true value of C(s) at (p, g) is what we would have ob- 
tained, had p and q been verifiable. 


Thus, when calculating necessary conditions for roots and pseudo-roots in @* [pp 701, 712-13], we 
use the true value of C(s) at (p, g), and invoke Riemann’s Functional Equation. Similarly, for an 
imaginary observer @ in the signal’s frame of reference [S], as shown in the diagram D below; the 
true value of €(s) at (p, g) in D is used in our methodology M [pp 258-304]. And so in Part VI, 
where we let n ---» ©, so that C(s, m) ---» C(s); we find the integral in (3) still converges to € [which 
is $], and hence from M conclude that p cannot be verified, because C(p) = C(q) in D. Thus, even in 
the pathological context in Part VI [C(s, n) ---» ((s) as n ---» 20], we see how the true value plays a 
role here. 


And we also see in Part VI, that because the integral in (3) still converges to €, as n ---» ©, the 
corresponding offset [defined to be (1/2) g(0), where g(s) = C((a—s + és) + C(a—s —iée)], must be 
zero, in the case of a root. This forces us to conclude that ¢(p) = 0 in the offset at n = © in (3); so 
that even in the pathological context, the true value of ¢(p) is used here [see also page 727]. And 
similarly for the offset associated with a pseudo-root in (3). 


We can strengthen the argument in this case, by using the integral (4) [p 265] in Part VI; and noting 
that at n = ©, the offset for a root is —(ni/2) h(O), which must also be zero; where here the function 
h(s) =C(a—s +ée) — C(a—s —ée), and the root or pseudo-root is p = a + ig. 


These are some examples, then, of how the true value of ¢(s) at (p, g) is actually used within the 
pathological setting; and going forward, could be useful to us as we learn how to reconcile our 
original methodology M [which was done in the holomorphic context, in a neighborhood W, of p], 
with the pathological context. 


a-path 


B-path 


735 


Table Of Contents, To Date 
Pages 1-52 


Largely an interpretation of the Crucifixion, using Noetherian principles; essentially an introduction 
to this topic. 


Pages 53-128 


A continuation of the above, but more philosophically mathematical. Some good examples from 
the NDE research are included here. 


Pages 129-167 


A more mathematical treatment of the current mosaic; the so-called a-B spaces, and our first 
glimpse of the field equations of general relativity, within this context. 


Pages 168-196 


An introduction to the dark energy contour integral [DECI], the dark energy density function and 
related topics, such as the Laplace transform, and its inverse; essentially a continuation of the last 
section. 


Pages 197-257 


Using DECI in a number of settings, within the context of general relativity; also some commentary 
on solving the generalized Twin Prime Conjecture [p 247 ff.], and various miscellaneous inserts. 


Pages 258-304 
Largely devoted to a harmonic study of the Riemann zeta function, and ultimately, a methodology 
that shows the Riemann Hypothesis can’t be decided for roots and pseudo-roots in the critical strip, 
away from the critical line, using the standard set of axioms. 

Pages 305-349 
Some additional commentary on the Riemann Hypothesis; perceiving its roots in the critical strip as 
static versus more quantumlike; but mostly devoted to a study of harmonic representations for the 
gravitational tensor gu,v, and hidden variables. 

Pages 349-383 
A study of the dark energy components associated with the field equations of general relativity, and 


whether they do or don’t satisfy Laplace (V2f = 0). Also, some more commentary on the Riemann 
Hypothesis, and the Godel-Cohen statements [p 376 ff.]. 


736 


Pages 383-460 


Largely devoted to a study of the a-y equations, which are connected to the time component of the 
Schwarzschild solution, for the interior of a star. A long and somewhat detailed section, but we 
eventually arrive at our final destination. Lots of pictures and tables included along the way. 


Pages 461-513 


Understanding and interpreting the coupled field equations within the context of general relativity 
and dark energy singularities. The associative principle under addition, relative to o, is one of the 
more important highlights. At times, this section reminds me of taking a /ong and winding road to 
some final destination, but eventually we reach that point. I would encourage the reader to be 
patient with this piece. Some good diagrams as well, to help clarify things. 


Pages 514-734 


A mixed bag covering a lot of different topics, like tangible and intangible spaces and vacuums; 
normalized versus general solutions for the coupled equations in the intangible space; the dark 
energy density function and Laplace compliancy; inner blocks and solving the equations as a sum 
over normalized component solutions; interpreting the harmonic expression within the context of 
the generalized equivalency theorem; and more recently, a tutorial on how to use the harmonic 
expression here, as well as a Simple Case Study series. Lots of good diagrams and snapshots to 
clarify the text, as well as some recent material on the Riemann Hypothesis. 


737 


A Message From The Light 


You save, redeem and heal yourself. You always have ... you 
always will. You were born with the power to do so from 
before the beginning of the world ... so says the Light... 


Of all the things I have come across within the world of NDE research, the words above, brought 
back to us from one near-death experiencer, have always stood out. 


The last ninety-eight updates precede the Table of Contents, and can be found on pages 566-734. 


‘Why even the stones know more than we do ... indeed, even a grain of sand. 
If I could talk to the stones or the grain of sand, what deep secrets would they tell me ?’ 


