I'll just briefly go through a little
bit about John first for those who are
new. John is the author of Serpent in
the Sky, Key to Ancient Egypt, The Case
for Astrology,
and is um he won an Emmy award in 1993
for the Mystery of the Sphinx, which was
hosted by Charles H. As you know, John
Anthony West takes regular trips to
Egypt several times a year, researching
and exploring lost tunnels,
all sort of stuff that I want to do. In
other words,
very jealous. Please give him a hand.
&gt;&gt; Well, we we'll trade, Duncan. I've
always wanted to um I've always wanted
to be the editor of an outrageous
magazine.
Um, also actually I I might add, um,
Duncan said I I take trips over there
researching, but in fact I I also do
intensive study tours. In other words, I
take people along. That's what pays the
mortgage actually on uh on on extreme on
very grueling but uh very informative
trips to Egypt. There are uh some
brochures out there. Anybody interested
in more information, I'll give you
website addresses and emails and things
of that sort.
Now I I from show of hands about
twothirds of you were at the conference.
For the other third I'll I'll just
backtrack a little bit and just explain
what we were talking about on the at the
conference. And this was mainly devoted
almost exclusively devoted to the to the
scientific search for the lost
civilization as it were um based on the
geology of the Sphinx, the water
weathering of the Sphinx. And to make a
very long story short, I'll encapsulate
and that is that the Great Sphinx is
weathered in a rather peculiar way and
it's tremendously deeply weathered. I'll
have shots of it later on in this in
this presentation.
But um
uh the the subject of this whole evening
will be what's called the symbolist
school of Egyptology developed by
remarkable French mathematician,
philosopher, orientalist and actually
practicing alchemist with the
unpronouncable name of Arala Dubovich
who over the course of 17 years from
1937 to 54 developed this radical
reinterpretation of the entire of Egypt,
Egyptian civilization in its entire ity
in one of his um ancillary books
scholar's main the main body of work of
scholar's masterpiece as it were the
culmination of his 17 years of work is a
book called the top dulum the temple of
man
um and my book serpent in the sky is an
in-depth introduction to this book when
I wrote serpent father hadn't been
translated out of the French and in the
French or any other language it is
fairly impenetrable stuff that is not
bedtime reading You don't read
Schwaller. You take a year off from
whatever you're doing and plow through
paragraph by paragraph and page by page.
And for those who are
sufficiently bitten by the Egypt bug,
that book has now been translated
finally into into English in a in an
absolutely brilliant translation and a
gorgeous production job. It's not cheap.
It's $195 American, which is about
$7,514
Australian, I believe. And uh or at
least that's what it was yesterday. Now,
it's probably another $100 more. Um you
can get it actually at 30 off through
Amazon or Barnes &amp; Noble. I'm assuming
that you have Amazon here. So, anybody
sufficiently interested want to look
into that because that's I mean that's
that's the nuts and bolts of the entire
symbolist theory.
Um anyway, Schwaller in one of his
ancillary books uh came up with the
observation that the great sphinx had
been weathered by water and not by wind
and sand. And when I read that I
realized that this was this could be and
didn't himself recognize the importance
of that observation. He died about a
year later anyway and was not in a
position to follow up on it. But I
realized reading that that whereas the
rest of the argument that scholar had
constructed a textual argument based
upon the writers of classical Greek and
Latin antiquity who all believed along
with the Greeks themselves and along
with the Egyptians that their
civilization extended many many
thousands of years further back into the
past than dynastic Egypt which begins
somewhere around 3200 BC.
Um I realized that that geological key,
the water weathering of the swings held
the scientific key to the validation of
that notion which as I say the Egyptians
themselves believed and even had uh
there were long two texts, one a one a
chronological tablet, another a
chronological papyrus in which the
Egyptians talk about long reigns when
first they're ruled by the gods
themselves and then the Neru and then by
a series of kind of demi-urge or or
semi- divine kings called companions or
followers of Horus but none of that can
you I mean a textual argument simply
isn't going to hold up in the in the
court of science but the water
weathering if it could be substantiated
would so this began on my part a long
15-year quest to validate that
geological inquiry culminating or
picking up steam I should say I I I
developed this theory and fairly
exhaustively in the culminating chapter
of Serpents in the Sky, but there it sat
with nobody taking paying any attention
to it other than occasional insults. Um,
and I'm of course not a geologist, so I
couldn't really defend myself other than
to say that it can't be wind and sand.
And finally in 1989 I found my colleague
and friend Robert Shock geology
professor strateg strategrapher
paleontologist exactly the kinds of
credentials that you needed to really
look into this and he came over to Egypt
with me corroborated the water
weathering hypothesis. This was then
presented at the Super Bowl of Geology,
the Geological Society of America's
convention in ' 91, which led to the big
NBC special, which led to furious
controversy over the last seven years.
Um, and now is picking up steam again as
we've acquired support from a couple of
independent geologists who we never even
met. They didn't even contact us. They
just got interested in this in this.
Went over to Egypt and um and um came
back and reported on their findings.
Both of them agreeing that it was indeed
weathered by water and specifically by
rainwater. And since there hasn't been
any rain on the Giza plateau to speak
of, certainly since 4,000 BC and between
10,000 BC or so and 4,000 BC, not much.
A couple of rainier periods. Even those
of us who even those of us who um are
agreed that the Sphinx is older and that
it's rain disagree amongst ourselves or
between ourselves as to the actual
dating. One of the new geologists who've
shown themselves, you know, come out in
support of it. One of them is
desperately trying to preserve a
dynastic date and thinks that it's done
in the second dynasty, that is to say,
just a few hundred years older than it
is now. this actually won't account for
that kind of dramatic weathering. Um,
Shock takes the most conservative
position allowed by the data, which is
fair enough. He's a he's a geologist,
but but a scientist. He's got tenure
after his name, so I mean, he's got
letters after his name, so he has to be
cautious. But even he privately agrees
that it could well be a lot older. um
Graham Hancock and Robert Boval
on the basis of
of a of a of a supposed Leo correlation
between the swins and the and the
constellation of Leo, that is to say,
and the age of Leo, the processional age
of of Leo. The last age of Leo was
around 10,500 BC. They take a 10,500
date. I think actually that it's the I
agree that this it's hard to it's hard
to ignore a LEO correspondence between
the Sphinx and uh between the Sphinx and
the constellation but for a variety of
reasons that I won't go into here. I
went into the other night. Um I don't
think that 10,500 date works mainly
because the Earth is in upheaval at that
time following the break up of the ice
age under cataclysmic conditions. I
think it's the period before that, the
processional age before that. In other
words, 36,000 or thereabouts, DC, which
of course absolutely outrages the
academics. But I don't care because I
don't have any letters after my name.
And I don't have any tenure that I have
to worry about or in fact I don't care
what they think what they think or what
they say on the basis of the Egyptian
texts themselves. Their p their dating
actually puts them back at that
fantastically
um old date around 34 36,000 BC. So
that's that's my bet is on for for for
that much older date. In any event, the
this is just just preamble. The um the
the actual dating of the slinks, as I've
said on a number of occasions and talked
about at the at the conference, is in
and of itself not a matter of grave
concern. It doesn't affect the price of
eggs. Um it has little to do with the
2000 Olympics. Um it's a date. But what
is an issue? This is the important bit
and here's where symbolist Egypt comes
in. The important bit is that we live in
an age that I regard as as completely
demented. I mean we're we're we're
plundering and ravaging the earth. Uh we
ind we we indiscriminately produce
hydrogen bombs, strike toothpaste,
Disneyland
and u and and worldwide pollution along
with little lovelies like nerve gas and
that sort of stuff. And it seems to me
that only mad people would would produce
this strange
complex of of of products at once silian
and at once silly and sinister. And um
it seems to me that the human race has
has lost its way grievously.
And what symbolist Egypt does, what
scholar's work does is to
is to actually recover the the wisdom of
Egypt that had been legendary actually
that the the the the magicians and
alchemists and cobalists and astrologers
of the Renaissance all believed they
were covering the wisdom of Egypt. They
all referenced the wisdom of Egypt. This
is talked about in all of the all of the
Greek and Latin texts of antiquity. Um,
but they only had little bits and pieces
of it. And what scholubic did and in
what I believe is I believe is actually
the big claim but I think it's probably
the most important single piece of
scholarship of this or any not this the
last or any other century actually
because it is the recovery of that
sacred science that holds the key to the
possibility of getting out of the mess
that we're in now and by that I don't
mean that by understanding in depth the
the Egyptian doctrine, we are suddenly
going to stop building skyscraper
skyscrapers and Porsches and atom bombs.
Well, maybe atom bombs, but um but
actually what we what we will have is
we will have the keys to an ancient
sacred science that we can remanifest in
a manner in a manner appropriate for our
own age or the age that's coming upon
us. In other words, we're not going to
build temples and tombs and pyramids
again. We're not going to mummify our
presidents, though it's not necessarily
a bad idea earlier rather than later.
Um, but but with those principles to
hand with a grasp on what the ancient
sacred science involves, we're in a
position individually and collectively
to sew the seeds of a new civilization
and get things going again. So, that's
going to be the tenor of the of of my
presentation tonight. And in a nutshell,
what what that amounts to is that it's
it's based upon a single issue actually.
I mean, Egypt was a oneisssue
civilization. And in fact, when you look
beneath the surface, which is not so
easy to do, of all of the major
religions and of all of the of the um of
the tribal and traditional societies
that we in our arrogance call primitive
and which are not primitive at all, but
simply non-intellectualized,
non not philosophical as it were, but
profoundly wise and and deeply
understanding.
um all of them are are based upon a
single issue or a single understanding.
The opposition would say belief. I don't
think it's belief. I think it's
understanding, knowledge, wisdom. And
that is the the potential immortality of
the soul. I mean, without that, we might
as well eat, drink, and be merry because
tomorrow not we may die, but we most
assuredly will, and it won't matter a
damn. Uh the understanding that we are
by nature potentially divine is what's
at the what's at the basis of virtually
every true civilization that ever
existed. And without that understanding
there is no civilization. There's just
progress which is as far as I'm
concerned the antithesis of
civilization. Doesn't have to be. But at
the moment it's pretty much that. So,
what we're going to do now is
I'm going to give you a bit of a rundown
of um of of Schwar's symbolist Egypt um
or an introduction to it rather in the
sense of how he developed it at Luxor
Temple and the basics of it. And then
I've got a very interesting video to
show you. Those who've been at the
conference will know that the term
resonance came up time and time and time
again in all kinds of in all all
different kinds of contexts from new
medical devices to new to medical
therapies and so on to I forget exactly
how practically all of the sneakers
except those who were who were um
talking about um about conspiracies to
stop us from from re re recovering the
ancient wisdom. Uh we're talking in one
way or another about resonance. So I'm
going to be showing you a very
interesting 20 or 25 minute video that I
suspect none of you have have heard
about or or seen which will then lead us
into an understanding of how and why
sacred science actually works. by the
great religious architecture of the past
moves us sometimes to tears. And most
modern architecture leaves us cold. Even
when it's quite functional and
attractive, it still doesn't have the
bang to it that let's say the temples of
Egypt have or the Cathedral of Shatra or
any of the other extraordinary
structures of antiquity. And then
following that, then we'll get into the
nuts and bolts of symbolism somewhere
along the line. I see everybody
snoozing. We'll take a break and then
we'll continue for as long as you're
willing to sit and listen or as long as
I'm I'm capable of talking. By the way,
today I was out the first time I managed
to get out of the hotel practically. Um
I was out at um you probably all know
about the uh the hieroglyphs carved into
the into the rocks of um a site. I
forget the name of it. What's it called?
&gt;&gt; What?
&gt;&gt; Gusford.
&gt;&gt; Gusford. um carved into the rocks there
at Gossford in which is apparently a a
very heated controversy about that.
Nexus published an article some years
ago and I I don't really have the
hieroglyphs fluently and I gave them to
a friend of mine who had them a bit more
fluent than myself but was not actually
an expert and he found all sorts of
strange discrepancies on the basis of
the photographs but still it was it was
not a definitive opinion but there was
no way for me to chase it up any
further. Subsequently, over the last
couple of years, I've become quite
friendly with
one of a very rare character and an an
open-minded Egyptologist. Um, actually
one of among the world's shortest books.
Do you know those whole series of
world's shortest books running around a
few years ago like you know who's who in
Puerto Rico? Um, a uh biographical
dictionary of Italian war heroes.
Welsh gourmet cooking. There was a whole
whole a whole lot of world's shortest
books. Well, new ideas in Egyptology may
be the shortest of all. And um anyway,
there's one Egyptologist that I know of,
a couple of others actually around, but
they just happen to be pals of mine. And
this fellow is in fact a a a widely
recognized hieroglyphic expert. So we
now have video, slides, digital camera,
and so when I get back home now, I'll
I'll I'll give it to Ed Meltzer and um
he will look at these at these
hieroglyphs very very carefully and we
may have something that that actually is
is valid as a definitive
um as a definitive opinion on on this
matter. Needless to say, if it's a
positive opinion, this is a big deal
actually. I mean, it really is to be
able to demonstrate in in in effectively
incontrovertible fashion that the
ancient Egyptians and if this reading is
correct because the the cart is there
crudely drawn, but boy, it looks
Egyptian to me. I must say, I've seen a
lot of hieroglyphs and I've seen a lot
of faked hieroglyphs and this looks
pretty good. But there are these strange
discrepancies with it. But to be able to
prove that the Old Kingdom Egyptians
actually visited Australia is going to
shake a shake up a lot of people. So,
we'll see. Stay tuned on that. I mean,
we'll if I get a a if I get an article
from from Ed or even a letter from
Meltzer, I'm sure we'll get it into a
subsequent issue of Nexus magazine. So,
you want to stay tuned to that. Um, in
any event, we'll we'll once we get into
the um once we get through the video,
uh, you'll see why why sacred art works
the way it does and why it is so very
important to really to our to to the
quest for im immortality. I mean,
without that without that, it's it's um
without that there's really not much
point to this existence. And we like to
think that there is some point to our
existence. Even though even though a
rationalist may say, well, what's the
difference? You know, we're all just
animals and it's all biological drives
and all the rest of it. Very few that
can actually live in that in that state
of meaninglessness. Actually, deep down
they all have some sense that really
that we're not just dogs or snails or
octopuses or something. Octopuses are
actually pretty bright. Um,
okay. So let's let's go in now. Let's
hope this works. Okay, this is the
temple of Luxor and Schwaller. I'm
backtrack again and digress. We got all
evening so I don't care if we take time.
Uh Schwaller himself was born in 1891
um into a scientific family. His father
was a a pharmacist or chemist. Um and um
he was very I mean he was brought up
with science but at a very early age
attracted to mystical doctrines um
esoteric philosophy uh mathematics in
particular. His first published little
pamphlet was on at the age of 16 was on
Pythagorean mathematics. Um he was
recognized pretty well in among his
peers and
actually the generation older than
himself as a a kind of a boy genius and
uh he always had followers. I mean he he
always had people who regarded him as a
as a wise man long before his time even
when he was very young.
Egypt was never his principle or even a
casual interest. He was more interested
in the western hermetic tradition. He
was, as I said earlier, a practicing
alchemist and seems to have reproduced
the the stained glass used in Shatra and
the other and certain of the other
cathedrals of the high renaissance. And
that secret was sub subsequently lost.
In other words, the those of you who've
been to Europe and seen Shatra and um
Notreamam doesn't have much left, but
Bourj and some of the a couple of the
other cathedrals will know that the the
great um stained glass windows of those
the high Gothic of of the 12th and 13th
century have a quality that was never
never equaled afterwards. Even though
the cathedrals later on themselves were
higher and bigger and so on, u none of
them have the magic of shots vanbour and
a handful of other in in France
basically a couple of them in England in
uh Elie Cathedral, a couple of others.
Anyway, Schwar apparently reproduced
that glass and um then in 1937 with his
wife, he just happened to go on a um on
a trip to Egypt. It was mainly just for
fun. It was a it was a um it was a
holiday and um in the temple of Luxor
and this is the temple of Luxor walking
walking through there and it's this is a
pretty ruinous temple. It's fabulous and
huge and magnificent but it's it's
pretty much in ruins. He had this um he
had this moment of what poets call
inspiration and mystics call revelation
and scientists call hypothesis formation
because they want to make it sound as
dull as possible. So he had a hypothesis
formation that the that this this
extraordinary temple was an exercise in
harmony and proportion. Now harmony and
proportion at that time and still in any
textbook any of any of you or any of
your kids will be u will be given as as
gospel as it were. The inventor of
harmony and proportion was a Greek was
was the the legendary Pythagoras.
Doesn't matter that Pythagoras according
to his own biographers uh supposedly
spent 20 22 years studying in under the
priests of Egypt but the Greeks and
Pythagoras in particular is supposedly
responsible for the invention of harmony
and proportion. So Schwaller had this
notion walking through this temple
ruinous temple that it was in and of
itself an exercise in harmony and
proportion. If that were the case, and
scher always believed or had kept an
open mind to the notion of of of more
ancient knowledge and lost civilizations
and that sort of thing,
if that were the case, if he could prove
that, Schwalla would push the the the
understanding of harmony and proportion
back at least a thousand years because
the temple of Luxor is built about a
thousand years before Pythagoras. By
extension, it would push it much further
back because the the Egyptians of the
new kingdom around 1300 BC obviously
didn't invent this out of the blue.
They're virtually every every building
in Egypt, including pyramids of the old
kingdom and the temple complexes of the
old kingdom are similar as it were. I
mean, they have the similar feel about
them, let's say, that Luxor has. So a
demonstration that harmony and
proportion were known to the Egyptians
would be a major scholastic revolution
as it were. So now here's a picture of
Luxor temple from the air. And you see
how this strange goes straight along
here and then has this strange skewed
axis. And actually it's even stranger
than that. You don't see it here, but
even these even these um halls here that
look as though they're right angles are
in fact not right angles. The temple is
actually built upon three separate axes.
And the reasoning behind this, I won't
go into it. It's it's it's simply too
complex. But as you see, walking through
something like this, you wouldn't get
the sense that it's harmony and
proportion necessarily. But anyway,
Schwala decided to stay there um at
least for the for the while and to take
careful measurements and to see if they
could find harmony and proportion
written into the written into the um
into the plan of Luxor. And he was lucky
because at that time there was a French
archaeological commission that was busy
measuring the temple down to the
millimeter. So he had absolutely
accurate unchallengeable data to work
with. After about a month, he was there
with his wife Isha and his stepdaughter
Lucy, who was a very accomplished
draftsman and artist. After about a
month, they discovered sure enough that
um when what they were looking for
specifically, I should say, is the is
the famous golden section, which is
expressed mathematically as 1 + 5 um 1
plus the square root of 5 over two. And
this is a proportion that was known to
the Greeks, used in the Parthonon, used
by the Latin um by the Latin architects
and subsequently by the arists and
architects of the Renaissance and of
course was also supposed to be a Greek
invention. Schwaller reckoned that if he
could find the golden section or fi as
it's written um
written into the plan of Luxor, well the
case would be proved as it were and
everybody would have to change their
minds or so he fondly believed. After
about a month, changing the minds of
Egyptologists is not so easy or
archaeologists. Um,
after about a month, he found sure
enough that he not only did he find the
golden section, but he also found the
musical scales written into the into the
into the measures and proportions of of
Luxor. and he found them deployed with a
sophistication and a and a complexity
that far exceeded anything the Greeks
had subsequently done. So fired by this
he suddenly realized that he had found
effectively he found the the key to
Egyptian architecture. But fired by this
he then it the the the mathematics
led him first to the geometry and then
into the symbolism and the mythology and
finally even into the astronomy, the
medicine and all of the rest. He stayed
there and once the war broke out, he was
there in 37 so the Spanish civil war was
just about to break out. Egypt did not
seem a bad place to be, but in Europe
that's for sure. I mean, you could see
that you could see that Holocaust coming
on. So, he stayed in Egypt until 19
54 and got out just before Nasser came
in. And actually, I don't know if any of
you have heard of the great Egyptian
architect died a few years ago called
Hassan Fati. Wonderful man. Um, great I
mean one of the great architects of of
the 20th century. and Hassan who Hassan
Patati died a couple of years ago and I
got to know him fairly well and he in
fact had studied with Schwaller and and
um in fact learned about sacred
architecture from Dubich and Hassan uh
Hassan Fati was himself recognized as
the the foremost expert on Islamic
sacred architecture. But I said to him
um at one point we were talking and I
said well how did Schwaler know to get
out of Egypt in 54? and he just put his
hands up and he said, "Oh," he said,
"That man knew everything." An
interesting line from a a very eminent
man himself. Anyway, Schwaller started
working on the on the temple here and
and finding these ma mathematical
proportions written into written into
the ver the all of the chambers and
halls and so on. Moreover, he was struck
by
here. There's the the plan. I have this
I do have it right. Anyway, you'll see
that this is this is just the geometric
um what's the word I'm looking for? The
the the growth of the temple by a play
of geometry starting actually here at
the at the um at the um at this holy of
holies, the central sanctuary which
serves as the seed or germ from which
all Egyptian temples grew. But then he
was struck um by the particularly from
this air from an aerial view he got the
notion that the temple itself was was
built to the proportions of the human
body and he found when he had Lucilami
prepare a human skeleton let's say an
not not exactly an ideal but an average
human skeleton male skeleton
specifically um which is a female
skeleton of slightly different
proportions um Both are cut by the
golden section, one at the genital area,
the other at the at the um at the navl.
And Schwaller found that when a skeleton
was prepared according to separately,
according to the best biometric methods
known at the time and superimposed,
whoops, sorry, I mean that and
superimposed upon the temple. Sure
enough, all of the main all of the main
temples, halls, colonads and so on of
the temple cut the human body at a major
articulation there at the knees, there
at the pelvis, there at the thorax and
so on up into the head and and he and
for some reason this is this gets the
Egyptologists angrier than anything
else. I don't know exactly why but it
was because of this that he called it
the temple of man. It's not that the
temple actually is
is meant was from this it was this that
led schwaller I mean this what drove him
on to develop the whole symbolist
theory. It was it's not that the temple
actually represents is is meant to be to
look like a man as it were. It's
proportions of that of a man but of the
of the divine man as it were as of the
realized man. The man who has
transformed himself from carnal to from
from material to spirit who is
symbolized in Egypt by the by the
pharaoh himself who is not an egotistic
tyrant bent on hoodwinking the people
but rather as the as the pope is
supposed to be the incarnation as it
were of God on earth. And Luxor
asshallah developed this and he
developed it with innumerable pieces of
evidence to show that the symbolism for
example in this hall um representing the
lower leg. The symbolism of that hall is
all of action of people setting off
left, right, left, right front. is a
hall of of marching colossal figures of
the king there and of this in this
section here it's again all action and
motion of the of the bringing of
sustenance to Egypt the whole thing is
tremendously complex actually and in
other halls for example there's a hole
over here and the the superimposition of
the skeleton has to have seen two ways
here you see a frontal view in other
words the the skeleton is laying on its
back super imposed upon the temple. But
you have to also you can you have to
turn it over on its side and the the
profile view also gives you um a
different connection with let's say the
with the the bodily centers as it were.
So there's one hole over here.
What is it now? It's this one I guess um
over here where corresponding to the
vocal cords and there there's a very
ruinous slide. I don't have it with me.
Um, well, there's sorry, there's a very
ruinous tableau there that shows right
where the vocal cords are that shows all
of the names of the king written out in
in great detail. But then there's a very
interesting scene where the queen mother
is sitting on a on a on a stool um with
her her hands interlaced with the god
Ammon and they're being supported by two
other goddesses beneath. And the queen
the queen mother is being told by Ammon
um that he is going to visit her in the
night and um and uh and make love to
her. And the result would be a divine
child. In other words, this is the
enunciation written into a temple um
very quite formally into the into an
Egyptian temple wall around 1350 BC.
Anyway, schwer much of the temple of man
of the big book is concerned with going
through the temple hall by hall and
colonade by hollinade showing how the
how the symbolism corresponds to the
vital functions of that part of the body
which in turn correspond to Egyptian
cosmology to sort of the grand scheme of
the universe and so that the temple of
man actually the temple of Luxor
contains
it is it is in its own way, a model of
the universe and a
a kind of a library of the functions of
humanity within the grand cosmic scheme.
And this is one of the marvels of Egypt.
When you go there,
the the whole of the new kingdom that
goes from about 1500 to about a,000 BC,
there's a kind of tremendous
exercise in sympathetic magic in which
the Egyptians are creating a complex of
temples, each of them linked to the
other and each playing a different role
within the cosmic scheme and processions
would go from one temple to another at
specific times of the year. So what the
Egyptians were actually doing were
living the birth and the birth and um
the birth and and genesis of the of the
entire cosmos and reliving the role of
humanity in its in its I mean what we're
here for supposedly according to
esoteric tradition our role in the
cosmic scheme is actually to to reverse
the descent of spirit into matter. I
mean the Egyptians like all
civilizations that ever existed
including the the traditional tribes all
have the idea that first there was
spirit or consciousness and then
consciousness for reasons that will
forever remain unfathomable according to
scholar a very interesting observation.
The reason why the divine or God or the
absolute or whatever you want to call it
the reason why God decided to create
create the universe is the only thing we
can't know. It's it's by definition
outside our comprehension. And when you
look at the various cosmologies and the
various mythologies, the reason why God
or the gods or however it's expressed
decided to create the universe is always
expressed in some sort of poetic
metaphor. It's always well he got bored
being there all by himself or he wanted
company or he wanted to see the drama
play out. All kinds of different
fanciful and and poetic images are used
for the reason why we're all here. But
all agree on one thing more or less. And
that is that our role specifically as
human beings is to is to reverse the
flow of of spirit into matter and in
other words become spirit ourselves and
in other words return back to the gods
what they gave us in the first place in
in terms of creation. So this whole uh
sequence of temples or complex of
temples in Luxor is is an exercise a
living exercise in the performance of
that obligation or responsibility or
privilege depending upon how you look at
it. So I think we're going now. Okay.
Now we're going and most of this all of
this that that I mean Egypt expressed
itself in architecture
mainly architecture and in um and in
art. And this is not
we tend to speak of high civilizations
from our point of view of technological
progress in one in one way shape or
form. In other words, art and
architecture is a high civilization. But
this actually is is is kind of our
prejudice. Doesn't have to be. In other
words, a civilization could express
express itself solely in song and dance
and leave not a trace upon the earth and
be no less sophisticated for that. I
mean, I think probably enough of you are
um I mean, you'll know more about your
own Australian aboriges than I do, but
they seem to be have been a civilization
that for tens of thousands or maybe even
hundreds of thousands of years exactly
express themselves in song and dance and
a few, you know, little rock drawings
and so on, but not much to look at. But
nevertheless, doesn't mean that they're
not as civilized as anybody else. In any
event, the Egyptians expressed
themselves in architecture, and we now
get up to why and how sacred
architecture works. This is where I'll
be showing you a video. I think you
wanted a a little bit of a warning here,
um, Duncan. Okay. You set it up.
Back in the 1900s,
um, a physicist and musicologist called
Ans Coladney, a Swiss, um, developed
what are called colladne figures.
Anybody who knows physics and acoustics
will will know about this. And
Coladney noticed the effects of of
vibration. He was very interested in
vibration as a as a musician and
musicologist. Obviously music is comes
to us. We interpret music through
vibration. And what Cologne did was that
he fixed a he fixed a um a metal plate
to a violin and spread sand on the plate
and then bowed the violin. And at
certain at certain frequencies, the
sand, which is just chaos on the plate,
would form itself into beautiful
geometric patterns. And then when that
particular note was passed, it would
dissolve again into into chaos and then
reform into a different but related
pattern when a harmonic of that note was
struck. Oh, hold on a sec. Don't Can we
hold on? Can we stop it a second? Okay.
Um
this was these are called coladne
figures and it was it was noted as a
curiosity for a hundred years or so. Um
they were well known these figures but
nobody nobody made much of them. Then in
the 50s another Swiss called Hans Yenni
who was an anthroposophist a follower of
Rudolph Steiner got very interested in
these colladi figures. Jenny was a Yenni
was a um a um scientist himself and also
an artist and what he decided to do was
to um elaborate upon Col's earlier
experiment. So what he did was he he he
put together relatively simple but rel I
mean relatively simple technological
devices that would allow him to control
the exactly the rates of vibration of
sound. I mean the the obviously Yenni
was using sound control the sound um and
also built little devices that would
allow him to vibrate different kinds of
materials not just sand but different
kinds of powder liquids iron filings and
so on and as he doing that this is what
you're about to see and he called this
science simatics the science of wave
forms now the the video that you're
about to see is is is pretty impressive,
but the but the um Yenni's commentary
because he was a scientist and he was
aware of of um of the dangerous ground
that he was treading on. So he put
together, excuse me, about as dry a
commentary as you could put or let's say
as neutral a commentary as you could put
to this because he didn't want to offend
his scientific colleagues. And he calls
it bringing matter to life through
sound. But really what he's doing is
something far more significant than
that. And I'll I'll just talk I'll just
tell you what it is now but afterwards
we'll talk about it in more detail. As
you all know the beginning of the gospel
of John is in the beginning was the word
in French they used to say in the
beginning was the verb. The verb the
verb which actually is
because the verb means action. Actually
the word could be any old word but
anyhow whatever the word is it's a it's
a it's a vibratory phenomenon in Egypt
the and in fact in many other cultures
in Egypt one is the one of the
cosmologies talks about pata who's the
architect of heaven and earth creating
the word the world from words spoken to
him by th or jihuti who represents the
embodiment of divine wisdom. So the
notion that creation is associated with
vibration or sound or the word the
informed word as it were is something
current. I believe the aboriges say that
the universe is the world is sung into
existence by the spirits and I'm not not
that up on aboriginal thought but I I
think that I think that's part of their
of their tradition. Anyway, this is
current over overall of the world over
over all of the world. So what you're
going to see here with simatics actually
is a visual demonstration of the
relationship between frequency and form.
And as I said it's about 25 minutes and
I'll let it run the whole time. I mean I
could fast forward now and again but
it's it's it's it's worth watching and
you'll see as you watch simple vibration
the matter represents whatever it is
powder liquid whatever represents let's
say the ground state of matter. It
represents chaos. And you'll see form
arising out of chaos through the agency
of sound. And you'll use your own vi
you'll use your own imagination to
relate those the forms that you see to
what you know. So shall we have proceed
to you have to put the slide on standby.
&gt;&gt; Hold on.
sit here.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Turn it off. Yes. And I can get back to
using the slides.
Um,
sorry folks, but uh technologies the
technolog is after us today. And it's a
brand new video too and I just showed it
last week. So this is peculiar. But but
maybe it is the tracking. I don't know
if that has tracking has to do with the
tape itself or with the uh with the
video, but there we go. Anyway, what you
would have seen and with a bit of luck
will still see was was a variety of of
substances, liquids, powders, in one
case iron filings vibrated at various
frequencies and starting off as nothing,
as chaos.
um
forming
all kinds of extremely beautiful shapes.
The the the shot that you saw before, I
want to see we get this back on now.
Okay, this is this is one of the figures
that comes out of of Yiani's work
actually. I'm not sure what exactly
which one this is. It might actually be
sand, but various powders like a podium
powders um all different kinds of things
are are vibrated sometimes on a
membrane. In one case, he he plays um
Mozart over a sheet of water. I'm not
sure if it's water or gelatin. And and
then visualize, of course, it sets the
the water vibrating. And then he
photographs it. And it's very
interesting because the the the the
pattern that is formed by the by the
water or by the surface of the liquid
looks like Mozart in terms you think of
Mozart, that's what it looks like. And
uh interestingly enough, there are my
favorite in this is a a fairly long
section in which he places iron filings
on a on a um
on on some sort of a device and then
vibrates the some sort of a magnetic
device and then vibrates the um the the
membrane or whatever it is that they're
on, the magnetized membrane. and the
iron filings sort of stand up and march
across the across the um across the
surface of this sheet looking for all
the world like an abstract samurai movie
by Kurasawa or something. And it's very
interesting because it's iron. I mean it
it behaves like like like um like like
war as it were behaves marshally and
you'll see we get this thing working
again. You'll see that you'll see
galaxies forming and organic forms,
turtles and backbones and animals
forming out of the out of simply out of
vibration out of out of frequency
affecting or frequency creating form out
of chaos. And actually one of my one of
my objectives actually some one of one
of the projects coming up in the next
few years I I I mentioned I was talking
at the conference the other day we're
putting together this ancient wisdom
fund. um not absolutely at the top of
the list but somewhere
along the list on the projects that I
want to see that I want to see to try to
get off the ground is to recreate the
instruments that uh Hanseni used and to
do a much more more high techch version
of the of this film that I hope you will
see um and not pussyfoot around about
the about the um the significance of it
because the significance is is actually
deeply profound.
And what it relates to of course is
okay um what it what it what it explains
actually when you see it and I mean
without talking about it but what's
what's at the basis of it is is the
relationship as I said the relationship
between between between
form and function via frequency but it
also explains how and why sac sacred art
works or in fact how any kind of art
works. Um, and we tend not to think
about this. I mean, we know obviously
music is the is the easiest and most
common example. We know that music is
nothing but frequency or frequency,
volume, tone, color, etc. But it's
vibration and a certain sequence of
vibrations is played. And if it's the
right sequence of vibrations, we're
moved to tears. We experience contact
with divinity. If it's another kind of
frequency, we're Deutschand Uber Alises.
We're all ready to go out there and go
to war. Another kind of frequency, if
it's the right kind of rock music or the
wrong kind, depending upon your point of
view. Um, everybody gets all bent out of
shape and excited. Um, but but music
obviously affects us emotionally, but
what's happening? Why is it affecting us
emotionally? Because we're constructed
in such a way that certain resonances
correspond to our emotional our various
emotional faculties and and the music
that the sequence of vibration the
volume etc. Everything that goes into
the harmonics everything that goes into
making up music produces this profound
emotional effect. But we tend not to
think of architecture in the same way.
Um but it was it was Gerta actually who
once remarked that was really into this
sort of thing. Gerta remarked that um
that uh that architecture was um was
actually frozen music. And normally this
is taken as a lovely poetic metaphor,
but it isn't really a metaphor at all.
It's it's quite it's quite literally
true because architecture is as much in
motion as it were as is music. It's just
that the the motion is visual rather
than auditory and we tend not to think I
mean obviously we know that light comes
into our into our through our eyes and
sound waves. So we know that that's a
vibratory phenomena. We just tend not to
think of architecture as vibratory as it
were or frequency because it sort of
sits there not doing anything. But of
course this is why exactly why
architecture works. Divine sacred
architecture works because of its
various visual harmonics, its visual
proportions, its visual volume even.
This is why a big building the same
proportions in a small building or the
same harmonies um will not produce the
same kind of effect as a as a bigger
building. I mean some buildings are
meant to be big and others in fact are
meant to be small. the the produce the
effect that they produce is is is is
contingent upon upon their relationship
to our size as it were. So with
architecture and we tend not to think of
it this way but suddenly you realize and
you know when you go into here in
Australia like in America there's not
much sacred architecture. This knowledge
filtered down through the ages, but it
was pretty much lost by the by the end
of the Renaissance or anyway if not lost
not utilized by most of the architects
of the of the particularly the 18th and
19th centuries. In fact, turn of the
century in the middle of this century
there were many architects who were
actually hostile to the whole notion of
harmonic architecture. I mean, there's a
lot of that kind of stuff, particularly
in England, where they seem to go out of
their way to consciously devise
buildings as ugly as possible so that
you didn't have to worry about accessing
the gods. You could think about Mammon
all day long and go about your business
making things easier for the high
priests of the Church of Progress. Um,
but in in the old days, of course,
sacred architecture was the principal
architectural expression and then
nowhere more so than in Egypt. So
once you understand that the that that
the frequency let's say the the
frequency or the stone music of
architecture is what produces its effect
you then begin to understand why when
you when you experience this when you
walk particularly in Egypt where the
where the um the architecture is so
diverse and you go into let's say
the temple of Luxor you get one effect
you go into the temple of Dender you get
a very different effect. I mean,
obviously it looks very different, but
the effect is generally speaking
profound and very different temple to
temple. Well, the reason for that is
that the so-called Egyptian gods should
not be thought of as gods at all. As
soon as you talk about of gods, it
sounds like superstition to to to a
rationalist. And of course, multiple
gods sounds like even more superstition.
Really the the word natur in in ancient
Egyptian should be translated as natural
principle and the gods represent uh
there's no god of wisdom or god of evil
or god of this or god of that. What the
gods are actually are the are the
embodiment of of the various of the
various principles or qualities and we
tend not to think of in fact we tend not
to think in terms of principles. Modern
science teaches us not to think in terms
of principles because there are no
principles. Everything as we all know is
an accident. The universe just kind of
evolved itself out of a lot of gas. And
um scientists I think who evolved
themselves out of a lot of gas. Um and
and all of a sudden there were galaxies
and nebula and at a certain point things
got complicated enough and suddenly
there was consciousness and
intelligence. But all of this is of
course totally accidental. There are no
principles informing this extraordinary
process. The the ancients saw it of
course absolutely opposite.
Consciousness was the was the preeminent
quality or universal quality
before there was creation. And in order
to in order for creation to proceed or
to flow in orderly fashion, it had to do
so according to certain principles. So
for example in the organic sphere you
might say that the principles are um the
principles are fertilization, gestation,
birth, growth, um maturity,
old age or scinessence, death, renewal
and then at the higher spir spiritual
level the what's called the returns of
the source what in Christianity is
called salvation. Um what Graham Hancock
calls the science of immortality.
um these are these are the organic
principles and this is what every every
living thing follows those principles.
So in Egypt each of those principles was
assigned to I mean one of the one of the
nets or metaroo um represent each of
those principles and the interplay of
those principles
produces the living world that we
experience. And so each of those
principles also are associated with
certain numbers or or sets of numbers
and those numbers give rise to an
intricate play of geometry
and harmony and proportion. So if you
know the science as it were, if you know
the sacred science and you know the
number sets that relate legitimately to
each of those principles and you know
what you're doing and employ them in a
temple, what you're doing actually in an
Egyptian temple or any piece of sacred
art, but the the Egyptian method of
expression is probably the most
sophisticated and most complex that we
know of. when you walk into an Egyptian
temple, what's happening actually and
you get this hit from it which is
sometimes
which is sometimes so profound. I mean
people people often break down in tears
particularly we get there early in the
morning before anybody gets there and
everybody has a good walk around before
we start talking and and and people have
I mean it changes people's lives
actually one of my favorite lines coming
from a book which is believe it or not
maybe the best travel book ever written
on Egypt by Florence Nightingale of all
people who everyone thinks of as this
one-dimensional goody two shoes carrying
her lamp around banding up patients she
was in fact an extraordinary woman,
wonderful writer, um, with a keen
intelligence who visited Egypt in 1849
and there was a book published of the
letters that she wrote back home,
published about 10 years ago. It's
called Letters from Egypt. She makes
this marvelous remark. Um, I I wonder
how people can visit e Egypt and come
home and live lives as they lived them
before. And in fact, what happens very
often in Egypt, you get home, you don't
want to live your life the way you lived
it before. But you walk into these
temples and there is this predigious
emotional reaction to that temple. And
what's happening actually is that
because of its constituent geometries,
harmonies, proportions, etc.
The you you you're having the principle
that the temple is consecrated to evoked
within you. So when you walk into a
Hatha temple, you're experiencing
Hathaor. When you walk into an Ammon
temple, you're experiencing Ammon. You
don't know that that's what you're
experiencing, but you know that that
Ammon temple is very different from an
Isis temple, which is different again
from a
from a Pata temple, etc., etc., etc.,
etc. So, this is the way that the sacred
sacred architecture, sacred art and
architecture, and all art and
architecture work. But if you're in
command of a sacred science as the
ancient Egyptians were and so were the
other civilizations of antiquity, the
Indians um you know the the the Vic
India and China and Japan, everybody has
this knowledge or had it. What
distinguishes Egypt is two things. I
mean one is the the scale that they that
they built on. And of course the
physical nature of Egypt is such that
stuff doesn't weather away very quickly.
I mean it's once you build a temple it's
there for a very long time.
In historically Egypt was very difficult
to overrun. So it wasn't anywhere it
wasn't plundered and ravaged in in wars
as much as let's say the rest of the
near east and China or India much more
open to conquest. So in Egypt we have
the remains of this prodigious
architecture and it's there that you can
experience sacred architecture as in a
way that you can't anywhere else in the
world. Um in any event you this is this
is this is actually why why it works
through through vibration knowledgeably
expressed and of course the difference
is actually very interesting uh when
Beethoven was writing his late quartets
which are probably his best music he
recorded somewhere in a letter to a
friend or a journal said ah music is a
higher revelation than philosophy and so
it is actually particularly the
philosophy that was around in
Beethoven's
But what Beethoven was doing actually
was was accessing the sacred science.
And in fact,
all of the great artists of the western
world, there was almost no such thing as
a great artist who is not at the same
time religious in the deep sense of the
word. doesn't necessarily mean he's a
card carrying
Catholic or Jew or Protestant, but it
means that he understands
he or she understands that that that
divinity is at the at the bottom or
responsible for his heightened
creativity.
and
and actually the the um but the the
difference is between the between the I
mean genius is genius and will out and
we'll will access this this this higher
level of consciousness. The difference
is that in the old days um when there
was a when there was a um when there was
a sacred science in place and
transmitted from generation to
generation
um the the laws could be transmitted. In
other words, Beethoven didn't know
exactly why he was accessing this. So,
he couldn't pass his knowledge on, let's
say, to a pupil or a child if he had
one. He didn't. But the ancients could
pass the sacred science on down. This
doesn't mean, excuse me, that doesn't
mean that you can do without genius. If
you don't have the genius, all you can
do is copy what your what your forebears
did before you. But if you have the
science and the genius, you can continue
to reproduce sacred art at that level
for as long as the science stays intact.
And Egypt actually managed to do that.
Although on a kind of a descending
spiral, one of the peculiarities of
Egypt, and I think I'm not exactly sure
why it should be so, though I do believe
that Egypt is a is the inheritor of that
still earlier wisdom. But it's a a
curious fact of Egypt that it's at its
height very close to its beginning in
the old kingdom and and in fact what
what we'll be seeing later on we'll
after I finish talking about the
symbolism and so on we will in fact take
a tour through Egypt and see Egypt
descending from from its early height
down into the decadence of the TMIC
period and finally vanishing into
effectively into nothingness with the
with the onset of the of the Roman
occupation.
But in any event the the the with the if
the sacred science is understood the
laws can be passed down and then it's up
to individual genius or collective
genius let's say to realize that and the
importance is as as I mentioned earlier
it's just a different variation here
it's just a different variation of what
I said before is that a civilization
that is devoted in its entirety to the
quest for eternal life and is
manifesting its knowledge in art and
architecture of at at this level is
effectively connecting humanity. I mean
the entire society is is connected to
this quest even at the lower levels
where probably people do not consciously
realize that that's what they're doing.
But if you're busy building a temple to
the gods, even at the level of whoever's
quarrying the blocks and whoever's
putting the blocks, you know, whoever's
chopping, knocking,
you know, smoothing them off. Um, this
is a different feeling than building a
football stadium or or a strip mall or
something of the sort. It's an entirely
different thing. And it's very
interesting when in Egypt as you get
this sense as you go from one fabulous
temple to another over the course of of
a couple of weeks you get the sense of
what a civilized society is actually
like. And that's the purpose of this
whole actually the whole exercise of
trying to recover the sacred science is
to make it possible again to experience
life the way the ancient Egyptians must
have. Anyway, let's what are we doing
here for time? Let's see. um what do you
think we're going to do with h happening
with that video?
&gt;&gt; What I suggest is that we try and fix
the video in the break and and determine
what what the fault is. So talk or show
slides up until a break of your choice
and we'll take a 15-minute break and
we'll try and fix the video.
&gt;&gt; Well, you know, I actually cuz this is
sort of a long sequence now.
Okay, let let's do that then because
rather than break this in the middle um
and if we can get that video fixed, I'd
love to show it because it really is
really is an impressive piece of piece
of video.
&gt;&gt; And uh No, I'm okay. Can you hear me in
the back there? I'm used to talking in
the middle of the Egyptian wind and
amidst crowds and stuff like that. So
yes, we've got the video going. We
didn't have there was one one bit was
set for NTSC, but the other bit wasn't.
So that's a the problem is now solved.
&gt;&gt; Without going into the the let's say the
spiritual and metaphysical significance
of it, it's um it's nevertheless a
dramatic demonstration and you use your
imagination. Imagine what it would be
like in a much higher tech version.
Not you know, not holding back on what
it actually means and using computer
graphics and, you know, a lot more
imaginative
um
production values as it were. And
imagine what this would be in a in a
much upgraded, you know, simatics 2.0
4.0 and uh just see for yourself. So,
let let it roll.
The film you are about to see has no
characters. It has no people.
It is a film to describe to you and
explain visually the effect of simatic
frequencies
on texture,
structure,
water, oil.
If you spare a little of your
imagination as you watch this film as it
runs,
you will see many things that answer
many questions. You will see living
forms,
living amoeba,
almost animallike creatures.
You will see continents being formed.
The earth itself coming into existence,
explosions,
eruptions, atomic explosions, bombs. You
can see all this and watch it before
your eyes. that any everything owes its
existence
solely and completely to sound.
Sound
is the factor which holds it together.
Sound is the basis
of form and shape.
In the beginning was the word and the
word was God. We are told that this is
how the worlds began and how creation
took shape.
If we put that into the modern idiom and
say that into the great voids of space
came a sound
and matter took shape. Please watch
carefully.
We can also use different shapes of
plate. Here we have a triangular plate
with a crystal attached to its underside
and produce a sawous fit. We change to a
higher note and shape a rather more
complicated figure.
This more elaborate figure likewise from
a steel plate is also produced by
fraation. The exciting crystal is
attached to the upper corner of the
plate.
We use sand and lyopodium. The
lyropodium moves to the center of the
fields and takes up circular shapes. The
sand forms the lines. Each material has
its own special way of behaving.
Nicopodium alone. A solless figure.
Transition to a mobile flowing phase
and back again to the figure.
The source figures represent stationary
waves. But now we can also observe
moving waves.
Here the sand is flowing in a current.
When the wavelengths are short, these
currents produce a rotary effect.
Areas become defined in which the
particles are actually rotating.
Now we produce two notes with
frequencies which are so related as to
cause a beat. The note seems to throb
and by using the method we have chosen
this phenomenon of beat or interference
can be rendered visibly. The figure
sways to and fro. The figure pulsates.
The picture has changed completely.
Now we are exciting fluids under
vibration. A layer of turbentine forms a
regular mattis work.
In vibrating glycerolin we see
continuous waves which form the querest
figures. And yet the extraordinary
things we see here are simply and solely
the effect of vibration.
Here
was a solid figure shown in a fluid.
There are some wave fields where there
was nothing before.
Where there was previously sand, now
there is nothing to be seen.
The dynamic phase has become the static
phase.
Wave fields which make the vibratory
process in the plate indirectly visible
here. Again interference can be
demonstrated.
All these wave fields pulsate.
Interference becomes visible.
A fluid colored black is dripped into a
transparent fluid. Vibration now gives
rise to curious eddy formations.
It is always a pair of eddies that is
created. One pair after another is
generated so that we finish up with a
whole series of such pairs of edies in a
symmetrical arrangement.
The formation of these eddies by
vibration is particularly significant
because it is eddies of this kind which
are specifically formed in the cockia of
our ears whenever we hear sounds.
That is to say, they are not ordinary
eddies as defined in realology, but
vibratory eddies with the members of
each pair turning in opposite
directions.
A plastic substance.
A plasticizable substance is always
shaped into a ball by the wave trains of
the vibrating membrane. The messes are
jiggled round but gradually proper
spherical shapes are formed created by
nothing more than the vibratory process.
The human voice can also made visible
with a simple apparatus. The various
vowels show typical characteristics
depending on the nature of their sound.
We can see the spectrum as it were of
the sounds.
A sequenced song notes comes out as a
sequence of vibratory patterns. We can
see a melody.
music can also be made visible. The same
membrane that emits the music can also
make its vibratory processes visible
through the medium of the fluid. Here we
have the last 89 bars of the first
movement of Mozart's Jupiter Symphony.
We can see Mozart while we hear him.
I love you.
Heat. Heat.
Lyopoleium powder.
The spores of the club moss reveals a
number of quite remarkable phenomena
when made to vibrate.
Circular shapes appear.
But these are in a state of continuous
upheaval.
The particles are pushed outwards from
the center and inwards again from the
outside
and at the same time they pulsate.
We can recognize the various patterns of
the vibratory fields. They move to and
fro, unite.
and separate again according to the
vibratory state of the surface formed by
the membrane
and we can as it were move over a
landscape which is in a state of
vibration.
If we intensify the note, if we produce
a crescendo for the ear, the messes are
hurled outwards,
we see fountains, eruptions, explosions
almost, but invariably the particles
return to the center. So that here
again, even under these violently
dynamic conditions, we find there is
circulation.
Here
a quick glance at a phenomenon with no
vibration.
Two liquids which spread by surface
tension.
No vibration is involved but this
phenomenon also progresses periodically
expressing the ubiquitous law of
periodicity.
Now we excite the surface on which the
liquids are running.
an entirely different picture is
produced.
It is even possible to make out a
circular formation.
Now there is vibration.
But then the vibration slowly ceases and
again we see a phenomenon without
vibration.
The regular pulsation of these spreading
masses of fluid.
The behavior of iron filings when
subjected simultaneously to a magnetic
field and mission shows that adhesion to
the surface is substantially reduced.
The magnetic lines of the force round
the poles show up with exceptional
clarity.
If we cluster the magnetic lines
together, we can see the effect on the
patterns formed. If we thin out the
lines of force, the phenomenon spreads
out.
Because of the reduced adhesion, the
particles of iron have certain degrees
of freedom. They can move, fall into
line, form figures, and almost dance.
but only in obedience to the vibration
imposed.
Even these serpent-like formations are
produced simply and solely by vibration
over areas of the vibrating membrane
representing movement processes.
All materials and substances and the
various states of aggregation behave in
characteristic ways under the effect of
vibration.
Or we can say that their behavior is
specific.
Here is a pulp.
Here again round shapes are formed and
circulation is set in motion but in the
opposite direction to that observed with
lopodium.
There is a definite ripple effect caused
by the wave trains in the vibrating
membrane. A rich field of effects due to
vibration.
They join together, separate and
pulsate.
If we intensify the vibration,
equivalent to a crescendo for the ear,
The messes are thrown into ever greater
agitation. They are rejected. Spikes are
thrust up. There are eruptions.
Protrances appear.
And all due to the dynamics of
vibration.
The whole landscape opens before us.
The note we hear is strong enough to
originate all this turbulence.
This impressive display is great.
And to end with here, by way of
contrast, is a sonless figure, a static
figure instead of a dynamic one,
representing the opposite pole in the
vast range of phenomena that Wake up the
world of vibrations.
me this is when I first saw this this
was this was a real eye opener and from
it you get the sense I mean you can see
why in fact why music affects us the way
that it does because of course when the
music vibrates we vibrate and why with
sacred architecture or any architecture
and when you go into bad architecture
here and you feel quite physically sick
and for good reason because you're
vibrating to those those disharmonies
and when you walk into a Hathaor temple
you are walking into Hatheror harmonies
and when you walk into an Ammon temple
you're walking into Ammon harmonies and
so forth and so on. So in a way sorry
that was a little bit out of sync but
you get the idea. This is this is
serious stuff. Now the
Egypt expressed
the connection to the gods via art and
architecture of course um and the art
and the language indeed was symbolic and
we'll look into that now a bit because
one of the strange things about Egypt I
mean one of the fascinations with it is
that everything in Egypt is is symbolic
and we along along with a lot of other
things that we've lost we've lost the
appreciation and the understanding of
symbolism. Uh we almost have no
symbolism left that's valid. So it's
very hard to look at a at a at a
find laser pointer.
So when we look at a at a complex figure
like this actually I mean it's quite
beautiful because it is in fact
harmonically designed but what the devil
does it mean? The winged scarab on a
boat over a large serpent with a figure
of a god here Ozirus and the deceased
here
making a a gesture of prayer to Osiris.
What's going on? We know it's beautiful
very well drawn and so on. But what does
it mean? And what's the what is the
what's the purpose of the symbolism?
Well, to get a to get a grasp of the of
the richness actually and in in a way
this the superiority of the symbolic
language over that of the of the of the
let's say the sec secular linear
language which is what we use generally
to express ourselves. Um there's one
there's one aspect of symbolism. It's
not sacred symbolism but that still
works and that is that is cartoon
particularly. Let's say the political
cartoon
um for example
the a good cartoonist will take a
particular political situation and let's
say juxtapose Uncle Sam for America John
Bull for England the liberte for France
and the Russian bear all cut up into 14
pieces like Ozirus in a certain context
or juosition and out of that you'll get
I mean if you know the symbolic language
and you understand what everything
represents
You'll get from this an instant hit an
understanding of a very complicated
political situation. If you're a Martian
or an Eskimo or a Zulu and you don't
know that symbolic language, all of this
will be completely opaque to you. But if
you understand the symbolic language,
you get not only do you get a complex
picture, but you get it according to
your level of understanding. So you know
somebody not very educated in the
symbolic and the in the political
situation will get one thing and a much
the same thing but a much more advanced
and sophisticated understanding of it
will be had from somebody who follows
the papers every day or a PhD in
political science or whatever and you'll
get it instantly. If you try to explain
in linear language what the political
cartoon is about, you have to start off
to say why Uncle Sam is Uncle Sam and
Libert and the Russian bear is the
Russian bear. By the time you're done
and then explain the history of the
situation by the time you're done with
this, which three months will have gone
by and whoever you're talking to will
long ago forgotten what you started
talking about in the beginning. You've
explained it in linear fashion. Okay.
But the totality of the situation will
have long since been lost. Well, if you
the the sacred cartoon is or the or the
religious the religious symbolism is is
like the political cartoon in that it
encapsulates a a tremendously complex
situation. But to appreciate it, you
have to know the language. And of course
with Egypt, we don't. And I mean, even I
after all of these years and years of
study only really can get a tiny
percentage of what these sacred cartoons
are all about. But if you walk into a
temple, of course, you're struck by the
beauty of the reliefs. And if you know a
bit, you get something out of it. But to
an Egyptian priest, walking into any of
these temples or any of the tombs would
give you this incredibly rich instant
hit of a total situation. This is what
we're looking at when we look at
Egyptian art. And so I can give you just
a brief as we go through now a kind of
an overview of what what we're looking
at and what it represents. Here we see
the scarab beetle. The scarab is a the
scarab is a dung beetle
and it represents the usual explanation
is well it represents the the the rising
sun. And the Egyptologists sort of laugh
lat and snicker about this, why a dung
beetle should represent the glorious
rising sun. But to understand what it
really is all about on the exoteric
side, sort of the external easy side,
the scarab is the the beetle is a little
bug that lays its eggs in the ball of
dung and then it rolls the ball of dung
along the desert. And in the evening
when the sun goes down, digs a little
hole, buries the ball of dung. And in
the morning when the sun comes up, it
unears a little ball of dung and
continues rolling it around the desert
supposedly for 40 days. I've never
actually followed the scarab beetle to
see if it was really 40 days or 38 days
or 42 days, but
metaphysically or esoterically it's 40
days, which is in fact a number of
completion. the 40 40 years of the the
40 days and 40 nights of the deluge.
Christ fasted in the wilderness for 40
days. Moses wandered in the wilderness
for 40 years. 40 turns up now time and
time and time again in in a context of
completion.
Anyway, it's what goes on. So this you
can see this is a kind of simple-minded
um not necessarily simple-minded but
simplistic
explanation of why the scarab beetle is
associated with the the rising and
setting of the sun but really what it
really represents is the
transformational power of the sun and
the reason for that is that as I said
its eggs are laid in the ball of dung
now what happens is it rolls a ball of
dung along the desert the sun beats down
it fermentss the dung um the little eggs
hatch into into grubs and feed on the
dung as it were. Now the dung represents
matter in its grossest state. The little
the little grubs feed on the dung and
then they go through the second stage.
They become a larvae and then they go
through into a third stage and they
become they spin a little co cocoon for
themselves. They become a nymph same as
a butterfly actually. And then at the
appointed time um I mean the the the the
the nymph goes quiescent in its in its
um in its little cocoon. And then at the
appointed time it breaks out of its
cocoon and flies off into the sunlight a
winged or there a winged creature and
therefore volatile or spirit. So what
the what the scarab beetle actually
represents is the transformational power
of the sun. And this is why it's it's
sort of the central one of the central
characters in the great cosmic drama
that Egypt is enacting. So here we see
the scarab beetle and it's in a it's in
a in a boat here. Not sure who's
steering the boat, but usually this is
the the so-called solar boat. It really
should be called the boat of eternity.
And the boat is actually is generally
steered by
two characters, three characters
actually, two of three characters. It's
it's it's steered either by by two
characters called sea and who which
represent consciousness and action or
sea and heekah who represent
consciousness and magic. Magic is the
science of transformation. It's not
conjuring tricks. So anyway, you get a
sense here anyway without going into a
long palava of the of the profound
significance of that scarab beetle.
We'll see a couple of other things
coming up. Here's our scarab beetle in
in the one of theerary texts, the books
of the dead, you see, holding the
sundisk in its arms. And the this the
these complex tables themselves. the
theerary text should be seen not as a
bunch of mumbo jumbo but actually as as
manuals. Um sort of like Microsoft
manuals equally hard to follow and very
very difficult to comprehend but they
are manuals for the the the the deceased
soul which of course retains its
consciousness again in Egypt and all the
other civilizations that ever were
except under the church of progress. And
when it's over, it's over according to
the Church of Progress. But all of them
should be seen as
as as manuals for the soul. In other
words, what it has to do after death in
order to either reincarnate or
become a star and and and and reach the
higher level of consciousness which is
which is in fact eternity.
More scarab beetles. And here you see
actually this is this is in fact a uh
the the the the pupa the the nymph of a
silkworm but effectively the scarab is
the same. And you look at that this is
this is a little cocoon it spins and you
look at that it looks like something
very familiar. Yes it looks like an
Egyptian mummy. The reason that the
mummy is wrapped the way that it is
wrapped is because it is effectively
a human cocoon. This is what's going on.
And sooner or later, if the if the nymph
within the within that cocoon has done
his or her work in the correct form, he
or she will fly off into the sunlight.
Let's say the spiritual sunlight as a
reborn or spiritual creature.
So that's the scarab. Now we'll look at
some of the
see in Egypt in Egypt cosmology I say um
the creation of the universe itself is
understood in in in in very
in detail actually and it's interesting
that in physics and in modern cosmology
the more advanced they get with each or
let's say with each significant advance
it becomes clearer and clearer
that the ancients understood this
precisely only they express expressed it
in myth and symbolism rather than in
mathematical formula. And so here at the
very beginning without going into a long
long palabra because it is a long
palabra but one of the Egyptian myths um
starts off it's it's called the
helopolitan helopouloolis the cosmology
of of helopoulos and it starts off in in
in terms of creation there is the void
or unpolarized consciousness as
schwaller calls it and then out of this
void the void creates in and of itself a
god called Atum who is alone and without
without without
um without without peer and without
consort without you know without a
without without a female part to him. So
in order to create the univer universe
ta actually sorry atum actually
masturbates the universe into into
existence in other words he has no
female and I've got a book now that I'm
just reviewing for a publisher um called
in French it's
uh the secrets of hathor by an
Egyptologist orthodox egyptologist is
very interesting because she's without
mentioning schwa delubich she's right in
there and she's understanding that the
the significance or the cosmological
significance of Egyptian myth and
according to this book and I didn't know
this before myself until I read it but
it's it's Hor who represents the divine
feminine or let's say the the cosmic
feminine that actually excites it's the
it's the vision of the feminine that
provokes uh that provokes atun into his
into his act of masturbation in which he
produces is a set of twins called Shu
and Teethnut. Shu and Teethnut. This is
the first the first sexually
differentiated pair representing Shu
representing usually he's called the god
of air which means nothing. He's not the
god of air. He's the principle of
extension actually of space. And Testnut
probably Testnut's a bit fuzzy and Tessa
is difficult to get a handle on is the
first feminine often shown as a lion or
a lioness rather. Um who who they say
represents moisture but it's it's in
other words it's it's the you might say
that Chiffnut represents the great womb
the moist womb from which creation will
spring. They in turn
produce well this is this is Hor
actually. I want to backtrack a bit.
This is the temple of Dendra and
Hatheror. Hather is associated with N. N
is the representation of the sky.
Interestingly enough, in Egypt, the sky
is feminine and the earth is masculine.
So here you have the sky goddess N
arched over. This is a chapel in in the
temple of Dendra. And you see that she's
swallowing. Let's see. Let's see if we
can get a better figure of her. It's
drawn out here. Here's N stretched
around the chapel and she's swallowing
the sun by night and giving birth to it
by day and the rays of the light are
raying down. This is actually a a
representation of the facade of dendra
between the two mountains of the
horizon. Normally there would be a
sundisk here between the between the
twin peaks of the horizon. And this
represents actually oneness, the
division of the one into the two, the
materialization into two. And the solar
disc here here is associated with hathor
and the sun raying down. One of the
interesting things of this
representation actually is that the
sunlight itself, I mean normally if you
ask a kid to draw sunlight or the rays
of the sun or if I ask any of you to
draw the rays of the sun, chances are
you'll draw straight lines. The Egyptian
drew Egyptians drew them as I think
they're probably meant to represent um
flowers, but you see that they're in
packets. And I'm I'm wondering if the
Egyptians actually understood the quant
the quantum nature of light. In other
words, that light is delivered in
packets because the natural way to draw
this is a straight line. I think
probably they did understand.
Anyway, here we get it. Here's Shu.
Here's GB the Earth. Oh, Shu and Tefnut.
Sorry. Shu and Tthnma give rise to
another set of of of twins. N and the
sky as she is and GB the earth and Shu
is kept keeping them separate. These get
very very complicated but it rep it it
actually relates to the book of Genesis
where you know God creates heaven and
earth and then separates heaven and
earth and then and then breathes life
across the waters. So all of this
actually very interestingly enough
virtually everything in the Old and the
New Testament is either
taken from or derived from or related to
the the much more complex and
sophisticated Egyptian
and much earlier of course Egyptian
mythology. You might say I sometimes get
people angry with this but basically
Christianity is a kind of remedial
Egypt. It's sort of it's Egypt for the
people who can't handle the science and
and Judaism is a kind of portable Egypt.
You can take it with you into the desert
and uh nice and short. But in Egypt, the
whole thing is worked out in tremendous
detail. So here we have you see the co
cosmology developing
over here. Then the the the in other
words earth and sky and universe and so
on is set up. This is an astronomical
freeze taken from um taken from the
ceiling of the tomb of Seti the first,
one of the new kingdom pharaohs.
Gorgeous tomb that you can unfortunately
no longer get into at the at the center
of the universe. The this is this
represents the the pole the actually the
polar axis and you see the strange
figure of the upright hippopotamus with
a crocodile on its back. Well, the this
all has these these all represent
constellations and stars and so on. But
the upright hippopotamus and the
actually all of the animals chosen by
Egypt to represent their gods usually
describe as you know some sort of
primitive animism but actually it's a
very it's a very sophisticated way of
embodying the principles in an animal or
bird or whatever that that best
represents that particular principle. In
other words, if you want to understand
why a particular animal is chosen for
its particular role, all you have to do
is look at what the animal does in real
life and you'll know why it's that
animal or bird or reptile
that serves that particular purpose. So
for example, the upright hippopotamus
here is a goddess called Toret and she
represents the the the principle of of
pregnancy or gestation because what
could be more pregnant than a pregnant
hippopotamus. The crocodile for fairly
obvious reasons represents death. So in
at the very center of the universe as it
were this is this is what is shown a
it's a cycle of of of
pregnancy in other words pre-birth
creation with the crocodile on its back
or death. So right at the very center of
creation the coming and return are
symbolized through these two animals.
Now we're getting into actually we're
getting we're getting closer to earth as
it were. These are the ram-headed
sphinxes leading into the temple of
Carac. the only instance of ram-headed
sphinxes that there are and schwala uses
this as I think very good evidence for
the Egyptian knowledge of the procession
of the equinoxes because in Luxor the
the chief deity of Luxor during the old
kingdom um and up to the middle kingdom
which stretches let's say from 3200 or
therefore or thereabouts down to about
2,000 BC is a is a god called Montu
whose whose whose symbol is the bull
just about 2,000 BC with the ingress
into the sign of Aries, the the worship
shifts to Ammon, one of whose symbols is
the ram. And in fact, in the texts,
Ammon is referred to as the great ram in
the sky. It sounds pretty much
astronomical, as though the Egyptians
knew what they were talking about. So
here, right on schedule, the the the
ram-headed sphinxes or or or or the
sphinxes of Ammon lead you into this
great temple of Carac, which actually
represents material creation. And
Carneak is connected by an avenue of
human headed sphinxes to Luxor which as
I said earlier is the temple of man or
which represents the role of humanity
within the grand cosmic scheme that in
turn is connected to a temple across the
river. And all of these are connected by
axes. In other words, you follow the
axis of one, it leads right into the
into the doorway of the other. And then
across the river miles away leads into
the doorway of a of a temple called
Medhabu which represents at once both
the creation of the world and its
harvest as it were. So in other words,
beginning and end. So the Egyptians are
creating this and are living this this
huge cosmic this huge recreation or it's
a a magical reliving of the cosmic
scheme. Then we have Ammon here. That's
just a nice little closeup of of the ram
of Ammon.
And now, ah, damn, that one's upside
down. I thought I ran through this.
Everyone stand on their head, please.
And you'll see that you will see that
this is this is the ank. And you see the
ank upside down. The loop and the bowl
and the and the shaft and the bowl
underneath the bowl represents all what
this means is all life. Actually, the
ank itself. Well, we might as well go
past that. But
explain. No, I will go back to it.
Um
the the the ankh itself is a very
complex all the symbols are complex and
arguments about what the ankh actually
represents. One school of thought has it
that this represents the pharaoh's
sandal. This is typical of
Egyptologists. Why should that represent
life? Another school of thought has it
that it represents all of Egypt. this as
the as the long the long Nile until it
hits the delta and the and and the loop
here the kind of the oval representing
the delta itself and this crossbar here
representing the division between upper
and lower Egypt a division that was
maintained
um throughout the course of Egypt after
it was unified which is usually taken as
a political situation and probably isn't
a political but a symbolic situation the
Nile part which is upper Egypt which is
the south representing spirit actually
and the lower part the delta which is
the fertile bit representing matter and
actually so this is the fusion of spirit
and matter this makes sense better sense
is that or actually they're not mutually
exclusive is that it represents the
fusion of male and female the the loop
representing the womb and the and the
the the shaft and crossbar representing
male genitalia And what is life other
than what what better symbol to to to uh
to represent life than the fusion of of
male and female. So starting with atum
masturbating the universe into
existence, we follow the cosmology down
to the creation of life itself in in
biblical terms, in Old Testament terms,
breathing life across the waters.
And then we get to we get to the to the
human side of it. Now, I won't go into
the complex Osiris myth, but you
probably all have a bit of a handle on
it. Ozirus, um, the dead king. By the
way, how many of you saw the line that's
very interesting the way that myths
percolate down through history and under
the right circumstances get revived and
sometimes you don't even know that it's
an old myth. Um, how many of you saw The
Lion King, the Disney film?
A lot of you saw it. Okay. How many of
you recognize the story?
The critics, most of the critics didn't.
So, if you didn't get it, but okay,
here's the story. The king lion, who's
the good king, beloved by everybody,
incurs the jealousy of his of his of his
mean-spirited brother. The brother
murders the king, marries the king's
wife, sends the young prince into exile,
who at a certain point comes back to
avenge the murder of his father. Sounds
like a Shakespeare play. Yes, Hamlet.
Um, but actually Hamlet is a much older
story than that. It's it's exactly the
Isis Osiris legend. um in which Osiris,
the good king, is murdered by his wicked
brother Set, who marries Isis. Horus,
their young son, is sent off into exile.
At a at his appointed time, he comes
back to avenge the murder of his father,
which he eventually does. Meanwhile,
within the Ozirus myth, all of this is
very very complex, but it all makes
perfect sense as the interplay of
principles and the really again the the
role of humanity within the within the
great cosmic scheme. In the myth, Ozirus
at one point in the myth, Ozirus is cut
into 14 pieces by by set. But Isis, who
is the mistress of magic along with
other things, goes all around Egypt
recollecting the pieces. The only piece
that she can't find has is the fallus
which has been eaten by in one context a
fish in another context or another
variation. A crocodile the crocodile is
easier to understand. Both make sense
but the crocodile is of course death. So
Osiris who who represents
who actually represents imminent
divinity within mortal humanity is
deprived of regeneration because he's
lost his his generative organ. He's
provided with a with a golden fallus for
a knight by the god Sar who is actually
a form of Horus. And here you see Ozirus
on this is a extraordinary relief at the
temple of Abidos. And you see him with
his palace in his hand obliterated and
faced by the Christians no doubt who
into facing that sort of thing. Um but
in due course what happens is that Isis
appears and in the form of a female
falcon or kite in other variations sort
of impregnates herself on the on the
fallus of the of of the of the dead
Osiris and she will eventually give
birth to Horus. This actually is a much
earlier representation of the immaculate
conception. In other words, this is a
this is a this is a spiritual this is
the this is the birth of the spiritual
human being. In Christian terms, it
becomes born again as it were. But
anyway, so here's the human drama
evolving out of the great cosmological
drama of of Atsum creating the universe
initially.
Here we go into into other aspects of
the symbolism. But I think you begin, I
hope, you begin to get the idea that
these very beautiful but inexplicable
scenes are actually tremendously rich
and in fact scientific
um
scientific explanation is is not quite
the right word, but perhaps scientific
evocations
of very complex processes. And if you
have a bit of a handle on the symbolism,
you get you get in other words, you get
a tremendous amount of understanding out
of this that you will not get from a
long linear explanation. But in order to
get that, you have to be an Egyptian
priest. I mean, I I could get only a
little fraction of it, and that's after
years and years of study. But if at
least you appreciate the richness of
these tableau, you begin to get a sense
or a feeling for Egypt. So this over
here, this is the court of Ozirus and
this is one of the forms of set who
represents the opposition being sort of
beaten away by a monkey who represents
the intellect. And all of this is very
complicated. These are the scales in
which the the soul of the deceased is
going to be weighed. Um complicated
stuff. Here though there's a just a more
clear this is a you know a drawing of
the same scene the whole of Ozirus. Here
you have one of the innumerable scenes
from Roman the papyrus of theerary text
of the of the the of the judgment scene.
This this becomes judgment day in
Christianity. And here you have Anubis
and this is the heart of the deceased as
the heart you see in the form of a
little jar being weighed against a
feather which is the feather of m who
represents justice or cosmic
equilibrium. The heart has to has to the
cart can't outweigh the feather or the
soul of the deceased gets thrown to a
creature here called Amit um who's a a
combination crocodile lion and
hippopotamus who's called devourer or
eater of the dead the Egyptians didn't
actually have a a hell a place of
eternal punishment what they had was
oblivion and without going into the
complexities of it Egypt Egypt had a a
kind of a twin doctrine according to
schwa dug which there was the the path
of Ozirus which corresponds pretty much
to Vic India which is a path of
successive incarnations reincarnation in
other words and then the path of Horus
which is salvation or resurrection or
the return to the source within a single
lifetime which in fact becomes
Christianity. So it was a fusion of
these two paths actually that fueled
Egypt along its 3,000 years.
Here we have just a detail of that scene
of the dead. That's the heart form of a
little jug and actually looking like a
heart. And this is the goddess Mahat
with her ostrich feather on her head.
Now here we have just a couple of scenes
from the from the from the books of the
dead which as I said are instruction
manuals and tremendously complex. When
you go into the royal tombs, when you go
into the noble tombs, you see all of
these wonderful scenes of so-called
scenes of daily life, which are also
scenes of transformation. All of these
are scenes of transformation in the
books of the of the royal of the of the
um of the pharaohs. They're actually
entirely symbolic and you see very
little that that relates to daily life
as we know it such as these the winged
andlegged serpents and the characters
with the sundisks on their heads and the
eyes of Horus and so on. This is even to
the Egyptians this was complicated. The
texts refer over and over again to the
to the mysterious land of the duat which
is the the limbo that or the the the the
state of consciousness that that follows
death. By the way, you I think you will
have gathered, but well, I'll I'll
reinforce the point now that in
classical Egyptology, it's often said
that the, you know, Egyptians were
obsessed with death. They weren't
obsessed with death. You can say that
they were obsessed, but what they were
obsessed with was eternal life, which is
a very different a very different
outlook upon life. Actually, everything
was directed toward and focused upon
that single issue of life eternal.
These are all just more scenes of the of
the books of the dead. I won't try to
explain them actually in the in the
guide book in the Travelers Key. There's
a um I'm quite pleased with that chapter
actually that's derived from both
Schwaller and a couple of other
Egyptologists
um who are fairly clued in trying to
explain these this very complicated um
sequence of what the soul must undergo
after after death. actually which
corresponds in to a certain extent to
the Tibetan book of the dead which is
about the same sort of thing. The whole
idea being not to reincarnate actually,
but to achieve immortality in one fell
swoop in the in the Tibetan book of the
dead. What happens at the end of 49
days? They say, "Sorry guys, you didn't
make it. Better luck next time. You're
going to have to come back."
More scenes from the book of the dead.
You see these fiveheaded serpents and
the character with the scarab attached
to his consciousness. All very complex
stuff, but very beautiful.
Now this is an interesting scene. The
Egyptians had a jillion ways of
expressing this notion of of exaltation
or transformation. So here what we have
this is a scene. It's it's what's called
the botanical garden of Tutmos the
third. It's part of the temple of
Carnac. And you see rather unusual
scenes here. Here you see a lotus
flower. And what it's doing is that it's
producing more lotuses from its from its
corola. In other words, what's being
represented here, this is a phenomenon
that happens in botany. It's rare, but
it does happen. And what's what's
represented here or what's symbolized
here is effectively born again in
Christianity. It's producing new life
without sexual reproduction. In other
words, it's it's creating itself out of
itself. So the Egyptians had a jillion
different ways of expressing this this
transformation as it were of of of
matter into spirit or back into spirit.
Here we have the cobra freezes around
the walls of Sakara and these represent
actually the cobra is always said
protection. It's not actually
protection. The cobra often is seen you
know as the diadem of the king. It's
shown rearing out of the king's forehead
right here. It actually represents the
the risen condalini. The Egyptians
understood this perfectly well. The the
Indian doctrine actually correlates to
the Egyptian quite closely. And so the
cobra phrases actually represent
represent the risen condundalini coming
out of the out of the third eye or the
pineal gland.
Here an interesting scene here. This is
one of the the faced figures of the
great queen Hachepsut. And here you see
Thoth or Jihuti
um representing cosmic wisdom and Horus
the falcon representing the return to
the source of the principle of
resurrection pouring the waters of life
for eternity over the aaced figure of
the queen. The reason she's faced I
won't go into very complicated everybody
disagrees with it but anyway she was the
hotepsut was the great queen who took on
herself the role of pharaoh and that
probably was illegitimate or considered
illegitimate which is why they have
faced her image but here you have the
the ibis of Thoth or jihuti and the
falcon of horus and you the reason why
why the ibis for wisdom actually
interesting and also at the same time.
The baboon, the the ibis, is a bird, a
waiting bird that stalks through the
water. Very intelligent bird. And in
other words, it's it's continually
seeking food. It's kind of walking along
in the mud looking for fish or
crustaceations or whatever, and it goes
and it gets its food. So, in other
words, it's it's continually on the
search for nourishment. And then as
baboon, the baboon is an animal that
squats on its heels, looks lost in what
appears to be contemplation for hours on
end. So if you're looking for animals to
represent wisdom, what better animals
than one that seems to be searching and
another one that seems to be
contemplating. Horus represents the
return to the source or or the the
ascent back into divinity. So the the
the the falcon is a bird that hovers
high up in the eye of the sun looking
for its prey. And when it finds it, it
sort of swoops down at tremendous speed,
a couple hundred miles an hour, grabs
its prey and then flies back up into the
eye of the sun again. What better animal
to express the return to the source. So
each of the animals that seem so
bizarre, let's see who comes up next.
Okay, now these are just a couple of
symbols, but you when you get into it,
you start seeing that all of the animals
make very I mean quite specific sense um
within their context. Here we have the
very complex symbol symbolism of flail
and crook. This is Osiris who's one of
one of whose epithets is the good
shepherd which of course filters down
into Christianity. The crook is a an
instrument used for gathering the sheep
into the fold. The flail is what
separates the wheat from the chaff and
it also serves as an instrument of
punishment. So even that even the um the
metaphors that are used in Egypt. I mean
the the the the let's say the the
instruments become metaphors in
Christianity. The links are are endless.
I mean there's almost nothing that's for
real in Christianity that can't be
related to Egypt. This is one of the
reasons why Egypt was the first country
Christianized because all they had to do
is change the names of the gods and it
was what they'd been believing all
along.
Here we have a very good instance of
crook and flail.
Now here a very interesting a very
interesting um tableau set often called
the god of evil. There's no such thing
as a god of evil. What set represents
set is interesting. except within the
cosmology is the is the brother of of
Osiris who murders him. In other words,
Hamlet and Hamlet is the the the king's
brother. I forget his name who actually
murders forget all the names suddenly
who murders the king. But in in the
Egyptian myth, what happens is that
Horus goes out to avenge the murder of
his father and after tremendous battles,
he actually ends up conquering Seth and
then doesn't kill him. more complexity
in terms of the myth but is reconciled
to him. Now set doesn't actually
represent the god of evil because there
is no god of evil. Maybe there's evil.
But what set actually represents is the
principle of opposition. That which does
not want to return to the source. And
set is rather easy to understand.
Anytime I turn on my computer screen,
that's set. It doesn't want words
written on it. Would much rather I went
out and had another couple of double
vodkas. And set is the opposition as as
it were. and quite simple to understand
and also to be appreciated. One of the
great problems with with I mean set
becomes Satan in Christianity. One of
the big problems with Christianity is
that I thought you had to get rid of the
opposition. You can't get rid of the
opposition. Without the opposition,
nothing gets done. And the myths
actually the myths become very very
interesting the more you study them
because you find that they are actually
even if they're ancient myths and not
our myths anymore that they're endless
sources of not information but
understanding in fact once you
understand
that that set
is is never I mean set can't be killed
and has to be venerated you're in good
shape and you can actually even watch
it. I mean, for example, those of you
who were there who were at my other
lecture, we're talking about the
strengths, we're carrying this quest
further now, if everybody had said right
from the beginning, great, you know,
you're right, wonderful, would change
our minds, you know, here, have a PhD.
Um,
nothing further would have been done
because why bother? It's only because of
the opposition that we look further and
further and further and further and
develop the theory which if correct will
sooner or later prevail. So set is an
understanding of set would be it would
be harder to find anything more
important than the actual process of
living our daily lives than to actually
appreciate the existence and the
necessity for set. And here you have set
I mean set is a great god in Egypt and
revered. And here you have set himself
offering the key of life and the and and
and the scepter of of dominion or power
to the falcon of Horus. And elsewhere
you see both Set and Horus embracing the
king. The king reconciles these two
waring principles of he who would return
to the source and he who would oppose
the return of the source. Be very
difficult to find a more important
lesson than than an appreciation and
understanding of the Setian force.
Unfortunately, I mean, we now live in an
era where Horus is kept in a cage, if he
exists at all, or is anyway an
endangered species and set is
everywhere. So, this is a problem.
Now, some of the other symbols here, we
have the hunting dogs of of of Egypt.
You see that these are called the
Muhoru, the greyhounds of Horus. These
are the wonderful vibrant scenes of the
walls of the of the noble tombs. And
it's from these tombs actually that we
know a lot about how the Egyptians live
their daily lives because these are
indeed scenes of daily life. And you see
boats and goldsmiths and wine makers.
And if you wanted to, if you had to
start from scratch, nothing else. And
you wanted to recreate Egypt. All you
needed a couple of these tombs intact.
And from scratch, you could start off
doing things the way the Egyptians did
because they're very detailed. But at
the same time, all of them are
transformational tales. And in this
case, these are the greyhounds of Horus.
And what they're doing is they're
hunting down the animal, the wild
animals of the desert. And everything in
the desert, everything that is wild
comes in under the domain of Set. So you
have So you have the the greyhounds of
Horus hunting down the enemies of Rah,
which are Setian. All of this is very
rich in symbolic significance. Here's a
very nice drawing of one of those
greyhounds. And interestingly enough, oh
here's another one actually of the of
the greyhounds and the monkey.
Greyhounds actually what they represent
is instinct under control. The monkey on
a lead represents represents the the
cerebral chattering in intellect. Same
as in China under control being led
actually to the to the deceased as
offerings.
And over here you see the dogs still
exist. Actually, I lived on Aisa, the
island of Aisa off the coast of Spain
for many years. And there the the
hunting dogs of Egypt remained pure as a
pure breed. And I've always had these
dogs. This last one died a few years
ago, and I've been so busy traveling
that I don't have another one. But
interesting that filters down over the
years and the and the and the wonderful
greyhounds of Egypt are still with us.
Here we have Seek, everybody's favorite
goddess shun as a lioness. a woman's
body with a lion with a with the head of
a lioness and a solar disc on top. She
represents the female aspect of the fire
principle and she's the consort of ka
the the consort the the architect of
heaven and earth. And when you say why
the lioness for this for this particular
role all you have to do is look at what
the lioness of how the lioness lives to
understand this and you realize that the
male lion basically does nothing. He
sort of sits around and roars and keeps
the other guys away from the from the
haram. And it's the female lion who the
lioness who does all of the work,
nurtures the children, does all of the
hunting and reeks vengeance on in other
words keeps the any anybody else out
away from the away from the pride. So
and it's Smat who actually is in Egypt
is both healer but the healer by fire
and the the um
and and also whenever vengeance has to
be wrought upon whatever rebellious
mankind or whatever it's semed who's
sent down to do the work. Seek is the
the fiery aspect of who represents who
represents the cosmic feminine. Here's
another segment.
Here segment is sometimes I mean so
active that she's actually shown
masculine with a with her erect fallus.
Here we have the the erecting of the jed
column which represents the backbone of
o symbolically the backbone of Ozirus
that which allows that which allows
organic life to stand upright. All of
this as you see in very complex tableau
here the falcon of Horus a beautiful
representation at the temple of Edu
another this there's Horus again against
the very corrupted art of of the late
period of Egypt the Tameic period
here's a beautiful Hakor face from the
the great temple of Hatsut Bahari on the
west bank of the Nile
Hakur represents many many things
associated by the Greeks with Aphrodite,
the goddess of love, dance, song,
sexuality and so on. This is absolutely
accurate. But she also provides cosmic
nourishment is sometimes shown in the
form of the cow. Here you see she has
cow ears. The cow being the animal per
excellence that provides nourishment.
And she's also actually the mistress of
disciples of time. Here we have maybe
the best vulture ever ever portrayed
anywhere on any wall. This is another
form of hustler. Actually this is Nebat
who represents the sky goddess.
Beautiful. This is also at Hatchepsuk's
temple. And here an interesting statue.
These are called cube statues. And you
see you have a figure. This is Senmut
the architect of of of Hepsu who's the
ward of her little daughter shown here.
The usual explanation of these strange
statues is that the Egyptians were
saving money by just sort of showing it
as a cube rather than showing the whole
figure. Actually, what's being
symbolized here is the emergence of
spirit shown as here the great architect
Selet and the little the little princess
was a young little little girl. It's
spirit emerging out of matter.
And here we have interesting
representation because Egypt
it's always said by the Egyptologists
that the Egypt that the Egyptians were
very elitist and the people couldn't use
the temples to pray at. In other words,
the people who were always kept outside
and this is supposedly undemocratic. But
by the same token, let's say a baseball
team is also very undemocratic. You or I
can't go and play at Yankee Stadium
because we haven't paid our dues and we
can't go work at the local nuclear
laboratory either because we happen not
to be physicists. These are obviously
very elitist organizations that won't
let us get in there and play with the
particle accelerator. But actually in
Egypt in Egypt in fact it was sort of
trickled down religion this little
symbol here of the lapwing represents
all of the people. So in all of the
columns and all of the temples and the
symbol here means all. So what it means
here is all of the people worship. So
technically they weren't allowed in the
temple but symbolically they were there
too
performing the in other words performing
the rights in honor of the gods or the
principles. What are we doing here? And
then the final the final actually the
the um
the the final um stage of of the process
actually is this is interesting too back
to the lion king. You may remember that
at a certain point the little lion cub
asks his father. He looks up in he looks
up in the sky at the stars and says,
"What are those?" And the and the father
the the king lion says, "Oh, those are
the souls of dead kings." This is
interesting because it means that
whoever wrote the script of that of that
Disney um movie didn't just know Hamlet
but also knew Egypt because associating
the the stars with the souls of dead
kings is strictly Egyptian. This is not
part of Shakespeare's play. And here you
have a representation actually of this
connection between star or stellar
consciousness and human consciousness.
you see collect connected by lines of
energy or consciousness to the third eye
of this particular character. This comes
from actually one of the one of the
shrines of tutin common and it's it's a
very interesting representation. It also
represents as far as I'm concerned in
some way or the other. This means that
the Egyptians had it had an astrology of
some sort because when you connect stars
with human consciousness in some way or
another you're you've got an an
astrology going. The Egyptologists deny
that the the Egyptians actually had an
astrology. Now we're getting into Okay,
now we're going to take a very brief
potted tour of Egypt
going through some of the major sites
very quickly, but you'll see then it
becomes quite graphic when you when you
follow the the sequence um that Egypt is
on a even Egypt lasting for dynastic
Egypt lasting a full over 3,000 years.
And if we're correct with our sphinx
theory, many many thousands of years
before that on a on a descending slope
starting off at its peak. And if if I'm
right about the sphinx, but we're
talking about 36,000 years or something
like that, even if I'm wrong, we're
certainly talking about more thousands
of years. But there's absolutely nothing
on Earth remotely like this
extraordinary sphinx. And this is the
dawn of
the dawn of civilization. But it's
civilization at its high point. So if
this is correct, Church of Progress has
a lot of thinking to do to try to
account for this and call ourselves
civilized. Anyway, here we have our
Sphinx all weathered by water as we as
we've seen. And now we go on to our
pyramids here.
Here we have interesting.
How are we doing time? We're getting
late so I'm not going to go into a lot
of this but the pyramids are probably
the pyramids of Giza and Dasher which
are related. These are all fourth
dynasty are probably not tombs. This is
the step pyramid a diagram of step
pyramid is very definitely a tomb and
the tomb architecture
there's a tomb logic let's say the the
bur the the sarcophagus is in one
placeerary furniture and so on in
another. Everything is set up so that
you can put all of theerary offerings
there. When you get to these
extraordinary temples of pyramids of of
um of of Giza and Dashor, there's no
logic whatever to it. Everything
everything is different from everything
else and nothing seems to work as a
tomb. This is the great pyramid here.
This is the bent pyramid of Dasher which
is actually has two different entrances.
This is the pyramid of Maidum
far away. This is this is the other view
of the bent pyramid. This is
do ah this is this is the red pyramid.
Those of you who were at the lecture the
other day when I was talking about this
megalithic site underneath underneath
the the hall here or maybe I was talking
about in private conversation. Anyway,
this is a big piece of the puzzle. This
is the Kafra pyramid. This is the manara
pyramid. Everything is different.
Nothing works as a tomb. No evidence of
a burial has ever been found in any of
these pyramids. In all of the other
pyramids that really were tombs, there's
plenty of evidence that they were used
as tombs, inscriptions,erary
remains, and so on. What were they used
for? Nobody really knows. My own guess
is that they were gigantic
technosspir
technosspiritual
instruments designed to further this
acquisition of immortality. But exactly
how they worked, I don't know. I I'm
inclined to think that they were places
where high initiations of some sort were
being carried out. But nobody can really
prove this. They also can't prove that
they were tombs. And this is another one
of those enduring mysteries.
Now we go along through here. We are at
Sakara third dynasty before the the the
major pyramids were built. And you see
very beautiful modern looking
construction. This is that pyramid
itself. And here you see the details of
the wall. And if somebody told you, I
mean, it looks very modern, doesn't it?
If if somebody told you that this was a
new building or a new construction at
the University of Arizona or New Mexico
in America, everybody would say, "Oh,
yeah, it looks like desert
architecture." Well, the reason for that
is is actually formal. when Marcel Buer
and the architects around the turn of
the century of of the Bow House School
were looking for a way out of the
clutter of of Victorian architecture.
They went back not to classical Rome and
Greece as did the classicists of the
18th century. They went back to Egypt
what little remained of it and Sakara
and the temple of Hot Sheps were their
two models for what what functional and
beautiful modern architecture should
look like. So it's very interesting
because there isn't much modern
architecture that's that's that's that
works because most of it is consecrated
to mammon and the whole idea is to build
as much as possible for as little as
possible to make as much money as
possible. So the the the the the concept
of the sacred has pretty well been
buried. But occasionally every once in a
while there is a good piece of modern of
modern architecture and in one way or
another it tends to hearken back to
Egypt. Here you see a architect's
reconstruction of the whole complex at
Sakara. And you see that this this
doesn't look like ancient architecture
really. It looks very high techch and
absolutely spectacular. And this is what
all of Egypt must have looked like in
its day. So from this you use your
mind's eye and you get a sense of what
this whole place must have been like.
Here we have a remarkable statue called
the shikled which means the shake of the
village. Also old kingdom. Look at the
eyes. You'll see a closeup of them
again. You see these eyes here? They
look back at you. Here's a still better
one. This is in the Louva. These these
inlaid eyes which were at their height
in Egypt in the old kingdom in the
fourth dynasty. After that the the whole
the the the ability to do these eyes
declined. They were used a bit in the
old in the new kingdom about a thousand
years later and then they disappeared
altogether. Now, what's interesting
about these eyes, apart from the fact
that makes the statue look alive, is
that they're made, to begin with,
they're very difficult to make. They're
made out of four different kinds of
quartz crystal, which is almost
impossible stone to work, particularly
with, you know, with presumably
primitive tools. But also more
importantly, according to Schwaller, in
order to produce these eyes, you need a
very advanced and sophisticated
knowledge of anatomy because you have to
understand the refractive and reflective
properties of the eye in order to
produce an eye that looks back at you
like that. When the workman found these
statues, by the way, turn of the last
century, they ran away screaming because
they dig away the earth and suddenly
they have a guy like this looking up at
them out of the out of the hole. and
they thought the statue was alive and
they weren't far from. There's another
view of the of the this is the squatting
scribe it's called that he's in the
Louv.
Here you have the furniture of the
mother of Kufu, Queen Heta Perez. And
you see I mean you're all probably
familiar at least in in photographs with
the the wonderfulerary
furniture of of of um of Tuten Common
but it's a bit baroque I must say for my
taste and getting degenerate already
much earlier 1200 years earlier you had
these very clean lines almost looking
like Egyptian Danish modern in the in
the mother of the mother of hufu.
Now here we have this is the temple of
hoteps now with the third level restored
and again you get the sense if somebody
told you that this has been been
designed by Frank Lloyd Wright you'd
have said you know good job Frank you're
really learning something and this is of
course 15 1450 or so BC fabulous temple
this is what's called the unfinished
obelisk they couldn't get it out of the
it developed a crack this isn't it the
cracks along here actually when they
were pulling it out of the out of the
quarry could no longer walk upon it,
idiots. But um uh if had they been able
to get this out of the rock, this is
down at Feli, all granite in Egypt came
from the south in Aswan and then was
transported hundreds of miles down the
river um to set up as oelis. This this
oelis would have been the biggest ever.
It would have weighed 1,200 tons if they
could have gotten it out of the rock.
And it's all done. And here it's quite
clear that it's done with very simple
methods. I mean the how it's how it's
prized out of the bedrock, how the
bedrock's pounded away, then how they
get it out of here and float it down the
river. This is another problem that I
won't go into here, but those of you who
come to Egypt with me, we'll discuss it
on site, but it's a it's a very
interesting logistic and engineering
problem.
This is this is Hutch's successor to
Moses III, great conqueror of Egypt with
this marvelous mystical face. Absolutely
gorgeous
um statue. This is just the entrance
into the valley of the kings where
common is buried and all of the other
kings of the new kingdom. This is a
barren landscape. You think you've got
desert here? This is desert.
This is again another lovely uh shot of
Hatchepsut in the in the Hatchepsut
temple. Now we're getting into the into
the new kingdom. This is the temple of
Luxor, one of these seated colossal
figures of the pharaoh in front of the
Colonad. Get a very different sense of
it. This is the heretic pharaoh Aknatan
about whom um more controversy exists
than probably any other single figure in
Egypt. I won't go into it here. Aknaten.
There's very little left of Aknaten and
most of the good stuff is either at the
Luxor Museum or the Cairo Museum. Almost
no one is left unmoved by this stuff.
Some people think that this is the best
thing that Egypt ever produced. Others
get the creeps from it and are
anti-naten. I personally am anti-natan.
This I wouldn't want to be ruled by this
guy.
But under underton the art of Egypt very
briefly took a very different form
rather sort of art deco looking much
more when it loses in in in sort of
spiritual purity it gains in in vivacity
as it were. So there's very interesting
artwork going on during Aknatan's brief
reign and afterwards within a couple of
years it all goes back to to classical
Egypt again one of the big mysteries.
This is the great temple of Abu Symbble.
If you're going to be a king, this is
how you should look. Uh, you know, none
of this nonsense. And these these
figures are are enormous cut into the
cliff face. This is one of the temples
that's been moved. But to get a sense of
it, you don't have any sense of scale
here. Obviously, you know that these are
big statues, but when you see the sense
of scale, you see what you're involved
with here. You're going to be king. Set
yourself up and say, "Yeah, I mean,
okay, I'm king, guys." ing.
This is what Egypt looked like when the
when the Egyptologists I mean before
Egyptology began. These are Napoleon's
drawings. The the drawings of Napoleon's
draftsman when he came in and you see
right up to the capitals of the columns.
This is I think Dendra anyways temple.
You see what's happening now? We've gone
from the Sphinx into the pyramids and
this extraordinary sculpture of the old
kingdom down into the new kingdom with
with with Abu Simbal and and and Luxor
and Carac and Hutch's temple. And now
here we are in Tomeic times following
Alexander. This is where here we're
talking about 200 or so BC. And you see
that the architecture looks very
different. Actually these temples still
have a lot of power but the the artwork
has become corrupted and much more
complex ornate. The sense you get of
tameic Egypt is of overwrite fruit fruit
ready to drop off the tree. In other
words, Egypt has lived out its life
cycle and there's not going to be much
more of it left. And then what happens?
You see the wonderful you saw before
hotships the sorry the the the hathor
the hathor heads and the and the tutos
face and the shake elled and all of
these wonderful figures. You see here
it's all become stiff and corrupted and
the figures themselves have changed
enormously. In old kingdom Egypt the
women all look like models and the men
all look like long-distance runners. In
the new kingdom the women all look like
movie sex queens and the men all look
like football players. When we get into
talmic times, the women look like 40s
like, "Ah, we're here in in in Australia
like like like hookers at King's Cross
and and the men as though they've just
come back from the orgy and probably
they have and everything is becoming
corrupted and and degenerate
except and then finally what happens is
that Egypt gives way to to Rome and
Greece and not even Rome and Greece at
their best." And you see what happens.
It's very moving actually when you go in
the carro museum and at the very end I
we go into into the Greco Roman rooms
there and you see what happens when a
when a a civilization that has been
based upon spirit gives way to a to a a
civilization that's based upon matter
and you see here we are grearis here
this guy has definitely come home from
the orgy or is maybe still at it a long
way from the kings of Egypt
and here we have this is the the famous
the bob bird which represents the the
the eternal spirit as it were and here's
in Roman times and here's the version in
in the new kingdom of the of the human
headed falcon hovering over the over the
body of the deceased and I think we're
going to have to switch this way just to
say here's the sphinx who's turned into
Tony the tiger I don't know if you have
Tony the tiger here on your Kellogg's
cornflakes and I think now here's what
happens another sphinx here we're a long
way from Giza here and I think this is
the last way coming to the end here.
Egypt is degenerating. Rome and Greece
take over. The last gasp of Egypt or
almost the last gap or the last sort of
major gasp of Egypt takes place in
Alexandria and what are called the
catacombs of Kuml Chugafa which are
erected by a wealthy private family
somewhere in the second centur century
AD. big circular well
and in it
are reliefs.
In it are reliefs and you see what's
happened to Egyptian art. This is the
the sacred bull of Patah and you see the
whole thing is has become a kind of a
you see them here. This is the rearing
cobra all mixed up with Greek Greek and
Roman motifs and the whole the whole of
sacred Egypt is turned into a kind of an
underground Disneyland.
What happens then is that Christianity
takes over and does not in fact go
around blasting everything to pieces as
Christianity usually does but in fact
takes over the temples carves the Coptic
cross into the walls or into the
columns. This is a feli, the great
temple of Isis, a feli, and appropriates
Egypt for for itself.
Christianity is then replaced by Islam,
who has even less regard for ancient
Egypt. Here you see the gods of Egypt
reduced to a backdrop on the rear end of
a camel
like that. Here's just a couple of a
couple of Egypt scenes of what it looks
like, you know, today down the Nile. The
kind of boats that we go on when we're
on the trips.
And here's a fabulous sunset against the
date palm.
And what I want to read you here, can I
have the lights on?
I've got it up backwards to forwards,
but doesn't matter. This is a this is a
this is a um
a an entry in in in what called the
hermetica which are big arguments about
the actual provenence of the hermetica
but the usual explanation this is 2 or
3rd century AD
it's neoplatonic actually in its
expression but the the the the knowledge
comes out of Egypt um or the background
comes out of Egypt and this is this is
Hermes Trismagist who is the Greek
equivalent of Thoth or Jehuti, wisdom.
And he's talking to Eskeipius, who is
not Eskeipius the doctor, but the
Eskeipius the Greeks associated with
Imoteep, the great sage, architect,
builder of Egypt. And he's prophesying
for the future. And this is an
extraordinary prophecy. Remember, this
is 2,000 years ago. And I'll I'll I
won't read all of it. I'll I'll I'll
select. But it it's um
see what you think of this as a prophecy
of the future. Do you not know,
Essipius, that Egypt is an image of
heaven? But to speak more exactly, in
Egypt all the operations of the powers
which rule and work in heaven have been
transferred to earth below. Nay, it
should rather be said that the whole
cosmos dwells in this our land as in its
sanctuary. And yet, since it is fitting
that wise men should have knowledge of
all events before they come to pass, you
must not be left in ignorance of this.
There will come a time when it will be
seen that in vain have the Egyptians
honored the deity with heartfelt piety
and assiduous service, and all our holy
worship will be found bootless and
ineffectual. For the gods will return
from earth to heaven. Egypt will be
forsaken and the land which was once the
home of religion will be left desolate
bereff of the presence of its deities.
Oh Egypt, Egypt of thy religion, nothing
will remain but an empty tale which
thine own children in time to come will
not believe. Nothing will be left but
graven words and only the stones will
tell of thy piety. And in that day, men
will be weary of life, and they will
cease to think the universe worthy of
reverent wonder and of worship. And so,
religion, the greatest of all blessings,
for there is nothing, nor has been, nor
ever shall be, that can be deemed a
greater boon, will be threatened with
destruction. Men will think it a burden,
and will come to scorn it. They will no
longer love this world around us. This
incomparable work of God, this glorious
structure which he has built, this sum
of good made up of things of many
diverse forms, this instrument whereby
the will of God operates in that which
he has made ungrudgingly favoring man's
welfare. This combination and
accumulation of all the manifold things
that can call forth the praise,
veneration, and love of the beholder.
Darkness will be preferred to light and
death will be thought more profitable
than life. No one will raise his eyes to
heaven. The pious will be deemed insane
and the impious wise. The mad man will
be thought a brave man and the wicked
will be esteemed as good. As to the soul
and the belief that it is immortal by
nature or may hope to attain to
immortality as I have taught you. All
this they will mock at and will even
persuade themselves that it is false. No
word of reverence or piety, no utterance
worthy of heaven and of the gods of
heaven will be heard or believed. And so
the gods will depart from mankind,
a grievous thing. And only evil angels
will remain who will mingle with men and
drive the poor wretches by main force
into all manner of reckless crime into
wars and robberies and frauds and all
things hostile to the nature of the
soul. Then will the earth no longer
stand unshaken, and the sea will bear no
ships. Heaven will not support the stars
in their orbits, nor will the stars
pursue their constant course in heaven.
All voices of the gods will of necessity
be silenced and dumb. The fruits of the
earth will rot. The soil will turn
barren and the very air will sicken and
sullen stagnation.
After this manner will old age come upon
the world. Religion will be no more. All
things will be disordered and arai. All
good will disappear. But when all this
has befallen Eskeipius, then the master
and father, God, the first before all,
the maker of that God who first came
into being, will look on that which has
come to pass and will stay the disorder
by the counterworking of his will, which
is the good. He will call back to the
right path those who have gone astray.
He will cleanse the world from evil, now
washing it away with water floods, now
burning it out with fiercest fire, or
again expelling it by war and
pestilence. And thus he will bring back
his world to its former aspect, so that
the cosmos will once more be deemed
worthy of worship and wondering
reverence. And God, the maker and
restorer of the mighty fabric, will be
adored by the men of that day with
unceasing hymns of praise and blessing,
such as the new birth of the cosmos. It
is a making again of all things good, a
holy and all striking restoration of all
nature, and it is wrought in the process
of time by the eternal will of God.
Not bad for 2,000 years ago, huh? Sounds
sort of like the business about the
sullen stagnation and the earthing and
so on. Sound sounds a bit like the
headlines of any daily newspaper,
doesn't it? But anyway, that's the
process. As I was as I was as I've been
explaining throughout this whole thing,
it's it's an organic process and we're
now at the cusp of an age and it is
certainly in a in a deep downhill
spiral, but the seeds of the new are
being planted and it's basically up to
us. Here we have a very rare um example
of I've got it up backwards to forwards
unfortunately but you see that the the
head of set and the head of Horus on a
on a single figure reconciled as it
were. And over here here we have the
figures again. This is the actual shrine
of Tuten Common with those with those
mumform figures connected by rays of
consciousness to the star. Here we have
it again more clearly. The star of the
star of of of heightened or or cosmic
consciousness connected to the human
being because that's our destiny. And
basically it's it's up to us to make the
prophecy come true. I have an idea that
God's not going to see it see to it on
his own unless he gets some help from
us. And so I thank you very much.
Oh, anybody who wants um anybody
interested in sort of staying in touch
or whatever, I do not have on my
brochure out there, the travel brochure
my my because I the brochure was printed
up before I had a website and email.
Anybody wants email and website, I can
give it to you. Got pieces of paper,
I'll give it to you now.
Everybody who has pencil and paper have
it. Okay. Email is my initials. J A W
Sphinx. S P H I NXOL.com.
Website is all J awinx of course one
word. It's not case sensitive. So it
doesn't matter if it caps or small
letters. email uh sorry website is http
&gt;&gt; http
harry thomas Thomas peter colon
slash slash members as in members of
parliament
aoljaw
swings and on the website you'll find
all the details of trips and stuff like
that and for those sufficiently
interested to wade through a lot of
controversy. A whole lot of stuff that's
been put on over the course of the last
few months of this furious argument
that's been going on back and forth and
so on. I keep the website updated. Um
fairly consistently,
so you know, tune in every once in a
while. There's always new stuff going on
there and new Egypt info and so on. Do I
have questions?
Oh, everybody knows everything. Oh,
okay. There's a question there. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Describing tonight suggested you might
talk about new discoveries at stakes.
&gt;&gt; Ah, yes I can. Actually, you weren't
there the other day. No.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's not so much new discoveries.
Well, it is in a sense the I've been
putting together a whole bunch of of of
new pieces of evidence um relating to
this water weathering theory. So there
are now there's a whole bunch of their
little smoking guns and I'm hoping to
get now I'm hoping I will be going over
there in another month or so with Robert
Shock, one of the geologists who works
with me to corroborate this water
weathering hypothesis. If he if he can
if he feels that the evidence is as
strong as I believe it to be, we then
present it at the Geological Society of
America's convention, in which case
that's more headlines. We smoke the
opposition out. The next stage is to get
a bunch of independent geologists over
to corroborate or rebut the evidence as
they as they see fit. And then that
leads, we hope, to more permission with
to get over there with with seismographs
and radar and so on to look for still
more evidence. without without the
slides here. Actually, it's difficult to
go into these different bits and pieces
of evidence, but mostly it concerns more
more water weathering in places where
there's not supposed to be any water
weathering. Meanwhile, there's the
competing team, you might say, guy
called Joe Shaw, who's um without going
into a long song and dance, but
basically out to sort of reap the glory
for himself and be the one who discovers
the Hall of Records, who supposedly has
permission, he could be over there now,
to himself go over there with mainly
he's going to be working with ground
penetrating radar to see if he can
establish once and for all the cavity
under the under the paw of the swings to
the satisfaction of the authorities and
at a certain point if particularly Zahi
was the director of the Giza Plateau is
convinced that there really is a chamber
there we're absolutely certain when
we're not absolutely certain well we're
about as sure as damn it that there
really is such a chamber then it's a
question of somewhere along the line
getting permission to for somebody to
drill a hole and put a fiber optic
camera down in there and see if there
really is anything in there I myself
would not like to put too many eggs in
that basket because a it's liable to be
full of water because it's deep
underground and the water table has
risen and b if it is a chamber and I'm I
I would I take bets that it is
there could be nothing in there. There
could have been it could have been
emptied by the by the dynastic Egyptians
by whoever it was that repaired the
Sphinx initially. So, and on the other
hand, if you know they go in there and
they find the tablet that says, you
know, this was carved by Ahmed the
Atlantan in 14,73
BC, nobody would be happier than me. I
would like to be the the guy who finds
it, but who cares? I mean, if whoever
finds it finds it. That's in a nutshell.
That's that's sort of what what what's
going on there. A lot. In other words,
because this is
if we can corroborate these little bits,
they don't look like much to the naked
eye, but if we they're the kinds of
pieces of evidence that a certain point
when you put them all together, at a
certain point enough people have to say
we can't explain this in any other way
other than that there's an earlier stage
of this civilization and then from then
at that point things start happening
quickly. It's a bit like when they
finally decided that these huge bones
that they were finding all over the
place in Europe and America throughout
the 18th century in 1838 when somebody
finally had clicked into places that
just this has to be an extinct animal
within a couple of decades there were
dinosaurs all over the place. Everyone
found them. And I think it's the same
thing with this. Once
a critical mass is achieved and and
people with the right kinds of expertise
accept that there really is an earlier
stage to civilization within a couple of
decades they'll be finding things all
over.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um what do you think is behind the door
in the shaft in the great period?
&gt;&gt; I have absolutely no idea cuz how could
I? But um it's not really a door. It's a
slab that appears to have handles. There
could be something behind it. A friend
of mine actually put forward what I
think is a very a very interesting
suggestion. That slab is made of Torah
limestone which is a finer limestone
that's used in the casings.
And it may be that it's there because
you know the shaft that it blocks off
doesn't go to the edge of the pyramid.
And it may be as my friend suggested
that that's an earlier stage of the
pyramid. And then when they continued
building to build it into its present
state, they sealed it up with a slab.
And there may or may not be nothing be
something behind it. But I like that
suggestion actually. I mean, I wouldn't
bet on there being something behind it.
But why seal it off then? But if in fact
that's the that's an earlier stage of a
finished pyramid and then they continue
to build so that therefore the the Tural
limestone. But why it would have those
copper handles or apparent copper
handles, I don't know. Zahi is talking
about
Gatenbrink has got in trouble there for
a variety complicated reasons and he
probably won't be allowed to get back in
there with a new robot to do it. But
there are other candidates for building
a new robot. And there's there's a a
little what seems to be a crack under
under one of the corners of that slab.
And if if they can stick a fiber optic
camera through there, they might do that
to see what's behind. If if in fact the
crack doesn't really extend all the way
through, then they're in trouble. Then
they have to drill through the slab or
the block, however big it is, and nobody
knows how big it is. But they can do
this. this is within the capacity of of
one of those little robots and stick a
camera behind there. But it it would
appear Zahi is and if Zahi is for it,
then all the other guys would be for it
that he's he's open to this to getting
through there to see what it is. Again,
it's not it's not a basket I'd like to
put too many eggs in.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
Anyway, wait a second now. Anybody? Are
we okay now? Everyone
&gt;&gt; okay? Thanks again.