science.
Okay, maybe we should get started since
there's no more seats available.
Uh, so it's a pleasure to welcome our
colleague Rob Schulov, Sterling
Professor of Applied Physics and
Physics. Uh Rob first came to Yale in
the mid 1980s to a science Saturdays
program that uh Bob Wheeler and
Vererville for showing off uh liquid
nitrogen and low temperature things and
Rob got hooked. uh he got his
undergraduate degree at Princeton where
he did his junior paper with Bob Dicki
and he got hooked on measuring quantum
noise. uh he went to Caltech and worked
with Jonas Muzenus uh building detectors
for radio astronomy and then came to
Yale as a posttock uh with Dan Prober in
1995
and uh invented the radio frequency
single electron transistor the world's
fastest counter of the smallest beans as
the Yale press office called it uh and
uh on the strength of that uh became an
assistant professor in applied physics
and uh has been here uh on the faculty
since 1998.
Uh so uh he's going to talk to us today
about the 2025
uh Nobel Prize in physics which was
shared by our colleague Michelle Deere
uh and uh and its relation to the
quantum mechanics and quantum optics of
electrical circuits.
Great.
&gt;&gt; Thanks Steve.
Can you folks hear me? Okay. Okay, good.
I don't hear it so much over here. Um,
right. So, thanks Steve for the
introduction. Thanks everyone for
coming. Um, it's been a kind of an
amazing year, right? uh in a lot of
respects uh but especially to see uh
this field that we've been working in
and developing uh around the world but
uh especially here at Yale sort of uh
recognized with this well-deserved
prize.
Uh
I see have to do like this. Um and
there's the uh short form of the
citation. Uh the prize was given to John
Clark, Michelle Devray and John
Martinez. Uh John Clark was an expert in
superconducting devices and squids on
the faculty at Berkeley. Uh Michelle was
then a posttock in John's group and John
Martinez was the grad student who worked
on the experiments together. So one of
each of the levels of folks there and it
was given for work that's almost exactly
uh 40 years ago. Um and so what I wanted
to do today, I wanted to make this kind
of fun um uh uh hopefully accessible for
uh students of various uh ages. I see
even some of the students who are taking
the new course we've introduced which is
a one uh uh semester mezzanine class
that's uh for advanced undergraduates
and beginning graduate students on this
field of superconducting uh quantum
circuits. Uh so hopefully uh that'll be
all uh you know something that you guys
find entertaining at least uh so you'll
get the one semester version and then
also the one hour version. So, um, also
wanted to say thank you to this
triumphvirate. Uh, so, uh, between, uh,
you know, Steve, Michelle, and myself,
we've had an incredible time and so much
fun discussing physics and, uh,
exploring, uh, this playground, um, over
the past 20 years. And also, I've I've
generously, uh, they've generously
donated I've cribbed lots of, uh,
slides, uh, from both of them. So um
the sort of uh origin of our field kind
of goes back to one of the most basic
and sort of enduring questions about
quantum theory
which is how come
we're not intuitively used to things
like superposition and entanglement.
Um why is it that the macroscopic world
uh seems to be obeying different rules
than the uh world of single atoms and
single photons? And you know uh that
goes back I'm not sure if you can see
the uh picture here. This is a little
chalk sketch of a cat in a box with a
gun that's breaking a poison vial. It's
uh you know Leot uh Tony Leot here uh
discussing Schrodener's cat uh which was
originally of course put forward as sort
of a reason why the early proponents of
quantum theory thought well this can't
be the whole story because uh this is
clearly ridiculous. We can't have
macroscopic objects that are actually in
a superp position or entangled with uh
some single degree of freedom like an an
atom or something like that. Um but uh
what Leget did starting in the early 80s
was uh he had a series of papers that
were somewhat philosophical in nature uh
in which he pointed out that there were
macroscopic quantum phenomena like
superc conductivity or super fluidity in
liquid helium uh that
uh have macroscopic manifest ations of
the fact that they are quantum uh
fluids. So in a superconductor you can
have a current that flows in a loop
forever. In uh super fluid helium you
can have uh a uh a you know circulation
of a fluid that goes around a pipe uh in
principle forever in a frictionless way.
But that those weren't quite macroscopic
in the same way that Schrodener's cat
was. uh and he started speculating that
you know maybe these superfluid or
superconducting systems would be a good
way to test the kind of limits of
quantum mechanics and how macroscopic an
object
uh or a system could one actually have
that you would observe these explicitly
kind of you know fundamental uh weird
and spooky whatever you know adjective
you want to
uh uh manifestations of quantum
mechanics be present and uh he didn't
talk so much about this one but you know
here's an example of a simple electrical
circuit the familiar LC resonator
uh which uh has uh a single degree of
freedom it has two uh variables the the
current and the voltage or the flux and
the charge on the capacitor
uh And uh the question is are those you
know two variables actually in quantum
mechanics non-commuting and they're
going to have uh manifestations like 0
point fluctuations and and all that
other sort of stuff. Um and uh you know
could we actually observe the kind of
phenomena that uh are associated with
single atoms and the like uh with this
uh kind of system. Now, why would that
be similar to an atom and why would it
be different from an atom? So, uh
Michelle has a slide that uh he's used
for many years that's sort of comparing
and contrasting you know real atoms with
electrical circuits or we're going to
call them artificial atoms in uh in this
talk. uh in you know a real atom you
have uh an electron and if you uh have
an excited state uh maybe the electron
has some motion uh this is again very
handwavy uh but uh you know um there
will be quantum phenomena associated
with this atom. It's all very clear to
us now. Uh if we excite uh this
electromagnetic uh resonator um you will
have something where uh charge is also
sort of slloshing back and forth right
you have uh charge accumulating on the
pads of the capacitor and then current
uh running back and forth uh through the
inductor uh and it's all sort of you
know held in place. There's a restoring
force associated with the ion core uh
and so on. But um it's a very different
kind of system. It's a very different
kind of phenomenology, right? Uh in uh
the hydrogen atom, you know, we're used
to thinking of this as being inherently
quantum. It's composed of two elementary
particles. It's a very simple and very
small system in that regard.
uh and uh you know we have things like
the velocity and the force that we can
understand and and and in some sense
probe but those now become things that
are ordinarily not something we think of
as being quantum mechanical things like
the current through the inductor or the
voltage on the plates of this uh
capacitor.
Uh now uh if we say okay why make this
out of superconductor one reason is we
want to prevent dissipation because that
will help preserve the quantum behavior
for longer. Uh but um also we want to
have something where we can make some
observations and have it behave a bit
like an uh atom. Oh and one other
important difference of course is the
scale. uh so you know typical hydrogen
atom rate on the angstrom scale uh one
of these LC circuits that we can make is
uh on the scale physically of
millimeters uh but and also you know we
can do things like paste them down and
attach wires to them and do stuff uh
nasty stuff to them that you can't do
with real uh hydrogen atoms
um however there's a real problem if you
try and just take a simple LC oscillator
and use that as your atom or try to
observe oberve explicitly quantum
mechanical behavior in that and the
reason for that is that an LC oscillator
is a very linear system. Okay. Uh and uh
that shows up for example in the energy
spectrum you might have this parabolic
uh potential but you have equally spaced
energy levels all throughout. And if one
takes this system and you push on it, if
you try to control it or manipulate it
using a classical field, uh this system
will always be in the correspondence
limit. So you will push it around. It
has a uh position and a momentum or a
current and a voltage. uh but the sort
of center of mass of those uh uh uh
variables in phase space is always going
to follow exactly what a classical
system would have done. The only real
difference is that you know if you could
get in and look at zero temperature
there'd be some nonzero fluctuations.
The the the position in phase space is a
little bit fuzzy. There's a bit of a a
fuzzy ball associated with the position
and the momentum or or the charge in the
phase. Um but that's very difficult to
observe
and so uh to make something that's more
like an artificial atom and allowed uh
our laureates to actually observe uh the
first evidence of macroscopic quantum
effects and energy quantization in
circuits. You needed to add a very
important ingredient namely the Joseph
and junction.
And a Josephson junction is nothing
other than a sandwich of two
superconductors with a thin insulator
that allows tunneling of charges between
uh the uh microscopic understanding of
superc conductivity came to us with the
theory of BCS Bardin Cooper and Shriefer
in 57 and Josephen interestingly in his
PhD thesis if you don't not aware of
that uh proposed his effect uh and uh
what uh Joseph's equation visions are is
it says that well there's going to be a
current that can flow between these two
electrodes and it could be measured
using voltmeters and forced using uh
current sources and the like. Uh but
that the current through this element
will be a syosoidal function of uh the
phase difference in the two condensates
uh of the superconductors that are
making up the two electrodes. And so
this syosoidal current is
it's like an inductor but it's a very
nonlinear inductor. Um in addition uh
the other one of Josephson's equation
says that if there's an actual voltage
imposed there will be uh uh fluctuations
of the phase that uh happen at a
characteristic frequency given by these
fundamental constants E and E and H. Um
but the sort of uh so-called resistively
shunted junction model, the sort of
behavior of a circuit like this uh is
ordinarily also pretty classical
uh if you're not striving to make uh
this system uh be in a very uh special
realm of parameter space. And moreover
uh this sort of uh variable here fi is
the phase difference between the uh
order parameters in these two uh
electrodes. But the uh behavior of that
variable now except for the fact that it
has this syosoidal behavior and there
are e and h's in some of the
relationships is almost fully classical.
And uh for example, if you know you want
to understand the dynamics of this uh
kind of circuit, just a simple Josephen
junction uh that is biased with a
current um you can write down these
so-called RSJ model uh here which is
basically just uh a version of Newton's
laws of motion. It's it's a it's a
second order differential equation,
right? that's just fully classical again
except for the appearance of some
interesting fundamental constants as uh
as prefactors.
Um and uh what this uh model says is
that uh this syosoidal current phase
relationship of the Josephson effect
gives a kind of potential which is like
uh a cosine it's uh uh got an
oscillating or undulatory component. And
then uh if we add the addition of a bias
current we can kind of tip this
potential giving us uh the sort of
tilted washboard uh uh uh potential uh
that's shown here. And um what one can
do with this for example is you can
apply a current and measure the voltage
and um you can say well okay uh what am
I going to observe if you uh apply a
current that's less than the uh critical
current you will just have uh no voltage
that develops. But if you apply a uh
current that is somewhat greater than
the critical current, then this particle
is not bound within one of the wells and
it can run down this washboard. Uh this
variable fi here again is the phase
difference between the two. But the
derivative of this is basically the
voltage. So in that case we have a
something approaching a constant
velocity. So there's a constant voltage
developed across the junction that you
can measure and uh there are still these
undulations. So there will be some
oscilly component at a very high
frequency of 484 gigahertz per millolt
uh which is uh uh 2 over h. Uh so uh uh
this uh was sort of understood and
studied uh somewhat in the sort of uh
60s and early 70s late 60s early 70s uh
and this uh Joseph injunction turns out
to be the kind of nonlinear thing you
need to make an artificial atom or to
make something which is going to display
really explicitly quantum behavior.
And the way this this works uh is you
have to get into the right realm of
parameters. So the first thing uh you
need to do is have the frequency of
small oscillations here be larger than
the temperature. And if that's going to
be typically a few gigahertz that
corresponds to something like a quarter
of a degree. So you need to cool this
system to very low temperatures lower
than the temperature of liquid helium at
which the sort of RSJ model was
initially explored and all that sort of
stuff. You need something uh called a
dilution refrigerator which can get your
chip down to something like a few uh
100ths of a degree above absolute zero
or 20 millichel.
And uh for those of you who've seen uh
sort of popular press things about
quantum computing and so on, you know,
the meme, the visual meme for a quantum
computer is this big round thing with a
chandelier like set of uh goldplated uh
copper uh temperatures that you anchor
things to. Many many uh wires coming in.
Uh this is the Berkeley refrigerator in
which the Nobel Prize work was done. uh
is about that big in diameter, not this
big in diameter like a modern
refrigerator. Uh and it had exactly one
microwave input line and all the
measurements were at DC. Whereas you
know uh things you will go down to
Beckton and see cutting edge academic
experiments that now have you know of
order 100 uh lines uh of microwaves both
in and out. Okay? Because we're doing
much more complicated things. Uh an also
fun thing is the state-of-the-art of
lithography. It was a nobium lead
indium. So lead and nobbium are both and
indium as well actually are all uh
superconducting elements. Uh the
lithography was done I think probably
with ruby lith or something. Uh it's uh
you know the the characteristic uh size
scale is 10 microns which is kind of
small but from the point of view of
lithography in the modern era not small
at all. Right? It's a typical Joseph and
junction in uh modern cubits is uh
something like uh 0.2 microns on a side.
So a good bit smaller. Um the the other
thing that you see here is kind of uh uh
funny. This you know in a lot of the
popular things about the Nobel Prize you
know some uh actual image or cartooned
image of this thing was shown. Most of
what you're seeing here, these these
interesting tubes are basically just uh
specialized filters that were developed
so as to remove all possible uh uh
thermal noise or external microwave
radiation from getting to the junction
and making it go poof uh before you
wanted it to. Uh and so these so-called
copper powder lowass filters here were
one of the innovations that were uh
needed to uh to get to this to this
point. Um and so uh what uh uh Clark
Devet and Martinez were able to do is uh
take a small Joseph and junction, put it
in this dilution refrigerator apparatus,
cool it down to a low temperature and
examine the dynamics of this washboard
potential uh in the quantum regime.
uh and in particular you know if we have
uh a washboard potential uh and a bias
current that's applied which is maybe a
little bit less than the critical
current. So the particle is not going to
run it's going to be trapped in one of
these wells. Um if we take uh this uh
quantum uh stuff seriously, right, there
should be quantized energy levels in
here associated with some uh energy
level spacing that's uh uh corresponding
to h bar times whatever the frequency of
small oscillations are. And the
important thing here is that this is now
not a parabola.
It doesn't give a linear system. It
gives a system with some interesting
nonlinearity. These energy levels are
not equally spaced and uh moreover uh
there are ways now to kind of uh measure
uh various effects in this system. So,
one of the things you can measure is the
fact that uh if you've tilted this
washboard and you sit around in weight
and there's a finite temperature, you
can be thermally excited up this uh uh
set of energy levels and tunnel across
developing a voltage which can be
measured.
And uh that can happen by thermal
activation or if you're at very low
temperatures, it can actually happen
quantum mechanically. Even though this
particle is sitting here and it's below
the energy of the barrier, uh there's
some finite probability that you can
tunnel in quantum mechanics through or
under a barrier and also get to the
voltage state. And that should manifest
itself as sort of an escape rate into
this voltage state that is independent
of temperature.
And so the first sort of signature
result of the prize from 1985
uh was in the there were a pair of fsrev
letters uh that were just a few weeks
apart. Uh the first one shows uh this
which is basically uh the escape
temperature. It's basically uh a
linearized version of the tunneling rate
where you know um we would expect from
thermal activation and arraneous law. So
this sort of temperature versus
temperature being linear is like
erranous activation as a function of the
temperature of the refrigerator. And
then you lower the temperature down and
it uh sort of looks like the temperature
is too high with a particular value here
which is h bar omega over k. Um now, uh
it's worth noting that there were other
folks working on the Josephson effect
and looking at the limits on critical
current in various kinds of small
junctions, including a group uh led by
Rich Webb at IBM research that were
doing very similar experiments. They
didn't quite have the control and they
weren't quite able to observe things uh
uh convincingly because you see this is
a little bit like there's too much
noise. So, how do I convince you that uh
this isn't an experimental flaw that as
I lowered the temperature of the
kryostat, the refrigerator everything's
attached to, maybe my payload wasn't
quite getting cold? Well, one way is
they had a different junction with
different electrical parameters that was
supposed to follow a straight line and
it went down lower. But the real smoking
gun of quantum behavior in uh this uh
set of experiments comes in the second
paper where they used that one microwave
line and they were able to do uh a crude
version of spectroscopy. So again what
they looked at was the escape rate the
sort of probability that the junction
develops a voltage all of a sudden uh as
a function of both bias current and uh
different frequency microwaves that were
applied. And in the presence of
microwaves you would expect that you can
uh resonantly promote the system to a
higher level where it's closer to the
top of the barrier and it can tunnel out
more rapidly. And as you see here,
there's a series of peaks, not very
sharply defined, but they do kind of
correspond to the energy levels within.
And so uh this is the first uh
observation of kind of energy
quantization in a man-made uh artificial
device with okay, it was only 10 microns
on a side. It wasn't millimeters, but
the the wires and everything attached to
it are millimeric in scale, not uh you
know sub nanometer.
So there you go. That gets you a trip to
Sweden. But more more excitingly, right,
this is the first thing that sort of
says, hey, we take these ingredients
with Joseph and junctions. We can have a
artificial kind of laboratory. We can
have a system where we can uh engineer
things. We can make electrical
measurements. We can maybe even control
things in an interesting way and have
some of the uh inherently
you know most quantum of effects be uh
visible
and also interestingly at this point
there was about a dozen hiatus.
So uh these experiments were sort of
done. There were not a lot of immediate
results that followed. Uh, a lot of the
community that was studying quantum
effects in the solid state was looking
at the coherence of individual electrons
as they move through solids or metals or
semiconductors or looking at the uh
charging effects. When you have a
quantum dot or a very small uh piece of
conductor, you are only able to add
charges one at a time and you can't add
them if it's energetically too uh uh
costly. And so there was a lot of people
looking at uh these sort of uh other
effects not the uh Josephson effect in
its kind of quantum guides but um what
uh these uh you know experiments told us
is now we had a sort of a toolbox for
making interesting circuits. Um and uh
that toolbox should have no resistors.
Uh it's allowed to have capacitors which
are lossless if they're superconducting.
Joseph and junctions which are hopefully
lossless if they're superc conducting
and uh regular inductors linear
inductors you can uh use as well. Um and
you know this toolbox became a lot more
interesting when uh we got to about 1998
and Shore said maybe uh a quantum
machine can factor numbers and maybe
there's something different about uh you
know being sorry Shore is 1995 I I beg
your pardon uh but the sort of first
results are following just a couple
years uh after that people started
saying well wait a minute maybe we can
make something which is an electronic
device that can actually function as a
cubit, a quantum bit of information and
maybe we can store and process
information in uh these superconducting
circuits in a way which is really
quantum and then comes a big flurry of
activity uh which I think I'll try and
use the remainder of the time to kind of
give you a a lightning tour through. you
know the Nobel Prize again should
appropriately be given for the seinal
work that establishes a direction of
research or a field but then of course
uh the real payoff is when that leads to
interesting places right and that's why
it sometimes takes 30 or 40 years for
one to know uh what's a Nobel
Prizeworthy uh result so um one can do
uh lots of interesting things with this
uh toolkit I I won't have time to
describe
uh uh all of these by any stretch. Um
this is from a paper that Michelle and I
wrote a few years ago um uh which
Michelle likes to call the Mandela
table, the sort of periodic table of
artificial atoms. Um, if you have just
junctions, capacitors, and inductors,
there's sort of a couple of different
axes that you can uh define that tell
you how to characterize one circuit and
distinguish it from another. Um, it's
not discreet, of course, like the
periodic table for real elements because
you're not adding uh uh protons one at a
time. uh uh but um rather it's kind of a
continuous diagram where you can
engineer and uh tailor these uh things
by how you make your fabricated circuit
uh to give you kind of continuous range
of these parameters. Um and why lots and
lots of different kinds of cubits? Well,
because in the beginning people were
exploring a lot of different directions
and um also uh looking at ways to avoid
some of the mechanisms for decoherence
like charge noise and flux noise which
the experts in the audience know about
but just there are problems that are
technical and you want to get away from
them. Okay. So uh the sort of simplest
and first superconducting cubit after
the MQTT results which are really a
cubit in themselves of course just
wasn't thought of and called that way is
something known as the Cooper pair box.
It's just a single Joseph injunction but
not current biased rather it's charge
bias. So there's just a capacitor and a
uh static voltage applied and um there
were early measurements by uh the team
including Michelle who was then in uh
Sllay uh measuring the charge on this
device. This has two states that are
basically plus and minus one extra
electron on this little uh island here.
And you can measure the quantum states
of that using an electrometer like this
RFTT that Steve mentioned. Um this was
done with uh a low frequency
electrometer just looking at the uh
average properties in 1998 which is what
I was thinking of Jack is sort of the
first operation of a superconducting
cubit uh by uh Nakamura uh and Sai uh
and co-workers at uh in Japan at NT. Um
what they were able to do was observe
the first uh Robbie oscillations or
maybe it's the Larmore procession.
Where's Kurt? Um uh in uh this system
you basically uh apply a sudden pulse in
the voltage. Uh now you go to something
where the Josephin energy is coupling
together plus and minus uh one electron
uh you know one additional pair is
oscillating back and forth and so this
is their plot as a function of sort of
the voltage you apply and the time you
apply that voltage for that shows
oscillations between the two states. So
this is now beginning not just to look
at the spectrum or where there are
energies that correspond to specific
states but actually you know uh halfway
along one of these is creating a superp
position where you're in both uh this
little island of the uh coup pair box is
in both uh zero and one additional
Cooper pair at the same time.
Uh the first Yale cubits uh were uh
experiments that we did in collaboration
with uh Perelling and his uh team in
Chalmer's. uh the first author was one
uh Conrad Leonard uh currently then uh
at the time was a postoc in my very new
lab and uh we basically took this same
experiment where there's the Cooper pair
box here's that one island here's the
electrometer that sits next to it and
using this radio frequency single
electron transistor we could make more
precise measurements of uh the states
here's us doing spectroscopy
uh at the time the line width was about
a gigahertz uh those of you who work in
the labs today know like oh hey you know
it's not a bad cubit the line width is
20 kHz or something so that's progress
for you over a couple of decades uh but
one of the things that uh could also be
done in this experiment is we could
abruptly turn the microwaves off which
are creating some population imbalance
between the ground and the excited state
and look at how fast the signal recovers
and uh what uh Conrad and Leif and
company observed was uh that this uh
time constant here. Uh that's not the
most beautiful T1 curve for also those
of you who are out there practicing. Uh
but that's what uh we were able to do in
the very first experiments. Uh was like
a microscond. So um you know if in this
Nakamura experiment here he's doing uh
operations that are changing the state
in a few hundred picosconds or a
fraction of a nancond in some sense this
microscond is already long. It means you
can create something that lives for a
thousand times faster than you can
manipulate it. If you want to build a
quantum computer, you need to be able to
manipulate things many many times.
Uh there are other kinds of cubits that
were also investigated. There's the kind
of electromagnetic duel of the Cooper
pair box or the RF squid. There's the
three junction version of the squid.
This was also studied. And
interestingly, Tony Leget always seemed
to think that uh the flux version of
this was much more macroscopic than the
charge version. Um this is a slide from
Yasu. I guess I'm not sure what his
point of making that of posing that
question was, but um there were uh other
innovations that followed uh rather
rapidly. And I'm going to now speed up a
little bit because I've been uh waxing
eloquently a little bit too much. But uh
um one of these was uh something a
device called the quantrronium uh done
uh by Michelle and his co-workers uh
again uh at Sllay just about the time
when he was moving here to uh to Yale to
join the applied physics department. Um
what uh this device did was uh it
actually operated at this kind of point
here uh which in terms of like sort of
the energy landscape and those control
parameters that one can have uh that
change the energy level splitting it
sort of operated at this uh special
saddle point a kind of sweet spot where
you're first order insensitive in terms
of the frequency varying with uh noise
in your control knobs. Um the uh uh uh
atomic physicists call that a clock
transition when you're insensitive to
the variations in the laser power. Um
and uh with that they performed the
first uh T2 measurements or measurements
really of the lifetime of a superp
position uh doing a so-called uh Ramsey
experiment. Uh and we're able to see
that the uh coherence of the superp
positions was preserved actually for a
very long time of hundreds of nanconds
up up to even approaching a microcond.
Again,
uh a another uh innovation in terms of
the circuit uh uh landscape or zoo of
cubits was uh the so-called phase cubit
uh introduced by John Martinez and
co-workers at uh uh then at at NIS
Boulder. Uh John later moved to Santa
Barbara and then again uh sometime later
on uh to uh Google in Santa Barbara.
this this phase cubit uh was basically
just uh the macroscopic quantum
tunneling experiment uh revisited. So
it's a single large Joseph and junction
that's current biased. You drive uh here
and use the first two states as the
quantum bit uh and then you can use a
pulse of microwaves or a DC pulse to
read things out. At the time this gave
very good performance as a readout but
uh very destructive and not uh actually
that good at preserving coherence uh
overall in the system. Uh it was rather
sensitive to that current bias and stuff
as well. Um uh
also uh in the early 2000s, 2001 I guess
uh uh Steve moved here uh to to Yale and
we began uh this many many years uh uh
thrilling and engaging uh collaboration
and uh you know one of the things that
uh we actually talked about in our first
meeting in my office uh I think maybe I
was just joined the faculty um was that
you
These systems also had uh nice analoges
with uh systems in uh real atoms. In
atomic physics or quantum optics,
there's a very interesting uh sort of
platform uh known as cavity quantum
electronamics where you have individual
atoms that couple to single modes of the
electromagnetic field.
um that can be done with real atoms in
the optical and what uh you know we kind
of uh proposed and then observed is that
one can do uh very nice versions of
these kinds of experiments uh using all
microwave uh devices. So I I mentioned
before that the harmonic oscillator
wasn't that much fun uh when you only
can push it with a classical field. Uh
you have to introduce some nonlinearity.
But if you have like a single cubit
that's in here, you can do things like
generate single photons on demand. You
can make all sorts of non-classical
states of light inside your your cavity.
You can also do very useful things like
suppress uh unwanted processes like the
spontaneous emission of this artificial
atom. Uh and so um you know uh that uh
launched quite an interesting uh vein of
research uh here for many many years.
One of the big advantages was that uh
and I think I won't go into the details.
Um it was easily po possible in this uh
microwave uh superconducting circuit
version to get what's called strong
coupling where you can go back and forth
between the two components the
artificial atom and the photon which is
a microwave exitation stored in this
transmission line uh many many times
before the sort of characteristic decays
uh of the information or the energy. Um
and here's a version of the chip that
realized that. Um, here's the uh team,
the entire team that was working on
Circuit QED uh back in 2004. Uh, you'll
recognize some of us, any of you who
were at the Gervenfest uh uh heard about
how Steve sort of looks kind of the
same, but some of the others of us
don't. Um, but uh um uh this was a a
great group. Here we are standing in the
shielded room that we thought was
necessary but turned out to be
irrelevant for doing these experiments.
And then we were uh you know uh had a
great time um a couple of years ago. It
was the 20th anniversary of this uh
paper and the launching of this uh
quantum optics with superconducting
circuits uh where uh we had in Marsh
Hall something like 300 and something
attendees and thank you again Florian
I'm sorry um but Florian helped arrange
all of that and so it's really been
amazing to see this this field grow in
the scope in the science that's uh been
able to be done um and all those sorts
of things. So there were many highlights
in uh circuit QED over the years. Uh
again observing sort of avoided
crossings between uh transitions of uh
one of these superconducting cubits and
uh a cavity or an oscillator uh mode
being able to exchange back and forth
and create single exitations.
uh being able to observe something
called the strong dispersive limit where
uh for the atomic physicists the uh AC
stark shift of one photon is actually a
large enough frequency shift that you
can resolve that in the spectrum of the
cubit. So here's the spectrum of a cubit
and a cavity that's got on average about
four photons but you see sometimes it
has one, sometimes it has five uh and
the like. Um and there were also things
like uh moving to a fully 3D uh even
larger version of this system that uh
boosted the coherences uh quite
significantly. Um one of the things that
enabled a lot of this work was uh the
invention of uh an even simpler cubit.
Uh it's basically uh the same as the
Cooper pair box. It's just two
electrodes coupled with one Joseph and
junction. Uh you now are able to get rid
of all the biases. uh lookma no wires.
Um and uh now you have just the kind of
cosine potential of the Josephson effect
which is enough of course to already
give you an anharmonic spectrum where
the energy levels are not equally
spaced. And so using the sort of zero
and one uh exitations of these things uh
sort of a difference in energy of a
yaktojoule
um uh or 10 the nine uh order uh 10 the
nine times smaller than the energy used
in a cos transistor you could store
information quite well. There were lots
of things that were sort of special
about the transmon. uh it solved a lot
of the existing problems of uh uh
decoherence in the system still left you
with enough anharmonicity enough uh of a
resource that you could control things
but also interestingly it was something
that we could not have uh invented had
we not already had the circuit QED
paradigm and this dispersive style of
measurement because this is a device
which now has um no sensitivity to low
frequency noise by virtue of being
completely indistin distinguishable to
the environment by any of its low
frequency properties. And so uh that
means you can't measure it with an
electrometer or a voltmeter or something
like that. You need to measure it
optically with uh a microwave probe tone
uh and the phase shift of that.
Um, another uh thing that I want to call
out here is uh amazing progress on other
aspects of our measurement technology uh
including the development of quantum
limited parametric amplifiers that rely
on the Josephson effect. Uh Michelle and
Conrad when he moved on to Jilla and
others uh uh helped develop a lot of the
technology for these things. our own uh
Mike Hatridge when he was a posttock
with Michelle uh helped kind of us make
that a standard ingredient in our
experiments and uh made it so that we
could apply it to uh something where we
could do uh an observation of what's
known as quantum jumps. So this is one
cubit that's being monitored. Each of
the sort of little wiggly points is us
determining the state of the system and
watching it jump back and forth. So this
is not good if you're doing coherence or
you're trying to store a superp position
but it's something which uh uh was took
many many years with real atoms or real
photons to be able to observe these
individual quantum jumps between states
and um it's also kind of a prerequisite
for being able to do things like uh
error correction and the like. Um with
this circuit QED platform uh we did
invect in some of the first uh uh
algorithms on uh uh quantum devices. We
had this electronic processor and we did
both of the algorithms you could do with
that two cubit processor.
uh you know uh but um nonetheless you
know we could sort of show that um this
uh platform was you know uh had the
potential to operate as a rudimentary
quantum computer and um I think it's
true to say that most of the industrial
efforts that you may read about out
there are at least with solid state
devices are pretty much brute force uh
extrapolations and um uh expansions on
uh this kind of paradigm Um and here you
see some of them like the Google willow
processor uh things in China, IBM uh and
also in uh academic uh groups.
Um
I should leave some time for questions I
guess. Uh so maybe I'll go uh very
quickly uh through one last thing. Um
which is kind of I guess a little bit of
the perspective. Um so uh you know today
we actually have the ability to make
collections of uh hundreds or thousands
of superconducting cubits on a single
chip and control and measure all of
them. Uh the uh ability to manipulate
these things has gotten quite good to
the point where we can do hundreds or
thousands of operations.
uh but uh we still don't have like a
useful computation done by any of these
machines. Uh nor do we have uh a fault
tolerant or a really uh robust way of
making these quantum computers. And um
one of the metrics here for sort of how
good uh or how interesting your quantum
computer is is something called the
quantum volume. It's basically how many
of these cubits uh two raised to that
power that you can really entangle. And
I think the current record is still
about like 10 or 11 for superconducting
uh cubits for trapped ions. Uh I think
it's maybe in the 20s. Um uh and you
really want you know hundreds or
thousands of cubits to do interesting
computations. Um what's needed for that
is a way to do error correction. And um
I won't um have enough time to really uh
go into this in much detail, but one of
the other things that's we've had a lot
of fun with in the last 10 years or so
is a different direction for how to
store the information uh that uh we
think offers maybe a more efficient path
to making robust and error correctable
quantum computers that would really be
useful uh for other kinds of
applications. And the idea is to
basically um flip the paradigm of
circuit QED. Instead of having the uh
cavities or the oscillators being uh the
thing that you use to protect the cubit
or measure the cubit or whatever you say
no no the cubits the Jose and junction
containing devices those are the input
output and the control actuators and I'm
going to actually store all the
information in one of these linear
cavities. uh and there are reasons to do
that. Basically uh they are uh simpler
systems that have a kind of natural
hierarchy in their errors. Um and uh
oops that's not what I wanted to do. Um
and uh you know they will always I claim
have better performance than a Joseph
and junction containing device basically
given what we know about materials
imperfections and the way we have to
make these kinds of circuits. Um and uh
uh
in 2016 uh in in Beckton we did uh an
experiment using a four component
Schrodener cat state of a cavity. So
it's something which is a superposition
of plus x and minus x as one of the
states and a superposition of plus p and
minus p as the other one of the iigen
states that is storing the cubit. And it
had the advantage that you could detect
in real time without messing up the
information you stored when photons were
lost from the system. And uh that very
simple system using just one cavity and
one transmon uh was used to sort of
perform an experiment that just barely
started to improve the lifetime of
things a little bit. But what you really
want is something where the uh gain you
have in sort of the performance of your
system due to error correction is a big
number. a more you know uh recent
version of this bzonic error correction
done by uh uh Vlad SAC in Michelle
Devy's group here uh at Yale um got to a
gain of 2.3. The record right now for
multi- uh transmon devices is a error
correction gain of about 2.4. So we have
a long way to go if we want to make
systems that are really robust and have
uh uh large advantages. Um but it's now
a really interesting time in this uh
investigation of quantum error
correction which is kind of a whole
other talk we could give um in which
theory and experiment now make really
interesting and useful contact and so uh
with uh one of our colleagues in applied
physics fruity puri uh you know inspired
by work she was doing with uh folks on
neutral atoms another approach for doing
quantum information processing
uh she kind of taught us that detecting
the errors was maybe a way to make full
error correction a little bit easier and
more efficient. And that led us to think
about well hey maybe we can encode a
cubit as uh a pair of cavities that are
sharing one exitation one microwave
photon between them and that could give
us we proposed a really nice hierarchy
of errors. uh this uh is only a few
years old this concept. It's already now
in uh uh you know commercial systems
that are being developed uh uh by uh now
D-Wave the parent that bought our
startup Quantum Circuits Inc. Um and has
demonstrated very high performance gates
and operations. Um the point of which
being that uh in some of the systems
that they are now able to uh produce uh
you are something like uh factors of uh
uh you know several or even uh tens
below the threshold at which this error
correction really takes effect. And so
the idea is that you might be able to
get error correction gains with this
kind of cubit that are even bigger than
10, let's say, which is something that
really when you now scale up your error
corrected system would would sort of
make some sense. So um it's been an
amazing time. It's been a lot of fun.
We've also uh trained a lot of folks uh
in interesting ways. Um this was the
group that we did the two cubit uh uh uh
uh entanglement experiments. uh we're
doing the two cubit dance of sort of
showing a bell state or something with
our uh spin up and our spin down. Um and
uh you know uh I've given the sort of
lightning version of many of the uh
highlights of the field in this last
couple of decades. Um all of this comes
of course from having really talented
people uh who are excited about doing
science and seeing where it will lead uh
that come and work with us. And that's
been an incredible pleasure. Um so uh uh
you know thanks to to all of you who
have contributed to this field. um you
know maybe just by way of summary
it's a really nice story right I mean
the field did start uh four decades ago
uh uh with pretty much people trying to
have a new way of uh attacking an old
and uh you know fundamental question
about the basic structure of quantum
mechanics and we didn't exactly know
anything about where it would go but um
this has turned into superconducting
circuits a really great kind of
playground for performing uh
experimental investigations of all kinds
of phenomena. We can do things that you
can't do with real atoms and real
photons uh due to the control we have
over these systems and maybe also an
emerging technology. And I also want to
make a point that um just because
something is now uh 40 years old uh and
seeing a translation into the real world
maybe uh doesn't mean that uh the time
for innovation is over you know as I
sort of just briefly sketched like we've
sort of been reimagining even the basic
way we make the cubit in the last uh
couple of years and so for all of you
young people students coming up Um, you
know, I hope you'll have as much fun as
we've had, uh, and that you, uh, maybe
consider, uh, adding your insights and
your creativity to this field. Um, and
we'll see where it all goes. So, thank
you very much.
Thanks, Rob. Questions?
in the list of companies that has ever
had Microsoft
fundamentally different or
&gt;&gt; ah um uh right I was listing companies
who are doing super connecting uh
devices as their main approach. So uh
Microsoft has both a theory and an
experimental effort. They are mostly
focusing on something called myerana
cubits which are uh uh supposed to be
inherently robust uh and uh have never
been observed. That's a fundamental
particle we don't know if exists yet. Um
and they're working on it. Um Intel for
example is working on semiconducting
quantum dots where you can make cubits
and all sorts of stuff. Um so there are
there are many other approaches out
there but um uh it's kind of interesting
to see you know nearly all of the big
tech giants having at least a toe in the
water on this uh on this field.
&gt;&gt; Others questions
a little bit about the collaborative
process and how that's benefited you and
and Gail.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So I I do think that um our
superpower over the years here at Yale
has been uh that we are small but we
take advantage of that small size by
being extra collaborative, extra
interactive. So um you know Michelle and
I had our offices just down the hall
from each other. Um uh for those of you
who know the fourth floor of Beckton uh
where most of these labs are, we also
have this little al cove with a
blackboard where people are always
discussing physics and people are always
walking up and saying you're wrong or oh
that's a great idea. Um and um you know
we even had uh the advantage of having
like Steve have many of his postocs uh
located there with us. So like
colllocation and a critical mass of
smart people uh is really really great.
We're really looking forward to what
kind of things can happen in the PSEB in
the new building uh once all of the
quantum efforts from across campus are
going to be able to be centralized and
uh you know sharing a coffee machine and
many blackboards. Um, so, um, you know,
I I think, uh, you never know where
these things are going to go and you
have to just kind of pull on strings in
research. Um, you know, when you tell
the history of something, it makes it
seem like we knew exactly what the next
step was and what the next step was and
what the next step was. And that's not
at all clear. Usually, you're very
confused and you have an idea that maybe
if I step over here, it'll be a little
better. Um, and you know that's how
science is done. So
yeah, it's been great to have this this
team.
&gt;&gt; What skills or knowledge do you have to
be?
&gt;&gt; Ah. Ah, that's a great question. Um, so
what skills or knowledge do you have to
have to be productive? Um, so this is an
interesting field, right? It's a little
bit computer science, it's a little bit
electrical engineering, it's a little
bit physics. Um, and you know, all of
those skills are useful and uh and
valuable. Um, you know, I think the most
important thing is willingness to learn,
right? Because, um, you know, again,
when you're doing research, uh, one of
the fun things is you don't know what
next piece of information you're going
to need to acquire in order to get
yourself unconfused. But um you know a
preparation in the basics of uh physics
is never going to hurt. Uh that's our
core business after all. Um uh but um
you know I think uh it's really
interesting to see people from computer
science, electrical engineering and
other disciplines getting involved.
Material science as well because making
better widgets is an important thing. Uh
radioastronomy which is kind of where I
came from but uh yeah
&gt;&gt; oh
Yeah. Uh
um I'm maybe Steve can speak to that.
&gt;&gt; Sure. So the Yale College now has a
certificate programificate
in science engineering. Uh students take
one of two core courses plus some
additional
other courses entirely
to try to encourage
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Can you talk a bit about the involvement
of industry in all of this?
How you navigated that at the beginning
and how you navigate it now?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, uh it's an interesting
question. So um you know as a physicist
I think when we started on all this we
didn't really have an idea that it would
turn into an industrial activity. You
usually in physics like you think that's
for you know your grandkids generation
or something is when your physics is
going to translate into uh real
technologies but I don't know think
about the transistor or other things
like that. Um you know I think partly
because of that
mindset in physics um some of our
colleagues have this kind of view that
things are all or nothing that like
you'll be doing an experiment in an
academic lab and then like it'll work in
some way so that you know like you break
glass, pull a lever and you know
industry comes in and swoops up and
turns it into a product and that's not
the way it goes, right? Um, you know,
there was a period of time where some of
our physics students were like, well,
this is all going to be over now because
this was like 15 plus years ago. Uh, now
industry is getting involved and they'll
just take it from here. And the thing I
would say to them is like, well, when
did academic research in semiconducting
devices and materials cease as a
discipline? uh you know we stopped in
the academic labs like competing with
Intel on how well they can make
transistors or directly making better
cos transistors but we were exploring
all sorts of other uh kinds of things.
So I think you know we're now in a stage
where uh that's a little bit better
understood and you know the having a
vibrant academic and you know basic
science component that goes with a
commercialization component is kind of
important because I guess one of the
things I've learned by being a little
bit involved in the uh industrial side
is there's no time to indulge your
curiosity or to try something that might
not work. you have to basically be only
working with components you think you
understand very very well. You're
reducing it even further to practice and
trying to get a large team to build a
complicated thing and there isn't time
to try a wacky new idea. Um but you know
at the same time you can't have like a
staleness where there are no new ideas
hitting the floor of uh industrial labs
or you never get there right. Um, so,
uh, I think it's it's been it's been an
interesting thing to see. We'll, uh,
we'll see where it goes, but I think
there's now a decent balance between the
two.
&gt;&gt; In the historical part of the story, you
described how there's a breakthrough
experiment,
and you said that then people kind of
walked away from that as a as a new
tool, as a new discipline, as something
to explore.
um why did that happen?
&gt;&gt; Uh it's it's not clear. Um that sort of
predates my arrival in the field. Um and
no no no uh no but where I was going
with that is I've asked people like
Michelle or or Steve I guess uh who have
been around longer. Um it
&gt;&gt; uh HITC did happen in 1986. Um there was
a lot of work on squids and
superconducting devices for a variety of
applications in uh you know geoysics and
and other you know you know medicine and
things like that. So there were lots of
applications that were being studied but
um these exotic quantum effects that
happen at millichelvin temperatures the
focus really was on um you know can I
understand it from the single particle
level up. So kind of looking at uh
things like um weak localization as you
know one electron splits up and
interferes with itself as it scatters
off the impurities in a in a solid or
something. Um and and you know I'm not
sure that uh the idea of quantum
computers is exactly the whole reason
that this came back as a as a big thing.
But um uh you know I I think it was also
realized that like there's a lot more
interesting things you can do now with
these devices. Maybe also technology
advanced a little bit but add a little
bit. Yeah. I was around a little bit
before your time. Uh so you know it
there was this feeling that macroscopic
quantum X was fringy activity
you know that was sort of like a little
because Roger Ko was doing this at at
IBM when I was there just after I left
you know and it was kind of okay but you
know what why is it why is it really
going to matter and I don't think you
know all those people that were thinking
about these more fundamental things
things were still looked at as kind of
fringy and and kooky. We also had
Charlie Bennett there doing it, you
know, but it wasn't it wasn't anybody's
you weren't going to make your, you
know, career with it. And
&gt;&gt; maybe yeah, one other thing was like uh
Leot and his uh musings, he didn't
propose a falsifiable theory of like
quantum mechanics breaks down when this
number exceeds 10.
Um, and so like you could look you could
look for, you know, a breakdown of
quantum mechanics at the macroscopic
scale, but like where's that going to
happen? Um, and without a good guide for
that, like how do you do a good
experiment?
&gt;&gt; Not a thing you found.
&gt;&gt; So, so that's maybe one reason it was
kind of crackbody
&gt;&gt; kind of considered kind of kooky
&gt;&gt; or trivial if all you're doing is making
a weak version of, you know, an atom.
because I think none of us understood
nearly as well as these guys. Some did,
but most didn't. That that you're really
quantizing a circuit. We still thought
it was sort of super conductivity, not
the fact that you were quantizing. And
now of course
all the
electrons, let's look at the whole
Hamiltonian. Why are you phenomenal
thing? Right. So there was that. Oh,
there you go.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I I disagree with you actually.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, there were experiments of I think
actually it was the part of it is that
technology just grew to the proper level
because after this experiment there was
this great experiment about the first
Mart
decay of a quantum state and then there
was this thing with so-called
quantization which
with broad levels and you can take it
with a grain of salt. Okay. So, so then
you could try actually to look at the
distillations at Jens
across the street
of
heried to do it for years and it never
worked and it never worked because
basically the discretion was too high
which is this RSJ model this RSJ model
was killing him. Uh and only Later on
developed proper technology and then the
kamura picked it up.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And perfected it to to see very short
time scales and I think these guys came
and just said just cut off the wires and
and use microwaves. So that that was
basically I think the main thing that
happened
&gt;&gt; the war was very late like 98.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But at the beginning of the
resurgence
&gt;&gt; decade in there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But that that took time to develop
basically the uh pair books you know the
column blockade also mentioned at the
level of know rather than something else
&gt;&gt; and then seeing the this actually with
the electrometer that indeed you know
connectivity matters in in little things
about the just firebox it was just it's
incremental I mean
I don't I don't think it was not just
&gt;&gt; but the single electron was very
classical
but that's not actually because if if
it's duckucky bear boxer bear box it's
not it's not a place
&gt;&gt; all right any last questions from the
students or shall we just get them some
gloves and have them come up in the
front here
&gt;&gt; last question I suppose this is mildly
related as far as the development of
technology uh you know I suppose 50 60
years ago maybe you had to make your own
refrigerator uh now you can you know buy
one but then maybe you had to make your
own uh cryogenic components, but now you
can buy them. And uh you know, we used
to piggy back off of uh all the telecom
industry and and buying our electronics
and that's you know, part of why we
might work at certain frequency ranges.
And uh you know, now there's sort of a
developing little industry of uh
electronic devices uh specifically for
quantum applications. Um and okay, maybe
you know a good ways down the road
there's companies selling whole quantum
computers, right? Uh is there any clear
additional intermediate step you see as
far as like a company that you know like
right now everyone has to make their own
blank uh because it's uh you know
there's not a big enough market but
maybe five years from now there's a
commercial blank uh that you buy
or are we kind of
&gt;&gt; start
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, uh,
it's it's a good question. I I mean, uh,
you used to indeed, you know, kind of
have to build nearly every widget in the
experiment yourself. You saw the photo
of the of the Berkeley one with the
filters and everything. You know, there
were still some SMA C connectors that
were commercial there. Um, uh, it's it's
not clear to me, I guess. Um,
you know,
in a lot of uh science labs or physics
labs they're pretty sophisticated pieces
of you know technology in the form of
oscilloscopes or the like and I don't
know what all of the sort of you know on
beyond versions of that there are that
enable more work on this uh specific
kind of quantum thing I mean certainly
you know it's gotten harder as you make
the systems larger and higher
performance and more complicated But
we're also getting better at the way you
do all the parts and you can outsource
more of it. So, um, yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
I think
the other I know.
&gt;&gt; Next
calendar. That's coming.
All right.
Is it
There is
brains.
I mean, it's too bad.
Well, I
didn't
ask I'll explain it is not a reflection.
Okay.
&gt;&gt; I never understand.
Obviously,
And then they get into the
I'm also waiting
Oh, good.
&gt;&gt; He's one of us.
No, no, no. I don't have a million.
Investors have
Then I asked Michelle
very very very
I think that was
I didn't know if you wanted to
circuit.
&gt;&gt; I was gonna say I'm like that's
the lead.
Hey, it's a nice thing to do.
And
it's
really extraordinary.
&gt;&gt; I think
it's better. It's better for
&gt;&gt; but also
the orange
Somebody in physics or physics started a
company.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah.
&gt;&gt; Anyway,
&gt;&gt; yeah. But
just looking for the existence of the
three.
&gt;&gt; I guess the other ingredient is that
some energy levels were observed around
as they should.
&gt;&gt; Oh,
so Leand is pretty much in the same
field I was in.
&gt;&gt; I was also
small
the same time frame
at
small
do
I think we don't disagree very
trying on
Do you have to violate
&gt;&gt; right
&gt;&gt; and so at that time it was dead
systeming.
Yeah. Yeah.
So All
right. Well,
if you want to hear
&gt;&gt; basically
They still couldn't find anything's
believed to be unbreakable because
mathematics
couldn't be done.
&gt;&gt; Security issue
No, this was
&gt;&gt; it was a good mix
to meet a lot of undergrads.
&gt;&gt; I gave this lecture to
&gt;&gt; Hi, my name is
&gt;&gt; Oh, yeah. Hi.
meet you in person.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What
That was
That's basically
actually.
So
drive
and he gets
very well.
In fact,
I'm sure