MIT  LIBRARIES 


DUPL 


EINSTEIN 


3  9080  02428  0536 


QC6 
.  L868 
1952 


A.  EINSTEIN 


H.  A.  Loren tz 


H.  Weyl 


H.  Minkowski 


Bromberger 


Sylv 


in 


a 


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  R 

by  A.  Einstein,  H.  A.  L 
and  H.  Weyl 

This  is  a  collection  of  origir1 
theories  of  relativity.  It  is  an 
of  “Das  Relativitatsprinzip,” 
additional  paper  by  H.  A.  Lo 

CONTENTS.  I.  “Michelson’s  In] 

II.  “Electromagnetic  PhenomerJ 
Less  than  that  of  Light”  by  H. 
of  Moving  Bodies”  by  A.  Eii 
Depend  Upon  its  Energy-Coi 
Time”  by  H.  Minkowski.  VI. 

Propagation  of  Light”  by  A. 

General  Theory  of  Relativity” 
pie  and  the  General  Theory  of  Relativity”  by  A.  Einstein.  IX.  Cosmo¬ 
logical  Considerations  on  the  General  Theory  of  Relativtiy  by 
A.  Einstein.  X.  “Do  Gravitational  Fields  Play  an  Essential  Part  in  the 
Structure  of  the  Elementary  Particles  of  Matter?”  by  A.  Einstein.  XI. 
“Gravitation  and  Electricity”  by  H.  Weyl. 


“The  book  constitutes  an  indispensable  part  of  a  library  on  relativity, 
NATURE.  “It  is  really  a  thrill  to  read  again  the  original  papers  by  these 
giants,”  SCHOOL  SCIENCE  AND  MATHEMATICS.  “Warmly  recom¬ 
mended,”  QUARTERLY  OF  APPLIED  MATHEMATICS. 

Translated  by  W.  Perrett  and  G.  B.  Jeffery.  Notes  by  A.  Sommerfeld. 
7  diagrams,  viii  — J—  216  pp.  5  3/s  *  8. 

S81  Paperbound  $1.75 


THIS  DOVER  EDITION  IS  DESIGNED  FOR  YEARS  OF  USE 

THE  PAPER  is  chemically  the  same  quality  as  you  would  find  in  books  priced 
$5.00  or  more.  It  does  not  discolor  or  become  brittle  with  age.  Not  artificially 
bulked,  either;  this  edition  is  an  unabridged  full-length  book,  but  is  still  easy 
to  handle. 

THE  BINDING:  The  pages  in  this  book  are  SEWN  in  signatures,  in  the  method 
traditionally  used  for  the  best  books.  These  books  open  flat  for  easy  reading  and 
reference.  Pages  do  not  drop  out,  the  binding  does  not  crack  and  split  (as  is  the 
case  with  many  paperbacks  held  together  with  glue). 

THE  TYPE  IS  LEGIBLE:  Margins  are  ample  and  allow  for  cloth  rebinding. 


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  RELATIVITY 


THE  PRINCIPLE  OF 
RELATIVITY 


A  COLLECTION  OF  ORIGINAL  MEMOIRS  ON  THE 
SPECIAL  AND  GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 


BY 

H.  A.  LORENTZ,  A.  EINSTEIN 
H.  MINKOWSKI  AND  H.  WEYL 


WITH  NOTES  BY 

A.  SOMMERFELD 


TRANSLATED  BY 

W.  PERRETT  AND  G.  B.  JEFFERY 


WITH  SEVEN  DIAGRAMS 


83IRAH8U  i  1 


0  I 


*  h 

i  V  ? 


'1 


nqv/rq-y-IQ 

--,.1  ■  V  i  .  ...»  ».„/  ....  ?  * 


DOVER  PUBLICATIONS,  INC 


Q<2 

,tJg6& 


This  new  Dover  edition  is  an  unaltered  and 
unabridged  republication  of  the  1923  translation  first 
published  by  Methuen  and  Company ,  Ltd.  Reprinted 
through  special  arrangement  with  Methuen  and  Company 

and  Albert  Einstein. 


This  Translation  First  Published  in  1923 


M.l.T.  LIBRARIES 

OCT  2  0  2004 

* 

RECEIVED 


PRINTED  AND  BOUND  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


TRANSLATORS’  PREFACE 


THE  Theory  of  Relativity  is  at  the  moment  the 
subject  of  two  main  lines  of  inquiry  :  there  is 
an  endeavour  to  express  its  principles  in  logical 
and  concise  form,  and  there  is  the  struggle  with  ana¬ 
lytical  difficulties  which  stand  in  the  way  of  further 
progress.  In  the  midst  of  such  problems  it  is  easy 
to  forget  the  way  in  which  the  theory  gradually  grew 
under  the  stimulus  of  physical  experiment,  and  thus 
to  miss  much  of  its  meaning.  It  is  this  growth  which 
the  present  collection  of  papers  is  designed  chiefly 
to  exhibit.  In  the  earlier  papers  there  are  some 
things  which  the  authors  would  no  doubt  now  ex¬ 
press  differently  ;  the  later  papers  deal  with  problems 
which  are  not  by  any  means  yet  fully  solved.  At 
the  end  we  must  confess  that  Relativity  is  still  very 
much  of  a  problem — and  therefore  worthy  of  our 
study. 

The  authors  of  the  papers  are  still  actively  at 
work  on  the  subject — all  save  Minkowski.  His  paper 
on  “  Space  and  Time  ”  is  a  measure  of  the  loss  which 
mathematical  physics  suffered  by  his  untimely  death. 

The  translations  have  been  made  from  the  text, 
as  published  in  a  German  collection,  under  the  title 
“Des  Relativitatsprinzip  ”  (Teubner,  4th  ed.,  1922). 


vi  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  RELATIVITY 


The  second  paper  by  Lorentz  is  an  exception  to  this. 
It  is  reprinted  from  the  original  English  version  in 
the  Proceedings  of  the  Amsterdam  Academy.  Some 
minor  changes  have  been  made,  and  the  notation  has 
been  brought  more  nearly  into  conformity  with  that 
employed  in  the  other  papers. 


W.  P. 

G.  B.  J. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


I.  Michelson’s  Interference  Experiment.  By  H.  A.  Lorentz  . 

§1.  The  experiment.  §2.  The  contraction  hypothesis.  §§3-4. 
The  contraction  in  relation  to  molecular  forces. 

II.  Electromagnetic  Phenomena  in  a  System  Moving  with  any 
Velocity  less  than  that  of  Light.  By  H.  A.  Lorentz  . 

§  1.  Experimental  evidence.  §  2.  Poincare’s  criticism  of  the 
contraction  hypothesis.  §  3.  Maxwell’s  equations  for 
moving  axes.  §  4.  The  modified  vectors.  §  5.  Retarded 
potentials.  §  6.  Electrostatic  fields.  §  7.  A  polarized 
particle.  §  8.  Corresponding  states.  §  9.  Momentum  of 
an  electron.  §  10.  The  influence  of  the  earth’s  motion  on 
optical  phenomena.  §11.  Applications.  §12.  Molecular 
motions.  §  13.  Kaufmann’s  experiments. 

III.  On  the  Electrodynamics  of  Moving  Bodies.  By  A.  Einstein. 

Kinematical  Part.  §  1.  Definition  of  simultaneity.  §  2.  On 
the  relativity  of  lengths  and  times.  §  3.  The  transforma¬ 
tion  of  co-ordinates  and  times.  §  4.  Physical  meaning  of 
the  equations.  §  5.  The  composition  of  velocities. 

Electrodynamical  Part.  §  6.  Transformation  of  the  Max¬ 
well-Hertz  equations.  §  7.  Doppler’s  principle  and  aber¬ 
ration.  §  8.  The  energy  of  light  rays  and  the  pressure  of 
radiation.  §  9.  Transformation  of  the  equations  with 
convection  currents.  §  10.  Dynamics  of  the  slowly  accel¬ 
erated  electron. 

IV.  Does  the  Inertia  of  a  body  depend  upon  its  energy- 

content  ?  By  A.  Einstein . 

V.  Space  and  Time.  By  H.  Minkowski . 

I.  The  invariance  of  the  Newtonian  equations  and  its  represen¬ 
tation  in  four  dimensional  space.  II.  The  world-postulate. 
III.  The  representation  of  motion  in  the  continuum.  IV. 
The  new  mechanics.  V.  The  motion  of  one  and  two 
electrons. 

Notes  on  this  paper.  By  A.  Sommerfeld . 

VI.  On  the  Influence  of  Gravitation  on  the  Propagation  of 
Light.  By  A.  Einstein . 

§  1.  The  physical  nature  of  gravitation.  §  2.  The  gravitation 
of  energy.  §  3.  The  velocity  of  light.  §  4.  Bending  of 
light-rays. 

vii 


PAGES 

1-7 

9-34 


35-65 


67-71 

73-91 

92-96 

97-108 


viii  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  RELATIVITY 


VII.  The  Foundation  op  the  General  Theory  of  Relativity.  By 

A.  Einstein . 

A.  Fundamental  Considerations  on  the  Postulate  of  Rela¬ 

tivity.  §  1.  Observations  on  the  special  theory.  §  2,  The 
need  for  an  extension  of  the  postulate  of  relativity.  §  3. 
The  space-time  continuum ;  general  co-variance.  §  4. 
Measurement  in  Space  and  Time. 

B.  Mathematical  Aids  to  the  Formulation  of  generally 

Covariant  Equations.  §  5.  Contravariant  and  covariant 
four- vectors.  §  6.  Tensors  of  the  second  and  higher  ranks. 
§  7.  Multiplication  of  tensors.  §  8.  The  fundamental 
tensor  g^.  §  9.  The  equation  of  the  geodetic  line.  §  10. 

The  formation  of  tensors  by  differentiation.  §  11.  Some 
cases  of  special  importance.  §  12.  The  Riemann-Christoffel 
tensor. 

C.  Theory  of  the  Gravitational  Field.  §  13.  Equations 

of  motion  of  a  material  point.  §  14.  The  field  equations 
of  gravitation  in  the  absence  of  matter.  §  15.  The  Hamil¬ 
tonian  function  for  the  gravitational  field.  Laws  of 
momentum  and  energy.  §  16.  The  general  form  of  the 
field  equations.  §  17.  The  laws  of  conservation.  §  18. 
The  laws  of  momentum  and  energy. 

D.  Material  Phenomena.  §  19.  Euler’s  equations  for  a  fluid. 

§  20.  Maxwell’s  equations  for  free  space. 

E.  Applications  of  the  Theory.  §  21.  Newton’s  theory  as 

a  first  approximation.  §  22.  Behaviour  of  rods  and  clocks 
in  a  static  gravitational  field.  Bending  of  light  rays. 
Motion  of  the  perihelion  of  a  planetary  orbit. 

VIII.  Hamilton’s  Principle  and  the  General  Theory  of  Rela¬ 

tivity.  By  A.  Einstein . 

§  1.  The  principle  of  variation  and  the  field-equations.  §  2. 
Separate  existence  of  the  gravitational  field.  §  3.  Pro¬ 
perties  of  the  field  equations  conditioned  by  the  theory  of 
invariants. 

IX.  Cosmological  Considerations  on  the  General  Theory  of 

Relativity.  By  A.  Einstein . 

§  1.  The  Newtonian  theory.  §  2.  The  boundary  conditions 
according  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity.  §  3.  The 
spatially  finite  universe.  §  4.  On  an  additional  term  for 
the  field  equations  of  gravitation.  §  5.  Calculation  and 
result. 

X.  Do  Gravitational  Fields  Play  an  Essential  Part  in  the 
Structure  of  the  Elementary  Particles  of  Matter? 
By  A.  Einstein  ......... 

§  1.  Defects  of  the  present  view.  §  2.  The  field  equations  freed 
of  scalars.  §  3.  On  the  cosmological  question.  §  4.  Con¬ 
cluding  remarks. 

XI.  Gravitation  and  Electricity.  By  H.  Weyl  .  .  .  . 


PAGES 

109-164 


165-173 


175-188 


189-198 


200-216 


MIGHELSON’S 

INTERFERENCE  EXPERIMENT 

BY 

H.  A.  LORENTZ 


Translated  from  “  Versuch  einer  Theorie  der  elektrischen 
und  optischen  Erscheinungen  in  bewegten  Korpernf 
Leiden ,  1895,  §§  89-92. 


MICHELSON’S  INTERFERENCE  EXPERIMENT 

By  H.  A.  LORENTZ 


1.  A  S  Maxwell  first  remarked  and  as  follows  from  a 
/  \  very  simple  calculation,  the  time  required  by  a  ray 

X  ^>of  light  to  travel  from  a  point  A  to  a  point  B  and 
back  to  A  must  vary  when  the  two  points  together  undergo 
a  displacement  without  carrying  the  ether  with  them.  The 
difference  is,  certainly,  a  magnitude  of  second  order ;  but  it 
is  sufficiently  great  to  be  detected  by  a  sensitive  interference 
method. 

The  experiment  was  carried  out  by  Michelson  in  1881.* 
His  apparatus,  a  kind  of  interferometer,  had  two  horizontal 
arms,  P  and  Q,  of  equal  length  and  at  right  angles  one  to 
the  other.  Of  the  two  mutually  interfering  rays  of  light  the 
one  passed  along  the  arm  P  and  back,  the  other  along  the 
arm  Q  and  back.  The  whole  instrument,  including  the 
source  of  light  and  the  arrangement  for  taking  observations, 
could  be  revolved  about  a  vertical  axis ;  and  those  two 
positions  come  especially  under  consideration  in  which  the 
arm  P  or  the  arm  Q  lay  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  direction 
of  the  Earth’s  motion.  On  the  basis  of  Fresnel’s  theory  it 
was  anticipated  that  when  the  apparatus  was  revolved  from 
one  of  these  principal  positions  into  the  other  there  would 
be  a  displacement  of  the  interference  fringes. 

But  of  such  a  displacement — for  the  sake  of  brevity  we 
will  call  it  the  Maxwell  displacement — conditioned  by  the 
change  in  the  times  of  propagation,  no  trace  was  discovered, 
and  accordingly  Michelson  thought  himself  justified  in  con¬ 
cluding  that  while  the  Earth  is  moving,  the  ether  does  not 
remain  at  rest.  The  correctness  of  this  inference  was  soon 
brought  into  question,  for  by  an  oversight  Michelson  had 

*  Michelson,  American  Journal  of  Science,  22,  1881,  p.  120. 

3 


4 


MICHELSON’S  EXPERIMENT 


taken  the  change  in  the  phase  difference,  which  was  to  be 
expected  in  accordance  with  the  theory,  at  twice  its  proper 
value.  If  we  make  the  necessary  correction,  we  arrive  at 
displacements  no  greater  than  might  be  masked  by  errors  of 
observation. 

Subsequently  Michelson  *  took  up  the  investigation  anew 
in  collaboration  with  Morley,  enhancing  the  delicacy  of  the 
experiment  by  causing  each  pencil  to  be  reflected  to  and  fro 
between  a  number  of  mirrors,  thereby  obtaining  the  same 
advantage  as  if  the  arms  of  the  earlier  apparatus  had  been 
considerably  lengthened.  The  mirrors  were  mounted  on  a 
massive  stone  disc,  floating  on  mercury,  and  therefore  easily 
revolved.  Each  pencil  now  had  to  travel  a  total  distance  of 
22  meters,  and  on  Fresnel’s  theory  the  displacement  to  be 
expected  in  passing  from  the  one  principal  position  to  the 
other  would  be  0‘4  of  the  distance  between  the  interference 
fringes.  Nevertheless  the  rotation  produced  displacements 
not  exceeding  0  02  of  this  distance,  and  these  might  well  be 
ascribed  to  errors  of  observation. 

Now,  does  this  result  entitle  us  to  assume  that  the  ether 
takes  part  in  the  motion  of  the  Earth,  and  therefore  that  the 
theory  of  aberration  given  by  Stokes  is  the  correct  one? 
The  difficulties  which  this  theory  encounters  in  explaining 
aberration  seem  too  great  for  me  to  share  this  opinion,  and 
I  would  rather  try  to  remove  the  contradiction  between 
Fresnel’s  theory  and  Michelson’s  result.  An  hypothesis 
which  I  brought  forward  some  time  ago,f  and  which,  as  I 
subsequently  learned,  has  also  occurred  to  Fitzgerald,  J  enables 
us  to  do  this.  The  next  paragraph  will  set  out  this  hypo¬ 
thesis. 

2.  To  simplify  matters  we  will  assume  that  we  are  work¬ 
ing  with  apparatus  as  employed  in  the  first  experiments,  and 
that  in* the  one  principal  position  the  arm  P  lies  exactly  in 

*  Michelson  and  Morley,  American  Journal  of  Science,  34,  1887,  p.  333 ; 
Phil.  Mag.,  24,  1887,  p.  449. 

t  Lorentz,  Zittingsverslagen  der  Akad.  v.  Wet.  te  Amsterdam,  1892-93, 
p.  74. 

t  As  Fitzgerald  kindly  tells  me,  he  has  for  a  long  time  dealt  with  his 
hypothesis  in  his  lectures.  The  only  published  reference  which  I  can  find  to 
the  hypothesis  is  by  Lodge,  “  Aberration  Problems,”  Phil.  Trans.  R.S.,  184 
A,  189a 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


5 


the  direction  of  the  motion  of  the  Earth.  Let  v  be  the 
velocity  of  this  motion,  L  the  length  of  either  arm,  and  hence 
2L  the  path  traversed  by  the  rays  of  light.  According  to  the 
theory,*  the  turning  of  the  apparatus  through  90°  causes  the 
time  in  which  the  one  pencil  travels  along  P  and  back  to  be 
longer  than  the  time  which  the  other  pencil  takes  to  complete 
its  journey  by 

Lv2 

There  would  be  this  same  difference  if  the  translation  had  no 
influence  and  the  arm  P  were  longer  than  the  arm  Q  by 
v^/c2.  Similarly  with  the  second  principal  position. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  phase  differences  expected  by  the 
theory  might  also  arise  if,  when  the  apparatus  is  revolved,  first 
the  one  arm  and  then  the  other  arm  were  the  longer.  It 
follows  that  the  phase  differences  can  be  compensated  by 
contrary  changes  of  the  dimensions. 

If  we  assume  the  arm  which  lies  in  the  direction  of  the 
Earth’s  motion  to  be  shorter  than  the  other  by  -JL v2/c2,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  that  the  translation  has  the  influence  which 
Fresnel’s  theory  allows  it,  then  the  result  of  the  Michelson 
experiment  is  explained  completely. 

Thus  one  would  have  to  imagine  that  the  motion  of  a 
solid  body  (such  as  a  brass  rod  or  the  stone  disc  employed  in 
the  later  experiments)  through  the  resting  ether  exerts  upon 
the  dimensions  of  that  body  an  influence  which  varies  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  orientation  of  the  body  with  respect  to  the  direction 
of  motion.  If,  for  example,  the  dimensions  parallel  to  this 
direction  were  changed  in  the  proportion  of  1  to  1  +  8,  and 
those  perpendicular  in  the  proportion  of  1  to  1  +  e,  then  we 
should  have  the  equation 

«  -  *  -  4$  •  •  •  •  (l) 

in  which  the  value  of  one  of  the  quantities  8  and  e  would 
remain  undetermined.  It  might  be  that  e  =  0,  8  =  -  iv2/c2, 
but  also  e  =  iv2/c2,  8  =  0,  or  e  =  Jt?2/c2,  and  8  =  -  {v2/c2. 

3.  Surprising  as  this  hypothesis  may  appear  at  first  sight, 

*  Cf.  Lorentz,  Arch.  N6erl.,  2,  1887,  pp.  168-17G. 


6 


MICHELSONS  EXPERIMENT 


yet  we  shall  have  to  admit  that  it  is  by  no  means  far-fetched, 
as  soon  as  we  assume  that  molecular  forces  are  also  trans¬ 
mitted  through  the  ether,  like  the  electric  and  magnetic  forces 
of  which  we  are  able  at  the  present  time  to  make  this  as¬ 
sertion  definitely.  If  they  are  so  transmitted,  the  translation 
will  very  probably  affect  the  action  between  two  molecules  or 
atoms  in  a  manner  resembling  the  attraction  or  repulsion  be¬ 
tween  charged  particles.  Now,  since  the  form  and  dimensions 
of  a  solid  body  are  ultimately  conditioned  by  the  intensity  of 
molecular  actions,  there  cannot  fail  to  be  a  change  of  di¬ 
mensions  as  well. 

From  the  theoretical  side,  therefore,  there  would  be  no 
objection  to  the  hypothesis.  As  regards  its  experimental 
proof,  we  must  first  of  all  note  that  the  lengthenings  and 
shortenings  in  question  are  extraordinarily  small.  We  have 
v2tc2  =  10  ~8,  and  thus,  if  e  =  0,  the  shortening  of  the  one 
diameter  of  the  Earth  would  amount  to  about  cm. 
The  length  of  a  meter  rod  would  change,  when  moved  from 
one  principal  position  into  the  other,  by  about  micron. 
One  could  hardly  hope  for  success  in  trying  to  perceive  such 
small  quantities  except  by  means  of  an  interference  method. 
We  should  have  to  operate  with  two  perpendicular  rods,  and 
with  two  mutually  interfering  pencils  of  light,  allowing  the 
one  to  travel  to  and  fro  along  the  first  rod,  and  the  other 
along  the  second  rod.  But  in  this  way  we  should  come  back 
once  more  to  the  Michelson  experiment,  and  revolving  the 
apparatus  we  should  perceive  no  displacement  of  the  fringes. 
Reversing  a  previous  remark,  we  might  now  say  that  the  dis¬ 
placement  produced  by  the  alterations  of  length  is  com¬ 
pensated  by  the  Maxwell  displacement. 

4.  It  is  worth  noticing  that  we  are  led  to  just  the  same 
changes  of  dimensions  as  have  been  presumed  above  if  we, 
firstly,  without  taking  molecular  movement  into  consider¬ 
ation,  assume  that  in  a  solid  body  left  to  itself  the  forces,  at¬ 
tractions  or  repulsions,  acting  upon  any  molecule  maintain 
one  another  in  equilibrium,  and,  secondly — though  to  be  sure, 
there  is  no  reason  for  doing  so — if  we  apply  to  these  molecular 
forces  the  law  which  in  another  place*  we  deduced  for 

*  Viz.,  §  23  of  the  book,  “  Versuch  einer  Theori9  der  elektrischen  und  opti- 
schen  Erscheinungen  in  bewegten  Korpern.” 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


7 


electrostatic  actions.  For  if  we  now  understand  by  Sx  and 
S2  not,  as  formerly,  two  systems  of  charged  particles,  but  two 
systems  of  molecules — the  second  at  rest  and  the  first  moving 
with  a  velocity  v  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  x — between  the 
dimensions  of  which  the  relationship  subsists  as  previously 
stated  ;  and  if  we  assume  that  in  both  systems  the  x  com¬ 
ponents  of  the  forces  are  the  same,  while  the  y  and  z  com¬ 
ponents  differ  from  one  another  by  the  factor  ^/l  -  v2lc\  then 
it  is  clear  that  the  forces  in  Sx  will  be  in  equilibrium  when¬ 
ever  they  are  so  in  S2.  If  therefore  S2  is  the  state  of  equilibrium 
of  a  solid  body  at  rest,  then  the  molecules  in  Sx  have  precisely 
those  positions  in  which  they  can  persist  under  the  influence 
of  translation.  The  displacement  would  naturally  bring  about 
this  disposition  of  the  molecules  of  its  own  accord,  and 
thus  effect  a  shortening  in  the  direction  of  motion  in  the 
proportion  of  1  to  ^/l  -  v2lc2,  in  accordance  with  the  formulae 
given  in  the  above-mentioned  paragraph.  This  leads  to  the 
values 


in  agreement  with  (1). 

In  reality  the  molecules  of  a  body  are  not  at  rest,  but  in 
every  “  state  of  equilibrium  ”  there  is  a  stationary  movement. 
What  influence  this  circumstance  may  have  in  the  phe¬ 
nomenon  which  we  have  been  considering  is  a  question  which 
we  do  not  here  touch  upon  ;  in  any  case  the  experiments  of 
Michelson  and  Morley,  in  consequence  of  unavoidable  errors 
of  observation,  afford  considerable  latitude  for  the  values  of 
8  and  e. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA  IN 
A  SYSTEM  MOVING  WITH  ANY  VELO¬ 
CITY  LESS  THAN  THAT  OF  LIGHT 

BY 

H.  A.  LORENTZ 

Reprinted  from  the  English  version  in  Proceedings  of  the 
Academy  of  Sciences  of  Amsterdam,  6,  1904. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA  IN  A  SYSTEM 
MOVING  WITH  ANY  VELOCITY  LESS  THAN 
THAT  OF  LIGHT 

By  H.  A.  LORENTZ 

§  1.  t  |  A  HE  problem  of  determining  the  influence  exerted 
on  electric  and  optical  phenomena  by  a  translation, 
A  such  as  all  systems  have  in  virtue  of  the  Earth’s 
annual  motion,  admits  of  a  comparatively  simple  solution,  so 
long  as  only  those  terms  need  be  taken  into  account,  which 
are  proportional  to  the  first  power  of  the  ratio  between  the 
velocity  of  translation  v  and  the  velocity  of  light  c.  Cases  in 
which  quantities  of  the  second  order,  i.e.  of  the  order  v2/c2, 
may  be  perceptible,  present  more  difficulties.  The  first  ex¬ 
ample  of  this  kind  is  Michelson’s  well-known  interference- 
experiment,  the  negative  result  of  which  has  led  Fitzgerald 
and  myself  to  the  conclusion  that  the  dimensions  of  solid 
bodies  are  slightly  altered  by  their  motion  through  the  ether. 

Some  new  experiments,  in  which  a  second  order  effect  was 
sought  for,  have  recently  been  published.  Rayleigh  *  and 
Brace  f  have  examined  the  question  whether  the  Earth’s 
motion  may  cause  a  body  to  become  doubly  refracting.  At 
first  sight  this  might  be  expected,  if  the  just  mentioned 
change  of  dimensions  is  admitted.  Both  physicists,  how¬ 
ever,  have  obtained  a  negative  result. 

In  the  second  place  Trouton  and  Noble  J  have  endeavoured 
to  detect  a  turning  couple  acting  on  a  charged  condenser, 
the  plates  of  which  make  a  certain  angle  with  the  direction  of 
translation.  The  theory  of  electrons,  unless  it  be  modified 
by  some  new  hypothesis,  would  undoubtedly  require  the 

*  Rayleigh,  Phil.  Mag.  (6),  4,  1902,  p.  678. 

f  Brace,  Phil.  Mag.  (6),  7,  1904,  p.  317. 

+  Trouton  and  Noble,  Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Lond.,  A  202,  1903,  p.  165. 

11 


12  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


existence  of  such  a  couple.  In  order  to  see  this,  it  will  suffice 
to  consider  a  condenser  with  ether  as  dielectric.  It  may  be 
shown  that  in  every  electrostatic  system,  moving  with  a 
velocity  v,*  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  “electromagnetic 
momentum.”  If  we  represent  this,  in  direction  and  magni¬ 
tude,  by  a  vector  Q,  the  couple  in  question  will  be  determined 
by  the  vector  product  f 

[G  .  v]  .  .  .  .  .  (1) 

Now,  if  the  axis  of  z  is  chosen  perpendicular  to  the  con¬ 
denser  plates,  the  velocity  v  having  any  direction  we  like ; 
and  if  U  is  the  energy  of  the  condenser,  calculated  in  the 
ordinary  way,  the  components  of  G  are  given  t  by  the  follow¬ 
ing  formulse,  which  are  exact  up  to  the  first  order, 

Gr*  =  —  Vx,  Gy  =  —  Vy,  GZ  =  U. 
c  c 

Substituting  these  values  in  (1),  we  get  for  the  compon¬ 
ents  of  the  couple,  up  to  terms  of  the  second  order, 

2U  2U 

2  VyVz,  2  V%VZ>  H 

Cf  (j 

These  expressions  show  that  the  axis  of  the  couple  lies  in 
the  plane  of  the  plates,  perpendicular  to  the  translation.  If 
a  is  the  angle  between  the  velocity  and  the  normal  to  the 
plates,  the  moment  of  the  couple  will  be  U^v/c)2  sin  2 a ;  it 
tends  to  turn  the  condenser  into  such  a  position  that  the 
plates  are  parallel  to  the  Earth’s  motion. 

In  the  apparatus  of  Trouton  and  Noble  the  condenser  was 
fixed  to  the  beam  of  a  torsion-balance,  sufficiently  delicate  to 
be  deflected  by  a  couple  of  the  above  order  of  magnitude. 
No  effect  could  however  be  observed. 

§  2.  The  experiments  of  which  I  have  spoken  are  not  the 
only  reason  for  which  a  new  examination  of  the  problems 
connected  with  the  motion  of  the  Earth  is  desirable.  Poin- 

*  A  vector  will  be  denoted  by  a  Clarendon  letter,  its  magnitude  by  the  cor¬ 
responding  Latin  letter. 

f  See  my  article  :  “  Weiterbildung  der  Maxwell’schen  Theorie.  Electron- 
entheorie,”  Mathem.  Encyclopadie,  V,  14,  §  21,  a.  (This  article  will  be  quoted 
as  “  M.E.”) 

t“  M.E.,”  §  56,  c. 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


13 


care  *  has  objected  to  the  existing  theory  of  electric  and  optical 
phenomena  in  moving  bodies  that,  in  order  to  explain  Michel- 
son’s  negative  result,  the  introduction  of  a  new  hypothesis 
has  been  required,  and  that  the  same  necessity  may  occur 
each  time  new  facts  will  be  brought  to  light.  Surely  this 
course  of  inventing  -special  hypotheses  for  each  new  experi¬ 
mental  result  is  somewhat  artificial.  It  would  be  more 
satisfactory  if  it  were  possible  to  show  by  means  of  certain 
fundamental  assumptions  and  without  neglecting  terms  of 
one  order  of  magnitude  or  another,  that  many  electromagnetic 
actions  are  entirely  independent  of  the  motion  of  the  system. 
Some  years  ago,  I  already  sought  to  frame  a  theory  of  this 
kind.f  I  believe  it  is  now  possible  to  treat  the  subject  with 
a  better  result.  The  only  restriction  as  regards  the  velocity 
will  be  that  it  be  less  than  that  of  light. 

§  3.  I  shall  start  from  the  fundamental  equations  of  the 
theory  of  electrons.!  Let  D  be  the  dielectric  displacement  in 
the  ether,  H  the  magnetic  force,  p  the  volume-density  of  the 
charge  of  an  electron,  v  the  velocity  of  a  point  of  such  a 
particle,  and  F  the  ponderomotive  force,  i.e.  the  force, 
reckoned  per  unit  charge,  which  is  exerted  by  the  ether  on  a 
volume-element  of  an  electron.  Then,  if  we  use  a  fixed 
system  of  co-ordinates, 


div  D  =  p,  div  H  =  0, 


curl  M  = 
curl  D  = 

F  = 


i  <$ '  r 


l  m 

c  Tit  9 

D  +  i  [v .  H], 
c 


*\ 


y  . 


I  shall  now  suppose  that  the  system  as  a  whole  moves  in 
the  direction  of  x  with  a  constant  velocity  v,  and  I  shall 
denote  by  u  any  velocity  which  a  point  of  an  electron  may 
have  in  addition  to  this,  so  that 

Vx  =  v  +  UX,  Vy  =  Uy ,  VZ  =  uz. 

*  Poincar6,  Kapports  du  Congres  de  physique  de  1900,  Paris,  1,  pp.  22,  23. 

t  Lorentz,  Zittingsverslag  Akad.  v.  Wet.,  7,  1899,  p.  507 ;  Amsterdam 
Proc.,  1898-99,  p.  427. 

X  “M.E.,”  §  2. 


14  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


If  the  equations  (2)  are  at  the  same  time  referred  to  axes 
moving  with  the  system,  they  become 

div  D  =  p,  div  H  =  0, 

dH?/  1/d  d  1,  \ 

- =  -[  ri  ~  v—  )DX  +  -p(v  +  Ux), 

7)z  c\7)t  da;/  c 


dHs 

dH  y 

a y 

()Z 

dHx 

~dZ 

da; 

dH  a: 

da; 

<>y 

3D, 

~6Z 

dDa; 

dD*  _ 

d# 

da; 

dDy 

da; 

iy 

F* 

=  Da;  + 

F; y 

=  Dy  - 

f2 

-  D2  + 

c  \d£  “da^/ 

VI  _  v±' 

C  \d£  da?/ 

1/d  d 

-(  ■—  -  V  — 

6*\dc  da; 


c' 

1 


iD~  +  ~puz, 
c 


1/d  d 

V— 

c\dc  da; 


)h„ 


VI 

c  \d£ 


dv 
> — 
da;- 


IHy> 


-  -  Ks  -  4K 


1 

-i 

C 

1 

-v 

c 


-y 


\ 

c 

-< 

c 


ly 


lyl 


§  4.  We  shall  further  transform  these  formulae  by  a  change 
of  variables.  Putting 


vi 


=  £2, 


.  (3) 


and  understanding  by  l  another  numerical  quantity,  to  be 
determined  further  on,  I  take  as  new  independent  variables 

x  =  ftlx,  y  =  ly,  z  =  Iz,  .  .  .  (4) 

^  -  pfy,  ■  •  •  .  (S) 

and  I  define  two  new  vectors  D'  and  H'  by  the  formulae 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


15 


D'*  =  pD*,  DV  -  f2(vy  -  -Ht),  D'2  =  ^(d2  +  ?H „), 

H*.  =  pH*,  H'y  =  £(h,  +  Jd),  H's  =  £(h2  -  ?D„), 

for  which,  on  account  of  (3),  we  may  also  write 

D*  =  PD'X,  I)„  =  I3p(d'v  +  -H'2Y  D,=  /8p(d',--Hv)  ] 

\  c  /  \  c  '  l  (6) 

H*  =  PH'*,  Hy  =  pp(H'y  -  H2  =  ^2(h'2  +  ^D'j,)I 

As  to  the  coefficient  Z,  it  is  to  be  considered  as  a  function 
of  v ,  whose  value  is  1  for  v  =  0,  and  which,  for  small  values 
of  v,  differs  from  unity  no  more  than  by  a  quantity  of  the 
second  order. 

The  variable  t'  may  be  called  the  “  local  time  ”  ;  indeed, 
for  ft  =  1,  Z  =  1  it  becomes  identical  with  what  I  formerly 
denoted  by  this  name. 

If,  finally,  we  put 

\p  =  P  ■  ■  •  •  (?) 


(3V 

62Ux  =  Ux,  fiUy  =  Uy,  (3uZ  =  Uzy 


•  (8) 


these  latter  quantities  being  considered  as  the  components  of 
a  new  vector  u',  the  equations  take  the  following  form  : — 


div'  D'  =  ^1  -  ~-^p',div'H'  =«  0, 


°ur1'  h'  -  + p'u')’ 

,,  1  JH' 

curl  D  — - 


i  » 


(9) 


c  it 


F*  =  P{V'X  +  -(u'yH'z  -  u'M'y)  +  -lu'yO'y  +  u\ D'2)}, 

c  c 

Fy=|{D'y+  kf»', Wrn  -  ux H '*)  -  \u'xD'y\, 

pc  c 

F2  «  £{D'2  +  hu'x Bfy  -  u'ySx )  -  \uxD'z\. 
pc  c 


(10) 


The  meaning  pf  the  symbols  div'  and  curl'  in  (9)  is  similar 


16  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


to  that  of  div  and  curl  in  (2) ;  only,  the  differentiations  with 
respect  to  x ,  y,  z  are  to  be  replaced  by  the  corresponding 
ones  with  respect  to  x\  y',  z'. 

§  5.  The  equations  (9)  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
vectors  D'  and  H'  may  be  represented  by  means  of  a  scalar 
potential  </>'  and  a  vector  potential  A'.  These  potentials 


satisfy  the  equations  * 

,, ,,  i  y<t>' 

V  ^  c2  W2  9  ' 

.  (ii) 

^  =  -  -p'u' 

'V  A  cl  Dt'‘  cp  ’ 

•  (12) 

and  in  terms  of  them  D'  and  H'  are  given  by 

D'  =  -  -  -  grad'  </>'  +  -grad'  A'x 

C  bt  °  C 

•  (13) 

H'  =  curl'  A' 

•  (14) 

The  symbol  v2  *s  an  abbreviation  for  ,s  + 

a2  a2 

by’2  *  bz'2’ 

and  grad'  <£'  denotes  a  vector  whose  components  are 


d</>' 

da"  V' 


The  expression  grad'  A'x  has  a  similar  meaning. 

In  order  to  obtain  the  solution  of  (11)  and  (12)  in  a 
simple  form,  we  may  take  x,  y ,  z  as  the  co-ordinates  of  a 
point  P'  in  a  space  S',  and  ascribe  to  this  point,  for  each 
value  of  t\  the  values  of  p,  u',  </>',  A',  belonging  to  the  corre¬ 
sponding  point  P  (x,  y ,  z)  of  the  electromagnetic  system. 
For  a  definite  value  t'  of  the  fourth  independent  variable,  the 
potentials  </>'  and  A'  at  the  point  P  of  the  "system  or  at  the 
corresponding  point  P'  of  the  space  S',  are  given  by  f 


+■  -  tw™  ■ 

A'  =  — 

47tcJ  r 


.  (15) 
.  (16) 


•  M.E.,”  §§  4  and  10. 


f  Ibid.,  §§  5  and  10. 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


17 


Here  d&  is  an  element  of  the  space  S',  r  its  distance  from 
P',  and  the  brackets  serve  to  denote  the  quantity  p  and  the 
vector  p'u  such  as  they  are  in  the  element  <2S',  for  the  value 
t'  -  r'lc  of  the  fourth  independent  variable. 

Instead  of  (15)  and  (16)  we  may  also  write,  taking  into 
account  (4)  and  (7), 

*  -  £|“-  •  ■  •  •  <17> 
A' -  ■  ■  ■  <I8> 

the  integrations  now  extending  over  the  electromagnetic 
system  itself.  It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  in  these 
formulas  r  does  not  denote  the  distance  between  the  element 
cZS  and  the  point  (x,  y,  z)  for  which  the  calculation  is  to  be 
performed.  If  the  element  lies  at  the  point  (aq,  yv  z x),  we 
must  take 

r  =  -  xxy  +  (y  -  yxY  +  (z  -  zxy. 

It  is  also  to  be  remembered  that,  if  we  wish  to  determine 
c / >'  and  A'  for  the  instant  at  which  the  local  time  in  P  is  t\  we 
must  take  p  and  pu,  such  as  they  are  in  the  element  dS  at 
the  instant  at  which  the  local  time  of  that  element  is  t'  -  r'lc. 

§  6.  It  will  suffice  for  our  purpose  to  consider  two  special 
cases.  The  first  is  that  of  an  electrostatic  system,  i.e.  a 
system  having  no  other  motion  but  the  translation  with  the 
velocity  v.  In  this  case  u'  =  0,  and  therefore,  by  (12),  A'  =  0. 
Also,  <j>'  is  independent  of  t\  so  that  the  equations  (11),  (13), 
and  (14)  reduce  to 

V'y  =  -  P\  ) 

D'  =  -  grad'  </>',[  •  •  •  (Pd) 

H'  =  0  J 

After  having  determined  the  vector  D'  by  means  of  these 
equations,  we  know  also  the  ponderomotive  force  acting  on 
electrons  that  belong  to  the  system.  For  these  the  formulae 
(10)  become,  since  u  =  0, 

F*  =  PD'X,  F  =  |DV,  F*  =  |d'z  . 


(20) 


18  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


The  result  may  be  put  in  a  simple  form  if  we  compare  the 
moving  system  2,  with  which  we  are  concerned,  to  another 
electrostatic  system  X  which  remains  at  rest,  and  into  which 
2  is  changed  if  the  dimensions  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x  are 
multiplied  by  fil,  and  the  dimensions  which  have  the  direction 
of  y  or  that  of  z,  by  l — a  deformation  for  which  (/3Z,  l ,  V)  is  an 
appropriate  symbol.  In  this  new  system,  which  we  may 
suppose  to  be  placed  in  the  above-mentioned  space  S',  we 
shall  give  to  the  density  the  value  p,  determined  by  (7),  so 
that  the  charges  of  corresponding  elements  of  volume  and  of 
corresponding  electrons  are  the  same  in  2  and  2'.  Then  we 
shall  obtain  the  forces  acting  on  the  electrons  of  the  moving 
system  2,  if  we  first  determine  the  corresponding  forces  in 
2',  and  next  multiply  their  components  in  the  direction  of 
the  axis  of  x  by  P,  and  their  components  perpendicular  to 


that  axis  by 
formula 


P 

F 


This  is  conveniently  expressed  by  the 


F(2)  =  (p,  |) PCS')  .  .  .  (21) 


It  is  further  to  be  remarked  that,  after  having  found  D'  by 
(19),  we  can  easily  calculate  the  electromagnetic  momentum 
in  the  moving  system,  or  rather  its  component  in  the 
direction  of  the  motion.  Indeed,  the  formula 


shows  that 


DzHy)dS. 


Therefore,  by  (6),  since  H'  =  0 


+ 


D/VS  =  ^rf  (D/2  +  D/2)iS'. 


§  7.  Our  second  special  case  is  that  of  a  particle  having 
an  electric  moment,  i.e.  a  small  space  S,  with  a  total  charge 


=  0,  but  with  such  a  distribution  of  density  that  the 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


19 


integrals  Jp.z^S,  j*p?/dS,  Jp£<iS 


have  values  differing  from  0. 


Let  f,  fi,  f  be  the  co-ordinates,  taken  relatively  to  a  fixed 
point  A  of  the  particle,  which  may  be  called  its  centre,  and 
let  the  electric  moment  be  defined  as  a  vector  P  whose  com¬ 
ponents  are 


(23) 


Then 

^  =  Jpu,*Sf  dJf  =  Jpw.ydS,  .  (24) 


Of  course,  if  y,  f  are  treated  as  infinitely  small,  ux,  uy,  uz 
must  be  so  likewise.  We  shall  neglect  squares  and  products 
of  these  six  quantities. 

We  shall  now  apply  the  equation  (17)  to  the  determination 
of  the  scalar  potential  </>'  for  an  exterior  point  P  (x,  yt  z),  at  a 
finite  distance  from  the  polarized  particle,  and  for  the  instant 
at  which  the  local  time  of  this  point  has  some  definite  value 
t' .  In  doing  so,  we  shall  give  the  symbol  [p],  which,  in  (17), 
relates  to  the  instarrfc  at  which  the  local  time  in  dS  is  t'  -  r'/c, 
a  slightly  different  meaning.  Distinguishing  by  r\  the  value 
of  r  for  the  centre  A,  we  shall  understand  by  [p]  the  value 
of  the  density  existing  in  the  element  dS  at  the  point 
(?>  V>  ?)>  al  the  instant  t0  at  which  the  local  time  of  A  is 
t'  -  rjc. 

It  may  be  seen  from  (5)  that  this  instant  precedes  that 
for  which  we  have  to  take  the  numerator  in  (17)  by 


/3  (  ybr  'dr' 

Ic  \dx  +  + 


units  of  time.  In  this  last  expression  we  may  put  for  the 
differential  coefficients  their  values  at  the  point  A. 

In  (17)  we  have  now  to  replace  [p]  by 


w  *  «■  JS  *  fh 


dr' 


dr' 


dx  +  ^ dy 


dp 
.dt  J 


(25) 


where 


relates  again  to  the  time  t0. 


Now,  the  value  of  t' 


for  which  the  calculations  are  to  be  performed  having  been 


20  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


chosen,  this  time  tQ  will  be  a  function  of  the  co-ordinates  x, 
y,  z  of  the  exterior  point  P.  The  value  of  [ p ]  will  therefore 
depend  on  these  co-ordinates  in  such  a  way  that 


M 

b X 


/3  "dr  bp 
Ic  J’ 


etc. 


by  which  (25)  becomes 


Again,  if  henceforth  we  understand  by  r  what  has  above 
been  called  /0,  the  factor  \  must  be  replaced  by 


F  -  4(?)  -  %Cf)  -  £(?)’ 

so  that  after  all,  in  the  integral  (17),  the  element  d S  is 
multiplied  by 

[p]  ,  Pvfr aP~|  _  <>  f[/>]  _  JL’tW  _  S  g[p] 
r  cV  J  bx  r  b y  r  bz  r 


This  is  simpler  than  the  primitive  form,  because  neither 
/,  nor  the  time  for  which  the  quantities  enclosed  in  brackets 
are  to  be  taken,  depend  on  x,  y,  z.  Using  (23)  and  re¬ 
membering  that  j pd S  =  0,  we  get 

» '  —  f  ^  ^  [Pa;]  b  [Py]  ^  [PJ\ 

^  4pc2ri  bt  J  4p\da;  r  by  r  bz  r  r 


a  formula  in  which  all  the  enclosed  quantities  are  to  be 
taken  for  the  instant  at  which  the  local  time  of  the  centre  of 
the  particle  is  t'  -  r/c. 

We  shall  conclude  these  calculations  by  introducing  a  new 
vector  P',  whose  components  are 

p'z  =  (31PX)  P'y  =  l¥y,  P'2  =  IFz,  .  .  (26) 

passing  at  the  same  time  to  x ,  y\  z\  t'  as  independent  vari¬ 
ables.  The  final  result  is 


,  _u_a[py  _  l  f  a  [F,]  a  [Pyn 

™  4pcV  bt'  r  'by'  r  bz'  r  J 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


21 


As  to  the  formula  (18)  for  the  vector  potential,  its  trans¬ 
formation  is  less  complicated,  because  it  contains  the  in¬ 
finitely  small  vector  u'.  Having  regard  to  (8),  (24),  (26),  and 
(5),  I  find 

A'  =  J_  3H 

4t rcr  it'  - 


The  field  produced  by  the  polarized  particle  is  now  wholly 
determined.  The  formula  (13)  leads  to 


D'  =  - 


1  ^  [P'] 


+ 


47rc2  'dt'2  r  47t 


a  [FJ 


.  *  [PV] .  a 

» 

oy  r  oz 


7) 


and  the  vector  H'  is  given  by  (14).  We  may  further  use  the 
equations  (20),  instead  of  the  original  formulae  (10),  if  we 
wish  to  consider  the  forces  exerted  by  the  polarized  particle 
on  a  similar  one  placed  at  some  distance.  Indeed,  in  the 
second  particle,  as  well  as  in  the  first,  the  velocities  u  may  be 
held  to  be  infinitely  small. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  formulae  for  a  system 
without  translation  are  implied  in  what  precedes.  For 
such  a  system  the  quantities  with  accents  become  identical 
to  the  corresponding  ones  without  accents  ;  also  /3  =  1  and 
1  =  1.  The  components  of  (27)  are  at  the  same  time  those 
of  the  electric  force  which  is  exerted  by  one  polarized  particle 
on  another. 

§  8.  Thus  far  we  have  used  only  the  fundamental 
equations  without  any  new  assumptions.  I  shall  now  suppose 
that  the  electrons ,  which  I  take  to  be  spheres  of  radius  R  in 
the  state  of  rest ,  have  their  dimensions  changed  by  the  effect 
of  a  translation ,  the  dimensions  in  the  direction  of  motion 
becoming  /3l  times  and  those  in  perpendicular  directions  l 
times  smaller. 

In  this  deformation,  which  may  be  represented  by 


(Jr  7’  r)’  ea°k  e^ement  of  volume  is  understood  to  preserve 
its  charge. 

Our  assumption  amounts  to  saying  that  in  an  electro¬ 
static  system  2,  moving  with  a  velocity  v,  all  electrons  are 
flattened  ellipsoids  with  their  smaller  axes  in  the  direction  of 


22  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


motion.  If  now,  in  order  to  apply  the  theorem  of  §  6,  we 
subject  the  system  to  the  deformation  (J31,  l ,  Z),  we  shall 
have  again  spherical  electrons  of  radius  R.  Hence,  if  we 
alter  the  relative  position  of  the  centres  of  the  electrons  in  2 
by  applying  the  deformation  (/3Z,  Z,  Z),  and  if,  in  the  points 
thus  obtained,  we  place  the  centres  of  electrons  that  remain 
at  rest,  we  shall  get  a  system,  identical  to  the  imaginary 
system  2',  of  which  we  have  spoken  in  §  6.  The  forces  in 
this  system  and  those  in  2  will  bear  to  each  other  the  rela¬ 
tion  expressed  by  (21). 

In  the  second  place  I  shall  suppose  that  the  forces  be¬ 
tween  uncharged  particles ,  as  well  as  those  between  such 
particles  and  electrons ,  are  influenced  by  a  translation  in 
quite  the  same  way  as  the  electric  forces  in  an  electrostatic 
system.  In  other  terms,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  the 
particles  composing  a  ponderable  body,  so  long  as  they  do 
not  move  relatively  to  each  other,  we  shall  have  between  the 
forces  acting  in  a  system  (2')  without,  and  the  same  system 
(2)  with  a  translation,  the  relation  specified  in  (21),  if,  as  re¬ 
gards  the  relative  position  of  the  particles,  2'  is  got  from  2 
by  the  deformation  (/3Z,  Z,  Z),  or  2  from  2'  by  the  deformation 


We  see  by  this  that,  as  soon  as  the  resulting  force  is  zero 
for  a  particle  in  2',  the  same  must  be  true  for  the  correspond¬ 
ing  particle  in  2.  Consequently,  if,  neglecting  the  effects  of 
molecular  motion,  we  suppose  each  particle  of  a  solid  body 
to  be  in  equilibrium  under  the  action  of  the  attractions  and 
repulsions  exerted  by  its  neighbours,  and  if  we  take  for 
granted  that  there  is  but  one  configuration  of  equilibrium,  we 
may  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  system  2',  if  the  velocity  v 
is  imparted  to  it,  will  of  itself  change  into  the  system  2.  In 
other  terms,  the  translation  will  produce  the  deformation 


111' 

flv  i  *  T. 


t 


The  case  of  molecular  motion  will  be  considered  in  §  12. 

It  will  easily  be  seen  that  the  hypothesis  which  was 
formerly  advanced  in  connexion  with  Michelson’s  experi¬ 
ment,  is  implied  in  what  has  now  been  said.  However, 
the  present  hypothesis  is  more  general,  because  the  only 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


23 


limitation  imposed  on  the  motion  is  that  its  velocity  be  less 
than  that  of  light. 

§  9.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  calculate  the  electro¬ 
magnetic  momentum  of  a  single  electron.  For  simplicity’s 
sake  I  shall  suppose  the  charge  e  to  be  uniformly  distributed 
over  the  surface,  so  long  as  the  electron  remains  at  rest. 
Then  a  distribution  of  the  same  kind  will  exist  in  the  system 
S'  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  the  last  integral  of  (22). 
Hence 


00 


,  |[dw  -  £j$ 


e1 


6ttR’ 


and 


R 


G 


X 


6ttc‘2K 


It  must  be  observed  that  the  product  fil  is  a  function  of  v 
and  that,  for  reasons  of  symmetry,  the  vector  G  has  the 
direction  of  the  translation.  In  general,  representing  by  v 
the  velocity  of  this  motion,  we  have  the  vector  equation 


G  = 


e 2 

67tc2R 


(3lv 


(28) 


Now,  every  change  in  the  motion  of  a  system  will  entail 
a  corresponding  change  in  the  electromagnetic  momentum 
and  will  therefore  require  a  certain  force,  which  is  given  in 
direction  and  magnitude  by 


dG 

dt 


Strictly  speaking,  the  formula  (28)  may  only  be  applied 
in  the  case  of  a  uniform  rectilinear  translation.  On  account 
of  this  circumstance — though  (29)  is  always  true — the  theory 
of  rapidly  varying  motions  of  an  electron  becomes  very  com¬ 
plicated,  the  more  so,  because  the  hypothesis  of  §  8  would 
imply  that  the  direction  and  amount  of  the  deformation  are 
continually  changing.  It  is,  indeed,  hardly  probable  that  the 
form  of  the  electron  will  be  determined  solely  by  the  velocity 
existing  at  the  moment  considered. 

Nevertheless,  provided  the  changes  in  the  state  of  motion 


24  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


be  sufficiently  slow,  we  shall  get  a  satisfactory  approximation 
by  using  (28)  at  every  instant.  The  application  of  (29)  to 
such  a  quasi-stationary  translation,  as  it  has  been  called  by 
Abraham,*  is  a  very  simple  matter.  Let,  at  a  certain  instant, 
ax  be  the  acceleration  in  the  direction  of  the  path,  and  a2  the 
acceleration  perpendicular  to  it.  Then  the  force  F  will  con¬ 
sist  of  two  components,  having  the  directions  of  these  acce¬ 
lerations  and  which  are  given  by 


Fx  =  m2 a2  and  F2  =  m2a2, 


if 


m 


Hence,  in  phenomena  in  which  there  is  an  acceleration 
in  the  direction  of  motion,  the  electron  behaves  as  if  it 
had  a  mass  mx ;  in  those  in  which  the  acceleration  is  normal 
to  the  path,  as  if  the  mass  were  m2.  These  quantities  m1 
and  m2  may  therefore  properly  be  called  the  “  longitudinal  ” 
and  “  transverse  ”  electromagnetic  masses  of  the  electron.  I 
shall  suppose  that  there  is  no  other,  no  “  true  ”  or 
“  material  ”  mass. 

Since  /3  and  l  differ  from  unity  by  quantities  of  the  order 
v2/c 2,  we  find  for  very  small  velocities 


This  is  the  mass  with  which  we  are  concerned,  if  there 
are  small  vibratory  motions  of  the  electrons  in  a  system 
without  translation.  If,  on  the  contrary,  motions  of  this 
kind  are  going  on  in  a  body  moving  with  the  velocity  v  in  the 
direction  of  the  axis  of  x,  we  shall  have  to  reckon  with  the 
mass  mx,  as  given  by  (30),  if  we  consider  the  vibrations 
parallel  to  that  axis,  and  with  the  mass  m2,  if  we  treat  of 
those  that  are  parallel  to  OY  or  OZ.  Therefore,  in  short 
terms,  referring  by  the  index  S  to  a  moving  system  and  by 
S'  to  one  that  remains  at  rest, 


(31) 


*  Abraham,  Wied.  Ann.,  10,  1903,  p.  105. 


25 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 

§  10.  We  can  now  proceed  to  examine  the  influence  of  the 
Earth’s  motion  on  optical  phenomena  in  a  system  of  trans¬ 
parent  bodies.  In  discussing  this  problem  we  shall  fix  our 
attention  on  the  variable  electric  moments  in  the  particles  or 
“  atoms  ”  of  the  system.  To  these  moments  we  may  apply 
what  has  been  said  in  §  7.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  we 
shall  suppose  that,  in  each  particle,  the  charge  is  concentrated 
in  a  certain  number  of  separate  electrons,  and  that  the 
“elastic”  forces  that  act  on  one  of  these,  and,  conjointly 
with  the  electric  forces,  determine  its  motion,  have  their 
origin  within  the  bounds  of  the  same  atom. 

I  shall  show  that,  if  we  start  from  any  given  state  of 
motion  in  a  system  without  translation,  we  may  deduce  from 
it  a  corresponding  state  that  can  exist  in  the  same  system 
after  a  translation  has  been  imparted  to  it,  the  kind  of  corre¬ 
spondence  being  as  specified  in  what  follows. 

(a)  Let  A'lf  A'2,  A'3,  etc.,  be  the  centres  of  the  particles  in 
the  system  without  translation  (S')  ;  neglecting  molecular 
motions  we  shall  assume  these  points  to  remain  at  rest.  The 
system  of  points  Ai,  A2,  A3,  etc.,  formed  by  the  centres  of  the 
particles  in  the  moving  system  S,  is  obtained  from  A'1#  A'2, 

1 

’  V 

what  has  been  said  in  §  8,  the  centres  will  of  themselves  take 
these  positions  A'j,  A'2,  A'3,  etc.,  if  originally,  before  there 
was  a  translation,  they  occupied  the  positions  Ax,  A2,  A3, 
etc. 

We  may  conceive  any  point  P'  in  the  space  of  the 
system  %  to  be  displaced  by  the  above  deformation,  so  that 
a  definite  point  P  of  S  corresponds  to  it.  For  two  corre¬ 
sponding  points  P'  and  P  we  shall  define  corresponding 
instants,  the  one  belonging  to  P',  the  other  to  P,  by  stating 
that  the  true  time  at  the  first  instant  is  equal  to  the  local 
time,  as  determined  by  (5)  for  the  point  P,  at  the  second 
instant.  By  corresponding  times  for  two  corresponding 
particles  we  shall  understand  times  that  may  be  said  to 
correspond,  if  we  fix  our  attention  on  the  centres  A'  and  A  of 
these  particles. 

( b )  As  regards  the  interior  state  of  the  atoms,  we  shall  as¬ 
sume  that  the  configuration  of  a  particle  A  in  X  at  a  certain 


According  to 


A'3,  etc.,  by  means  of  a  deformation 


26  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


time  may  be  derived  by  means  of  the  deformation 

from  the  configuration  of  the  corresponding  particle  in  X, 
such  as  it  is  at  the  corresponding  instant.  In  so  far  as 
this  assumption  relates  to  the  form  of  the  electrons  them¬ 
selves,  it  is  implied  in  the  first  hypothesis  of  §  8. 

Obviously,  if  we  start  from  a  state  really  existing  in  the 
system  X,  we  have  now  completely  defined  a  state  of  the 
moving  system  X.  The  question  remains,  however,  whether 
this  state  will  likewise  be  a  possible  one. 

In  order  to  judge  of  this,  we  may  remark  in  the  first  place 
that  the  electric  moments  which  we  have  supposed  to  exist 
in  the  moving  system  and  which  we  shall  denote  by  P,  will 
be  certain  definite  functions  of  the  co-ordinates  x,  y}  z  of  the 
centres  A  of  the  particles,  or,  as  we  shall  say,  of  the  co¬ 
ordinates  of  the  particles  themselves,  and  of  the  time  t.  The 
equations  which  express  the  relations  between  P  on  one  hand 
and  x,  y ,  2,  t  on  the  other,  may  be  replaced  by  other  equations 
containing  the  vectors  P'  defined  by  (26)  and  the  quantities 
x',  y ,  z\  t’  defined  by  (4)  and  (5).  Now,  by  the  above  as¬ 
sumptions  a  and  6,  if  in  a  particle  A  of  the  moving  system, 
whose  co-ordinates  are  x,  y,  z,  we  find  an  electric  moment  P 
at  the  time  t,  or  at  the  local  time  t',  the  vector  P'  given  by 
(26)  will  be  the  moment  which  exists  in  the  other  system  at 
the  true  time  t'  in  a  particle  whose  co-ordinates  are  x ,  y\  z . 
It  appears  in  this  way  that  the  equations  between  P',  x',  y\ 
z  ,  t'  are  the  same  for  both  systems,  the  difference  being  only 
this,  that  for  the  system  X  without  translation  these  symbols 
indicate  the  moment,  the  co-ordinates,  and  the  true  time, 
whereas  their  meaning  is  different  for  the  moving  system,  P', 
x\  y ,  z> ,  £  being  here  related  to  the  moment  P,  the  co-ordin¬ 
ates  x}  y ,  2  and  the  general  time  t  in  the  manner  expressed 
by  (26),  (4),  and  (5). 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  equation  (27)  applies 
to  both  systems.  The  vector  D'  will  therefore  be  the  same 
in  X  and  X,  provided  we  always  compare  corresponding 
places  and  times.  However,  this  vector  has  not  the  same 
meaning  in  the  two  cases.  In  X  it  represents  the  electric 
force,  in  X  it  is  related  to  this  force  in  the  way  expressed  by 
(20).  We  may  therefore  conclude  that  the  ponderomotive 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


27 


forces  acting,  in  X  and  in  X',  on  corresponding  particles  at 
corresponding  instants,  bear  to  each  other  the  relation  deter¬ 
mined  by  (21).  In  virtue  of  our  assumption  ( b ),  taken  in  con¬ 
nexion  with  the  second  hypothesis  of  §  8,  the  same  relation 
will  exist  between  the  “  elastic  ”  forces  ;  consequently,  the 
formula  (21)  may  also  be  regarded  as  indicating  the  relation 
between  the  total  forces,  acting  on  corresponding  electrons, 
at  corresponding  instants. 

It  is  clear  that  the  state  we  have  supposed  to  exist  in  the 
moving  system  will  really  be  possible  if,  in  X  and  the  pro¬ 
ducts  of  the  mass  m  and  the  acceleration  of  an  electron  are 
to  each  other  in  the  same  relation  as  the  forces,  i.e.  if 

ma(S)  =(/2,|,|)ma(S')  •  .  .  (32) 

Now,  we  have  for  the  accelerations 

a(2)  =  (&’  wv  •  •  •  (33) 

as  may  be  deduced  from  (4)  and  (5),  and  combining  this  with 
(32),  we  find  for  the  masses 

m(X)  =  (/33Z,  0lt  f3l)m(S) . 

If  this  is  compared  with  (31),  it  appears  that,  whatever  be 
the  value  of  Z,  the  condition  is  always  satisfied,  as  regards  the 
masses  with  which  we  have  to  reckon  when  we  consider 
vibrations  perpendicular  to  the  translation.  The  only  con¬ 
dition  we  have  to  impose  on  Z  is  therefore 

d  (ftlv)  _  03  ^ 

dv  p 

But,  on  account  of  (3), 

djftv')  _  03 
dv  p  ’ 

so  that  we  must  put 

"  =  0,  l  =  const. 
dv 

The  value  of  the  constant  must  be  unity,  because  we  know 
already  that,  for  v  =  0,  l  =  1. 


28  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


We  are  therefore  led  to  suppose  that  the  influence  of  a 
translation  on  the  dimensions  (of  the  separate  electrons  and 
of  a  ponderable  body  as  a  whole )  is  confined  to  those  that 
have  the  direction  of  the  motion,  these  becoming  ft  times 
smaller  than  they  are  in  the  state  of  rest.  If  this  hypothesis 
is  added  to  those  we  have  already  made,  we  may  be  sure  that 
two  states,  the  one  in  the  moving  system,  the  other  in  the 
same  system  while  at  rest,  corresponding  as  stated  above, 
may  both  be  possible.  Moreover,  this  correspondence  is  not 
limited  to  the  electric  moments  of  the  particles.  In  corre¬ 
sponding  points  that  are  situated  either  in  the  ether  between 
the  particles,  or  in  that  surrounding  the  ponderable  bodies, 
we  shall  find  at  corresponding  times  the  same  vector  D'  and, 
as  is  easily  shown,  the  same  vector  H'.  We  may  sum  up  by 
saying :  If,  in  the  system  without  translation,  there  is  a  state 
of  motion  in  which,  at  a  definite  place,  the  components  of  P, 
D,  and  H  are  certain  functions  of  the  time,  then  the  same 
system  after  it  has  been  put  in  motion  (and  thereby  deformed) 
can  be  the  seat  of  a  state  of  motion  in  which,  at  the  corre¬ 
sponding  place,  the  components  of  P',  D',  and  H'  are  the  same 
functions  of  the  local  time. 

There  is  one  point  which  requires  further  consideration. 
The  values  of  the  masses  rax  and  m2  having  been  deduced 
from  the  theory  of  quasi-stationary  motion,  the  question 
arises,  whether  we  are  justified  in  reckoning  with  them  in 
the  case  of  the  rapid  vibrations  of  light.  Now  it  is  found  on 
closer  examination  that  the  motion  of  an  electron  may  be 
treated  as  quasi-stationary  if  it  changes  very  little  during  the 
time  a  light-wave  takes  to  travel  over  a  distance  equal  to  the 
diameter.  This  condition  is  fulfilled  in  optical  phenomena, 
because  the  diameter  of  an  electron  is  extremely  small  in  com¬ 
parison  with  the  wave-length. 

§  11.  It  is  easily  seen  that  the  proposed  theory  can 
account  for  a  large  number  of  facts. 

Let  us  take  in  the  first  place  the  case  of  a  system  without 
translation,  in  some  parts  of  which  we  have  continually 
P  =  0,  D  =  0,  H  =  0.  Then,  in  the  corresponding  state  for 
the  moving  system,  we  shall  have  in  corresponding  parts  (or, 
as  we  may  say,  in  the  same  parts  of  the  deformed  system) 
P'  =  0,  D'  =  0,  H'  —  0.  These  equations  implying  P  =  0, 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


29 


D  =  0,  H  =  0,  as  is  seen  by  (26)  and  (6),  it  appears  that  those 
parts  which  are  dark  while  the  system  is  at  rest,  will  remain 
so  after  it  has  been  put  in  motion.  It  will  therefore  be  im¬ 
possible  to  detect  an  influence  of  the  Earth’s  motion  on  any 
optical  experiment,  made  with  a  terrestrial  source  of  light, 
in  which  the  geometrical  distribution  of  light  and  darkness  is 
observed.  Many  experiments  on  interference  and  diffraction 
belong  to  this  class. 

In  the  second  place,  if,  in  two  points  of  a  system,  rays  of 
light  of  the  same  state  of  polarization  are  propagated  in  the 
same  direction,  the  ratio  between  the  amplitudes  in  these 
points  may  be  shown  not  to  be  altered  by  a  translation. 
The  latter  remark  applies  to  those  experiments  in  which  the 
intensities  in  adjacent  parts  of  the  field  of  view  are  compared. 

The  above  conclusions  confirm  the  results  which  I  formerly 
obtained  by  a  similar  train  of  reasoning,  in  which,  however, 
the  terms  of  the  second  order  were  neglected.  They  also 
contain  an  explanation  of  Michelson’s  negative  result,  more 
general  than  the  one  previously  given,  and  of  a  somewhat 
different  form ;  and  they  show  why  Rayleigh  and  Brace  could 
find  no  signs  of  double  refraction  produced  by  the  motion  of 
the  Earth. 

As  to  the  experiments  of  Trouton  and  Noble,  their 
negative  result  becomes  at  once  clear,  if  we  admit  the  hypo¬ 
theses  of  §  8.  It  may  be  inferred  from  these  and  from  our 
last  assumption  (§  10)  that  the  only  effect  of  the  translation 
must  have  been  a  contraction  of  the  whole  system  of  elec¬ 
trons  and  other  particles  constituting  the  charged  condenser 
and  the  beam  and  thread  of  the  torsion-balance.  Such  a 
contraction  does  not  give  rise  to  a  sensible  change  of 
direction. 

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  present  theory  is  put  for¬ 
ward  with  all  due  reserve.  Though  it  seems  to  me  that  it 
can  account  for  all  well-established  facts,  it  leads  to  some 
consequences  that  cannot  as  yet  be  put  to  the  test  of  experi¬ 
ment.  One  of  these  is  that  the  result  of  Michelson’s  experi¬ 
ment  must  remain  negative,  if  the  interfering  rays  of  light 
are  made  to  travel  through  some  ponderable  transparent 
body. 

Our  assumption  about  the  contraction  of  the  electrons 


30  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


cannot  in  itself  be  pronounced  to  be  either  plausible  or  in¬ 
admissible.  What  we  know  about  the  nature  of  electrons 
is  very  little,  and  the  only  means  of  pushing  our  way  farther 
will  be  to  test  such  hypotheses  as  I  have  here  made.  Of 
course,  there  will  be  difficulties,  e.g.  as  soon  as  we  come  to 
consider  the  rotation  of  electrons.  Perhaps  we  shall  have  to 
suppose  that  in  those  phenomena  in  which,  if  there  is  no 
translation,  spherical  electrons  rotate  about  a  diameter,  the 
points  of  the  electrons  in  the  moving  system  will  describe 
elliptic  paths,  corresponding,  in  the  manner  specified  in  §  10, 
to  the  circular  paths  described  in  the  other  case. 

§  12.  There  remain  to  be  said  a  few  words  about  molecular 
motion.  We  may  conceive  that  bodies  in  wThich  this  has 
a  sensible  influence  or  even  predominates,  undergo  the  same 
deformation  as  the  systems  of  particles  of  constant  relative 
position  of  which  alone  we  have  spoken  till  now.  Indeed,  in 
two  systems  of  molecules  X  and  X,  the  first  without  and  the 
second  with  a  translation,  we  may  imagine  molecular  motions 
corresponding  to  each  other  in  such  a  way  that,  if  a  particle 
in  X  has  a  certain  position  at  a  definite  instant,  a  particle  in 
X  occupies  at  the  corresponding  instant  the  corresponding 
position.  This  being  assumed,  we  may  use  the  relation  (33) 
between  the  accelerations  in  all  those  cases  in  which  the 
velocity  of  molecular  motion  is  very  small  as  compared  with  v. 
In  these  cases  the  molecular  forces  may  be  taken  to  be  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  relative  positions,  independently  of  the  velocities 
of  molecular  motion.  If,  finally,  we  suppose  these  forces  to 
be  limited  to  such  small  distances  that,  for  particles  acting 
on  each  other,  the  difference  of  local  times  may  be  neglected, 
one  of  the  particles,  together  with  those  which  lie  in  its 
sphere  of  attraction  or  repulsion,  will  form  a  system  which 
undergoes  the  often  mentioned  deformation.  In  virtue  of 
the  second  hypothesis  of  §  8  we  may  therefore  apply  to  the 
resulting  molecular  force  acting  on  a  particle,  the  equation 
(21).  Consequently,  the  proper  relation  between  the  forces 
and  the  accelerations  will  exist  in  the  two  cases,  if  we  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  masses  of  all  particles  are  influenced  by  a  trans¬ 
lation  to  the  same  degree  as  the  electromagnetic  masses  of  the 
electrons. 

§  13.  The  values  (30),  which  I  have  found  for  the  longi- 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


31 


tudinal  and  transverse  masses  of  an  electron,  expressed  in 
terms  of  its  velocity,  are  not  the  same  as  those  that  had 
been  previously  obtained  by  Abraham.  The  ground  for  this 
difference  is  to  be  sought  solely  in  the  circumstance  that,  in 
his  theory,  the  electrons  are  treated  as  spheres  of  invariable 
dimensions.  Now,  as  regards  the  transverse  mass,  the  re¬ 
sults  of  Abraham  have  been  confirmed  in  a  most  remarkable 
way  by  Kaufmann’s  measurements  of  the  deflexion  of 
radium-rays  in  electric  and  magnetic  fields.  Therefore,  if 
there  is  not  to  be  a  most  serious  objection  to  the  theory  I 
have  now  proposed,  it  must  be  possible  to  show  that  those 
measurements  agree  with  my  values  nearly  as  well  as  with 
those  of  Abraham. 

I  shall  begin  by  discussing  two  of  the  series  of  measure¬ 
ments  published  by  Kaufmann  *  in  1902.  From  each  series 
he  has  deduced  two  quantities  7 7  and  ?,  the  “  reduced  ” 
electric  and  magnetic  deflexions,  which  are  related  as  follows 
to  the  ratio  7  =  v/c  : — 

7  =  +(7)  =  yfi  •  •  •  (34) 

Here  yfr  (7)  is  such  a  function,  that  the  transverse  mass  is 
given  by 

3  e2 

m2  =  4  *  67tc2E^^)’  *  *  * 


whereas  and  k2  are  constant  in  each  series. 

It  appears  from  the  second  of  the  formulae  (30)  that  my 
theory  leads  likewise  to  an  equation  of  the  form  (35) ;  only 
Abraham’s  function  \fr  (7)  must  be  replaced  by 

P  -  -  72)-1'’- 


Hence,  my  theory  requires  that,  if  we  substitute  this 
value  for  yfr  (7)  in  (34),  these  equations  shall  still  hold.  Of 
course,  in  seeking  to  obtain  a  good  agreement,  we  shall  be 
justified  in  giving  to  kx  and  k  other  values  than  those  of 
Kaufmann,  and  in  taking  for  every  measurement  a  proper 


value  of  the  velocity  v,  or  of  the  ratio  7. 


Writing  skv  ^  k\ 


*  Kaufmann,  Physik.  Zeitschr.,  4,  1902,  p.  55. 


32  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 


and  7'  for  the  new  values,  we  may  put  (34)  in  the  form 

7'  =  skS  ....  (36) 

and 

(1  _  ■/•)-*-  .  .  .  (37) 

Kaufmann  has  tested  his  equations  by  choosing  for  kx 
such  a  value  that,  calculating  y  and  k2  by  means  of  (34),  he 
obtained  values  for  this  latter  number  which,  as  well  as  might 
be,  remained  constant  in  each  series.  This  constancy  was 
the  proof  of  a  sufficient  agreement. 

I  have  followed  a  similar  method,  using,  however,  some 
of  the  numbers  calculated  by  Kaufmann.  I  have  computed 
for  each  measurement  the  value  of  the  expression 

k\  -  (1  -  7/2)1/2^(7)&2>  •  •  •  (38) 

that  may  be  got  from  (37)  combined  with  the  second  of  the 
equations  (34).  The  values  of  yjr  (7)  and  k2  have  been  taken 
from  Kaufmann’s  tables,  and  for  y  I  have  substituted  the 
value  he  has  found  for  7,  multiplied  by  s ,  the  latter  coefficient 
being  chosen  with  a  view  to  obtaining  a  good  constancy  of 
(38).  The  results  are  contained  in  the  tables  on  opposite 
page,  corresponding  to  the  Tables  III  and  IV  in  Kaufmann’s 
paper. 

The  constancy  of  k'2  is  seen  to  come  out  no  less  satis¬ 
factorily  than  that  of  k2,  the  more  so  as  in  each  case  the  value 
of  s  has  been  determined  by  means  of  only  two  measure¬ 
ments.  The  coefficient  has  been  so  chosen  that  for  these  two 
observations,  which  were  in  Table  III  the  first  and  the  last 
but  one,  and  in  Table  IV  the  first  and  the  last,  the  values  of 
A  2  should  be  proportional  to  those  of  k.2. 

I  shall  next  consider  two  series  from  a  later  publication 
by  Kaufmann,*  which  have  been  calculated  by  Runge  f  by 
means  of  the  method  of  least  squares,  the  coefficients  kx 
and  k2  having  been  determined  in  such  a  way  that  the 
values  of  77,  calculated,  for  each  observed  f,  from  Kaufmann’s 
equations  (34),  agree  as  closely  as  may  be  with  the  observed 
values  of  77. 

*  Kaufmann,  Gott.  Nachr.  Math.  phys.  Kl.,  1903,  p.  90. 
t  Runge,  ibid.,  p.  326. 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


33 


III.  s  =  0-933. 


7- 

'Ht)- 

k2. 

7'* 

k\. 

0-851 

2-147 

1-721 

0-794 

2-246 

0-766 

1-86 

1-736 

0*715 

2-258 

0-727 

1-78 

1-725 

0-678 

2-256 

0-6615 

1-66 

1-727 

0-617 

2-256 

0-6075 

1-595 

1  655 

0-567 

2-175 

IV.  s  =  0-954. 


7- 

'P(y)- 

V- 

k\. 

0-963 

3-28 

8-12 

0-919 

10-36 

0-949 

2-86 

7-99 

0-905 

9-70 

0-933 

2-73  1 

7-46 

0-890 

9-28 

0-883 

2-31 

8-32 

0-842 

10-36 

0-860 

2-195 

8-09 

0-820 

10-15 

0-830 

2-06 

8-13 

0-792 

1023 

0-801 

1-96 

8-13 

0-764 

10-28 

0-777 

1-89 

8-04 

0-741 

10-20 

0-752 

1-83 

8-02 

0-717 

10-22 

0-732 

1-785 

7*97 

0-698 

10-18 

I  have  determined  by  the  same  condition,  likewise  using 
the  method  of  least  squares,  the  constants  a  and  b  in  the 
formula 


rf  =  af2  + 


which  may  be  deduced  from  my  equations  (36)  and  (37). 
Knowing  a  and  b,  I  find  y  for  each  measurement  by  means 
of  the  relation 


For  two  plates  on  which  Kaufmann  had  measured  the 
electric  and  magnetic  deflexions,  the  results  are  as  follows 
(p.  34),  the  deflexions  being  given  in  centimetres. 

I  have  not  found  time  for  calculating  the  other  tables  in 
Kaufmann’s  paper.  As  they  begin,  like  the  table  for  Plate 
15  (next  page)  with  a  rather  large  negative  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  values  of  rj  which  have  been  deduced  from  the 
observations  and  calculated  by  Runge,  we  may  expect  a  satis¬ 
factory  agreement  with  my  formulae. 


34  ELECTROMAGNETIC  PHENOMENA 

Plate  No.  15.  a  =*>  0*06489,  b  =  0*3039. 


c 

V 

7 

Observed. 

Calculated 
by  R. 

Diff. 

Calculated 
by  L. 

Diff. 

Calcul 

R. 

ated  by 

L. 

0*1495 

0*0388 

0*0404 

-  16 

0*0400 

-  12 

0*987 

0*951 

0*199 

0-0548 

0*0550 

-  2 

0*0552 

-  4 

0*9*4 

0-918 

0*2475 

0*0716 

0*0710 

+  6 

0*0715 

+  1 

0*930 

0*881 

0*296 

0*0896 

0*0887 

+  9 

0*0895 

+  1 

0*889 

0*842 

0  3435 

0*1080 

0*1081 

-  1 

0*1090 

-  10 

0*847 

0*803 

0*391 

0*1290 

0*1297 

-  7 

0*1305 

-  15 

0*804 

0-763 

0*437 

0*1524 

01527 

-  3 

0*1532 

-  8 

0-763 

0*727 

0*4  25 

0*1788 

0*1777 

+  11 

0*1777 

+  11 

0*724 

0*692 

0*5265 

0-2033 

0*2039 

-  6 

0*2033 

0 

0*688 

0*660 

Plate  No.  19.  a  =  0*05867,  b  =  0*2591. 


c 

V 

Observed. 

Calculated 
by  R. 

Diff. 

Calculated 
by  L. 

Diff. 

0*1495 

0*0404 

0-0388 

+  16 

0-0379 

+ 

25 

0*199 

0*0529 

0*0527 

+  2 

0*0522 

+ 

7 

0*247 

0*0678 

0  0675 

+  3 

0*0674 

+ 

4 

0*296 

0*0834 

0*0842 

-  8 

0*0844 

— 

10 

0*3435 

0*1019 

0*1022 

-  3 

01026 

— 

7 

0-391 

0*1219 

0*1222 

-  3 

0*1226 

— 

7 

0*437 

0*1429 

0*1434 

-  5 

0*1437 

— 

8 

0*4825 

0*1660 

01665 

-  5 

0*1664 

— 

4 

0*5265 

0*1916 

0*1906 

+  10 

0*1902 

+ 

14 

7 

Calculated  by 

R. 

L. 

0-990 

0*954 

0*969 

0*923 

0*939 

0*888 

0*902 

0*849 

0-862 

0*811 

0*822 

0*773 

0*782 

0*736 

0*744 

0*702 

0*709 

0*671 

ON  THE  ELECTRODYNAMICS  OF 
MOVING  BODIES 


BY 

A.  EINSTEIN 

Translated  from  “  Zur  Elektrodynamik  bewegter  Korpe 

Annalen  der  Physik ,  17,  1905. 


- 


ft 


ON  THE  ELECTRODYNAMICS  OF  MOVING 

BODIES 

By  A.  EINSTEIN 

IT  is  known  that  Maxwell’s  electrodynamics — as  usu¬ 
ally  understood  at  the  present  time — when  applied 
to  moving  bodies,  leads  to  asymmetries  which  do  not 
appear  to  be  inherent  in  the  phenomena.  Take,  for  example, 
the  reciprocal  electrodynamic  action  of  a  magnet  and  a  con¬ 
ductor.  The  observable  phenomenon  here  depends  only  on 
the  relative  motion  of  the  conductor  and  the  magnet,  where¬ 
as  the  customary  view  draws  a  sharp  distinction  between  the 
two  cases  in  which  either  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  bodies 
is  in  motion.  For  if  the  magnet  is  in  motion  and  the  con¬ 
ductor  at  rest,  there  arises  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
magnet  an  electric  field  with  a  certain  definite  energy,  pro¬ 
ducing  a  current  at  the  places  where,  parts  of  the  conductor 
are  situated.  But  if  the  magnet  is  stationary  and  the  con¬ 
ductor  in  motion,  no  electric  field  arises  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  the  magnet.  In  the  conductor,  however,  we  find  an 
electromotive  force,  to  which  in  itself  there  is  no  correspond¬ 
ing  energy,  but  which  gives  rise — assuming  equality  of 
relative- motion  in  the  two  cases  discussed — to  electric  currents 
of  the  same  path  and  intensity  as  those  produced  by  the 
electric  forces  in  the  former  case. 

Examples  of  this  sort,  together  with  the  unsuccessful  at¬ 
tempts  to  discover  any  motion  of  the  earth  relatively  to  the 
“  light  medium,”  suggest  that  the  phenomena  of  electro¬ 
dynamics  as  well  as  of  mechanics  possess  no  properties  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  idea  of  absolute  rest.  They  suggest  rather 
that,  as  has  already  been  shown  to  the  first  order  of  small 
quantities,  the  same  laws  of  electrodynamics  and  optics  will 

be  valid  for  all  frames  of  reference  for  which  the  equations  of 

37 


38 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


mechanics  hold  good.*  We  will  raise  this  conjecture  (the 
purport  of  which  will  hereafter  be  called  the  “  Principle  of 
Belativity  ”)  to  the  status  of  a  postulate,  and  also  introduce 
another  postulate,  which  is  only  apparently  irreconcilable 
with  the  former,  namely,  that  light  is  always  propagated  in 
empty  space  with  a  definite  velocity  c  which  is  independent 
of  the  state  of  motion  of  the  emitting  body.  These  two 
postulates  suffice  for  the  attainment  of  a  simple  and  consistent 
theory  of  the  electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies  based  on 
Maxwell’s  theory  for  stationary  bodies.  The  introduction  of  a 
“  luminiferous  ether  ”  will  prove  to  be  superfluous  inasmuch 
as  the  view  here  to  be  developed  will  not  require  an  “  ab¬ 
solutely  stationary  space  ”  provided  with  special  properties, 
nor  assign  a  velocity-vector  to  a  point  of  the  empty  space  in 
which  electromagnetic  processes  take  place. 

The  theory  to  be  developed  is  based — like  all  electro¬ 
dynamics — on  the  kinematics  of  the  rigid  body,  since  the 
assertions  of  any  such  theory  have  to  do  with  the  relation¬ 
ships  between  rigid  bodies  (systems  of  co-ordinates),  clocks, 
and  electromagnetic  processes.  Insufficient  consideration  of 
this  circumstance  lies  at  the  root  of  the  difficulties  which  the 
electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies  at  present  encounters. 

I.  .Kinematical  Part 

§  i.  Definition  of  Simultaneity 

Let  us  take  a  system  of  co-ordinates  in  which  the 
equations  of  Newtonian  mechanics  hold  good.f  In  order  to 
render  our  presentation  more  precise  and  to  distinguish  this 
system  of  co-ordinates  verbally  from  others  which  will  be 
introduced  hereafter,  we  call  it  the  “  stationary  system.” 

If  a  material  point  is  at  rest  relatively  to  this  system  of 
co-ordinates,  its  position  can  be  defined  relatively  thereto  by 
the  employment  of  rigid  standards  of  measurement  and  the 
methods  of  Euclidean  geometry,  and  can  be  expressed  in 
Cartesian  co-ordinates. 

If  we  wish  to  describe  the  motion  of  a  material  point,  we 

*  The  preceding  memoir  by  Lorentz  was  not  at  this  time  known  to  the 
author. 

f  i.e.  to  the  first  approximation. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


39 


give  the  values  of  its  co-ordinates  as  functions  of  the  time. 
Now  we  must  bear  carefully  in  mind  that  a  mathematical 
description  of  this  kind  has  no  physical  meaning  unless  we 
are  quite  clear  as  to  what  we  understand  by  “time.”  We 
have  to  take  into  account  that  all  our  judgments  in  which 
time  plays  a  part  are  always  judgments  of  simultaneous 
events.  If,  for  instance,  I  say,  “  That  train  arrives  here  at 
7  o’clock,”  I  mean  something  like  this :  “  The  pointing  of 
the  small  hand  of  my  watch  to  7  and  the  arrival  of  the  train 
are  simultaneous  events.”  * 

It  might  appear  possible  to  overcome  all  the  difficulties 
attending  the  definition  of  “  time  ”  by  substituting  “  the 
position  of  the  small  hand  of  my  watch  ”  for  “  time.”  And 
in  fact  such  a  definition  is  satisfactory  when  we  are  concerned 
with  defining  a  time  exclusively  for  the  place  where  the 
watch  is  located  ;  but  it  is  no  longer  satisfactory  when  we 
have  to  connect  in  time  series  of  events  occurring  at  different 
places,  or — what  comes  to  the  same  thing — to  evaluate  the 
times  of  events  occurring  at  places  remote  from  the  watch. 

We  might,  of  course,  content  ourselves  with  time  values 
determined  by  an  observer  stationed  together  with  the  watch 
at  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates,  and  co-ordinating  the  corre¬ 
sponding  positions  of  the  hands  with  light  signals,  given  out 
by  every  event  to  be  timed,  and  reaching  him  through  empty 
space.  But  this  co-ordination  has  the  disadvantage  that  it  is 
not  independent  of  the  standpoint  of  the  observer  with  the 
watch  or  clock,  as  we  know  from  experience.  We  arrive  at 
a  much  more  practical  determination  along  the  following  line 
of  thought. 

If  at  the  point  A  of  space  there  is  a  clock,  an  observer  at 
A  can  determine  the  time  values  of  events  in  the  immediate 
proximity  of  A  by  finding  the  positions  of  the  hands  which 
are  simultaneous  with  these  events.  If  there  is  at  the  point 
B  of  space  another  clock  in  all  respects  resembling  the  one  at 
A,  it  is  possible  for  an  observer  at  B  to  determine  the  time 
values  of  events  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  B.  But 
it  is  not  possible  without  further  assumption  to  compare,  in 

*  We  shall  not  here  discuss  the  inexactitude  which  lurks  in  the  concept 
of  simultaneity  of  two  events  at  approximately  the  same  place,  which  can 
only  be  removed  by  an  abstraction. 


40 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


respect  of  time,  an  event  at  A  with  an  event  at  B.  We  have 
so  far  defined  only  an  “  A  time  ”  and  a  “  B  time.”  We 
have  not  defined  a  common  “  time  ”  for  A  and  B,  for  the 
latter  cannot  be  defined  at  all  unless  we  establish  by  definition 
that  the  “  time  ”  required  by  light  to  travel  from  A  to  B 
equals  the  “  time  ”  it  requires  to  travel  from  B  to  A. 
Let  a  ray  of  light  start  at  the  “  A  time  ”  tA  from  A  towards 
B,  let  it  at  the  “  B  time”  tB  be  reflected  at  B  in  the  direction 
of  A,  and  arrive  again  at  A  at  the  “  A  time  ”  ' 

In  accordance  with  definition  the  two  clocks  synchronize 
if 

—  t\  —  t  a  —  ^B* 

We  assume  that  this  definition  of  synchronism  is  free 
from  contradictions,  and  possible  for  any  number  of  points  ; 
and  that  the  following  relations  are  universally  valid  : — 

1.  If  the  clock  at  B  synchronizes  with  the  clock  at  A,  the 
clock  at  A  synchronizes  with  the  clock  at  B. 

2.  If  the  clock  at  A  synchronizes  with  the  clock  at  B  and 
also  with  the  clock  at  C,  the  clocks  at  B  and  C  also  syn¬ 
chronize  with  each  other. 

Thus  with  the  help  of  certain  imaginary  physical  experi¬ 
ments  we  have  settled  what  is  to  be  understood  by  synchron¬ 
ous  stationary  clocks  located  at  different  places,  and  have 
evidently  obtained  a  definition  of  “simultaneous,”  br  “syn¬ 
chronous,”  and  of  “time.”  The  “time”  of  an  event  is 
that  which  is  given  simultaneously  with  the  event  by  a 
stationary  clock  located  at  the  place  of  the  event,  this  clock 
being  synchronous,  and  indeed  synchronous  for  all  time  deter¬ 
minations,  with  a  specified  stationary  clock. 

In  agreement  with  experience  we  further  assume  the 
quantity 

2AB 

t  A  “  t& 

to  be  a  universal  constant — the  velocity  of  light  in  empty 
space. 

It  is  essential  to  have  time  defined  by  means  of  stationary 
clocks  in  the  stationary  system,  and  the  time  now  defined 
being  appropriate  to  the  stationary  system  we  call  it  “  the 
time  of  the  stationary  system.” 


A.  EINSTEIN 


41 


§  2.  On  the  Relativity  of  Lengths  and  Times 

The  following  reflexions  are  based  on  the  principle  of 
relativity  and  on  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the 
velocity  of  light.  These  two  principles  we  define  as 
follows : — 

1.  The  laws  by  which  the  states  of  physical  systems 
undergo  change  are  not  affected,  whether  these  changes  of 
state  be  referred  to  the  one  or  the  other  of  two  systems  of  co¬ 
ordinates  in  uniform  translatory  motion. 

2.  Any  ray  of  light  moves  in  the  “  stationary  ”  system  of 
co-ordinates  with  the  determined  velocity  c ,  whether  the  ray 
be  emitted  by  a  stationary  or  by  a  moving  body.  Hence 


velocity  = 


light  path 
time  interval 


where  time  interval  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  the  definition 
in  §  1. 

Let  there  be  given  a  stationary  rigid  rod ;  and  let  its 
length  be  l  as  measured  by  a  measuring-rod  which  is  also 
stationary.  We  now  imagine  the  axis  of  the  rod  lying 
along  the  axis  of  x  of  the  stationary  system  of  co-ordinates, 
and  that  a  uniform  motion  of  parallel  translation  with  velocit}' 
v  along  the  axis  of  x  in  the  direction  of  increasing  x  is  then 
imparted  to  the  rod.  We  now  inquire  as  to  the  length  of  the 
moving  rod,  and  imagine  its  length  to  be  ascertained  by  the 
following  two  operations  : — 

(а)  The  observer  moves  together  with  the  given  measur¬ 
ing-rod  and  the  rod  to  be  measured,  and  measures  the  length 
of  the  rod  directly  by  superposing  the  measuring-rod,  in 
just  the  same  way  as  if  all  three  were  at  rest. 

(б)  By  means  of  stationary  clocks  set  up  in  the  stationary 
system  and  synchronizing  in  accordance  with  §  1,  the  ob¬ 
server  ascertains  at  what  points  of  the  stationary  system  the 
two  ends  of  the  rod  to  be  measured  are  located  at  a  definite 
time.  The  distance  between  these  two  points,  measured  by  the 
measuring-rod  already  employed,  which  in  this  case  is  at  rest, 
is  also  a  length  which  may  be  designated  “  the  length  of  the 
rod.” 

In  accordance  with  the  principle  of  relativity  the  length 


42 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


to  be  discovered  by  the  operation  (a) — we  will  call  it  “  the 
length  of  the  rod  in  the  moving  system  ” — must  be  equal  to 
the  length  l  of  the  stationary  rod. 

The  length  to  be  discovered  by  the  operation  ( b )  we  will 
call  “  the  length  of  the  (moving)  rod  in  the  stationary  system.” 
This  we  shall  determine  on  the  basis  of  our  two  principles, 
and  we  shall  find  that  it  differs  from  l. 

Current  kinematics  tacitly  assumes  that  the  lengths  deter¬ 
mined  by  these  two  operations  are  precisely  equal,  or  in  other 
words,  that  a  moving  rigid  body  at  the  epoch  t  may  in  geo¬ 
metrical  respects  be  perfectly  represented  by  the  same  body 
at  rest  in  a  definite  position. 

We  imagine  further  that  at  the  two  ends  A  and  B  of  the 
rod,  clocks  are  placed  which  synchronize  with  the  clocks  of 
the  stationary  system,  that  is  to  say  that  their  indications 
correspond  at  any  instant  to  the  “  time  of  the  stationary 
system  ”  at  the  places  where  they  happen  to  be.  These  clocks 
are  therefore  “  synchronous  in  the  stationary  system.” 

We  imagine  further  that  with  each  clock  there  is  a  mov¬ 
ing  observer,  and  that  these  observers  apply  to  both  clocks 
the  criterion  established  in  §  1  for  the  synchronization  of  two 
clocks.  Let  a  ray  of  light  depart  from  A  at  the  time  *  tA,  let 
it  be  reflected  at  B  at  the  time  £b,  and  reach  A  again  at  the 
time  t'A.  Taking  into  consideration  the  principle  of  the  con¬ 
stancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  we  find  that 

tB  -  tA  =  -rAB  -  and  t'A  -  tn  =- 

c  -  v  c  4-  v 

where  r Ab  denotes  the  length  of  the  moving  rod — measured 
in  the  stationary  system.  Observers  moving  with  the  moving 
rod  would  thus  find  that  the  two  clocks  were  not  synchronous, 
while  observers  in  the  stationary  system  would  declare  the 
clocks  to  be  synchronous. 

So  we  see  that  we  cannot  attach  any  absolute  signification 
to  the  concept  of  simultaneity,  but  that  two  events  which, 
viewed  from  a  system  of  co-ordinates,  are  simultaneous,  can 
no  longer  be  looked  upon  as  simultaneous  events  when  en- 

*  “  Time  ”  here  denotes  “  time  of  the  stationary  system  ”  and  also  “  posi¬ 
tion  of  hands  of  the  moving  clock  situated  at  the  place  under  discussion.” 


A.  EINSTEIN  43 

visaged  from  a  system  which  is  in  motion  relatively  to  that 
system. 

§  3.  Theory  of  the  Transformation  of  Co-ordinates  and 
Times  from  a  Stationary  System  to  another  System 
in  Uniform  Motion  of  Translation  Relatively  to  the 
Former 

Let  us  in  “stationary”  space  take  two  systems  of  co¬ 
ordinates,  i.e.  two  systems,  each  of  three  rigid  material  lines, 
perpendicular  to  one  another,  and  issuing  from  a  point.  Let 
the  axes  of  X  of  the  two  systems  coincide,  and  their  axes  of 
Y  and  Z  respectively  be  parallel.  Let  each  system  be  provided 
with  a  rigid  measuring-rod  and  a  number  of  clocks,  and  let 
the  two  measuring-rods,  and  likewise  all  the  clocks  of  the  two 
systems,  be  in  all  respects  alike. 

Now  to  the  origin  of  one  of  the  two  systems  ( k )  let  a  con¬ 
stant  velocity  v  be  imparted  in  the  direction  of  the  increasing 
x  of  the  other  stationary  system  (K),  and  let  this  velocity  be 
communicated  to  the  axes  of  the  co-ordinates,  the  relevant 
measuring-rod,  and  the  clocks.  To  any  time  of  the  stationary 
system  K  there  then  will  correspond  a  definite  position  of  the 
axes  of  the  moving  system,  and  from  reasons  of  symmetry 
we  are  entitled  to  assume  that  the  motion  of  k  may  be 
such  that  the  axes  of  the  moving  system  are  at  the  time  t 
(this  “  t  ”  always  denotes  a  time  of  the  stationary  system) 
parallel  to  the  axes  of  the  stationary  system. 

We  now  imagine  space  to  be  measured  from  the  stationary 
system  K  by  means  of  the  stationary  measuring-rod,  and  also 
from  the  moving  system  k  by  means  of  the  measuring-rod 
moving  with  it ;  and  that  we  thus  obtain  the  co-ordinates 
x ,  y,  z ,  and  f,  77,  f  respectively.  Further,  let  the  time  t  of 
the  stationary  system  be  determined  for  all  points  thereof 
at  which  there  are  clocks  by  means  of  light  signals  in  the 
manner  indicated  in  §  1 ;  similarly  let  the  time  t  of  thq 
moving  system  be  determined  for  all  points  of  the  moving 
system  at  which  there  are  clocks  at  rest  relatively  to  that 
system  by  applying  the  method,  given  in  §  1,  of  light  signals 
between  the  points  at  which  the  latter  clocks  are  located. 

To  any  system  of  values  x}  y ,  z}  t,  which  completely  defines 
the  place  and  time  of  an  event  in  the  stationary'system,  there 


44 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


belongs  a  system  of  values  f,  77,  t,  determining  that  event 
relatively  to  the  system  k,  and  our  task  is  now  to  find  the 
system  of  equations  connecting  these  quantities. 

In  the  first  place  it  is  clear  that  the  equations  must  be 
linear  on  account  of  the  properties  of  homogeneity  which  we 
attribute  to  space  and  time. 

If  we  place  x  =  x  -  vt,  it  is  clear  that  a  point  at  rest  in 
the  system  k  must  have  a  system  of  values  x\  y ,  z,  inde¬ 
pendent  of  time.  We  first  define  t  as  a  function  of  x  ,  y,  z,> 
and  t.  To  do  this  we  have  to  express  in  equations  that  r  is 
nothing  else  than  the  summary  of  the  data  of  clocks  at  rest 
in  system  k ,  which  have  been  synchronized  according  to  the 
rule  given  in  §  1. 

From  the  origin  of  system  k  let  a  ray  be  emitted  at  the 
time  Tq  along  the  X-axis  to  x,  and  at  the  time  tx  be  reflected 
thence  to  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates,  arriving  there  at  the 
time  r2 ;  we  then  must  have  (t0  +  r2)  =  rlt  or,  by  inserting 
the  arguments  of  the  function  r  and  applying  the  principle 
of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  in  the  stationary 
system  : — 


\  t(0,0,0,  i)  +  r(o,0,(U 


X 


X 


/  v  — 1 


c  -  V  c  +  v/  J 


=  r(x',  0,  0,  t  + 

\  c  -  v, 


Hence,  if  x  be  chosen  infinitesimally  small, 


+ 


1 

C  +  V/'dt 


t )T  1  ^T 

+  C  -  V  ~dtf 


or 


()t  V  C )T 

~dx'  +  C"  -  v2  tit 


It  is  to  be  noted  that  instead  of  the  origin  of  the  co-ordin¬ 
ates  we  might  have  chosen  any  other  point  for  the  point  of 
origin  of  the  ray,  and  the  equation  just  obtained  is  therefore 
valid  for  all  values  of  x ,  yf  z. 

An  analogous  consideration — applied  to  the  axes  of  Y  and 
Z — it  being  borne  in  mind  that  light  is  always  propagated 
along  these  axes,  when  viewed  from  the  stationary  system, 
with  the  velocity  x/(c2  -  v2),  gives  us 


7)r 

'ty. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


45 


Since  r  is  a  linear  function,  it  follows  from  these  equations 
that 


=  °(*  - 


where  a  is  a  function  (p(v )  at  present  unknown,  and  where 
for  brevity  it  is  assumed  that  at  the  origin  of  k,  r  =  0,  when 
t  =  0. 

With  the  help  of  this  result  we  easily  determine  the 
quantities  f,  rj,  f  by  expressing  in  equations  that  light  (as  re¬ 
quired  by  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of 
light,  in  combination  with  the  principle  of  relativity)  is  also 
propagated  with  velocity  c  when  measured  in  the  moving 
system.  For  a  ray  of  light  emitted  at  the  time  t  =  0  in  the 
direction  of  the  increasing  f 

f  =  ct  or  ?  =  ac(t  -  -rz—,x')- 

But  the  ray  moves  relatively  to  the  initial  point  of  ky  when 
measured  in  the  stationary  system,  with  the  velocity  c  -  v, 
so  that 


x 


c  -  v 


=  t 


If  we  insert  this  value  of  t  in  the  equation  for  f,  we  obtain 


c.  I'  ' 

t  =  a-2 - r,x  . 

cz  -  ir 

In  an  analogous  manner  we  find,  by  considering  rays  moving 
along  the  two  other  axes,  that 


V  =  CT  =  ac(t  -  ,  ”  vtx) 


when 


Thus 


y 


-  v 2) 
c 


t ,  x  =  0. 


V  aJ(ci  -  v‘)V  and  ^  as/W  -  V2) 
Substituting  for  x  its  value,  we  obtain 


z. 


46 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


t  =  <f>(v)/3(t  -  vx/c2), 
f  =  4>(v)P(x  -  vt), 

7]  =  <p(v)y, 

where 

£  =  _ i _ 

P  v/U-^/c2)’ 

and  $  is  an  as  yet  unknown  function  of  v.  If  no  assumption 
whatever  be  made  as  to  the  initial  position  of  the  moving 
system  and  as  to  the  zero  point  of  t,  an  additive  constant  is 
to  be  placed  on  the  right  side  of  each  of  these  equations. 

We  now  have  to  prove  that  any  ray  of  light,  measured  in 
the  moving  system,  is  propagated  with  the  velocity  c,  if,  as 
we  have  assumed,  this  is  the  case  in  the  stationary  system  ;  for 
we  have  not  as  yet  furnished  the  proof  that  the  principle  of 
the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  is  compatible  with  the 
principle  of  relativity. 

At  the  time  t  =  t  =  0,  when  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates 
is  common  to  the  two  systems,  let  a  spherical  wave  be 
emitted  therefrom,  and  be  propagated  with  the  velocity  c  in 
system  K.  If  (x,  y ,  z)  be  a  point  just  attained  by  this  wave, 
then 

x2  +  y2  +  z2  *=  c2t2. 

Transforming  this  equation  with  the  aid  of  our  equations 
of  transformation  we  obtain  after  a  simple  calculation 

f2  +  V2  +  ?2  **  c2t2. 

The  wave  under  consideration  is  therefore  no  less  a 
spherical  wave  with  velocity  of  propagation  c  when  viewed 
in  the  moving  system.  This  shows  that  our  two  funda¬ 
mental  principles  are  compatible.* 

In  the  equations  of  transformation  which  have  been  de¬ 
veloped  there  enters  an  unknown  function  </>  of  v ,  which 
we  will  now  determine. 

For  this  purpose  we  introduce  a  third  system  of  co-ordin- 

*  The  equations  of  the  Lorentz  transformation  may  be  more  simply  de¬ 
duced  directly  from  the  condition  that  in  virtue  of  those  equations  the  re¬ 
lation  x 2  +  y-  +  z1  =  cH 2  shall  have  as  its  consequence  the  second  relation 

e  +  v2  +  c>  = 


A.  EINSTEIN 


47 


ates  K',  which  relatively  to  the  system  k  is  in  a  state  of 
parallel  translatory  motion  parallel  to  the  axis  of  X,  such  that 
the  origin  of  co-ordinates  of  system  k  moves  with  velocity 
-  v  on  the  axis  of  X.  At  the  time  t  =  0  let  all  three  origins 
coincide,  and  when  t=x=y=z=  Olet  the  time  t'  of  the 
system  K'  be  zero.  We  call  the  co-ordinates,  measured  in 
the  system  K,  x,  y\  z ,  and  by  a  twofold  application  of  our 
equations  of  transformation  we  obtain 

t'  =  </>(  -  v)/3(  -  v)(r  +  vf/c2)  =  -  v)t, 

x  =  </>(-  v)/3(  -  v){%  +  vr)  =  <p(v)(p(  -  v)xf 

y  =  <p(-  v)rj  =  <p(v)(p(  -  v)y, 

z  =  <p{  -  v)%  =  C p(v)(p{  -  v)z. 

Since  the  relations  between  x\  y\  z  and  x,  y,  z  do  not 
contain  the  time  t ,  the  systems  K  and  K'  are  at  rest  with  re¬ 
spect  to  one  another,  and  it  is  clear  that  the  transformation 
from  K  to  K'  must  be  the  identical  transformation.  Thus 


(p{v)(p(  -  v)  =  1. 


We  now  inquire  into  the  signification  of  cp(y).  We  give  our 
attention  to  that  part  of  the  axis  of  Y  of  system  k  which  lies 
between  f  =  0,  ^  =  0,  ?=0  and  f  =  0,  rj  =  Z,  f  =  0.  This 
part  of  the  axis  of  Y  is  a  rod  moving  perpendicularly  to  its  axis 
with  velocity  v  relatively  to  system  K.  Its  ends  possess  in  K 
the  co-ordinates 


Z 


and 


Xi  ~  vt>  Vi  ~  <f,(Vy " 
^2  *  Vt,  2/2  “  0,  -  0. 


0 


The  length  of  the  rod  measured  in  K  is  therefore  l/<p(v) ;  and 
this  gives  us  the  meaning  of  the  function  (p(v ).  From 
reasons  of  symmetry  it  is  now  evident  that  the  length  of  a 
given  rod  moving  perpendicularly  to  its  axis,  measured  in 
the  stationary  system,  must  depend  only  on  the  velocity  and 
not  on  the  direction  and  the  sense  of  the  motion.  The 
length  of  the  moving  rod  measured  in  the  stationary  system 
does  not  change,  therefore,  if  v  and  -  v  are  interchanged. 
Hence  follows  that  l/(p(v )  =  l/(p{  -  v ),  or 

cp(v)  -</)(-  v). 

It  follows  from  this  relation  and  the  one  previously  found 


48 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


that  (f>(v)  =  1,  so  that  the  transformation  equations  which 
have  been  found  become 


where 


t  =  /3(i  -  vx/c2), 

£  =  £(*-  «<)> 

v  =  y> 

t  = 

£  =  i/V(i  - 


§  4.  Physical  Meaning  of  the  Equations  Obtained  in  Re¬ 
spect  to  Moving  Rigid  Bodies  and  Moving  Clocks 

We  envisage  a  rigid  sphere*  of  radius  R,  at  rest  relatively 
to  the  moving  system  k,  and  with  its  centre  at  the  origin  of 
co-ordinates  of  k.  The  equation  of  the  surface  of  this  sphere 
moving  relatively  to  the  system  K  with  velocity  v  is 

f2  +  v2  +  f2  =  R2. 

The  equation  of  this  surface  expressed  in  xf  y,  z  at  the  time 
t  =  0  is 

(Va  -  d2/c2))2  +  y2  +  *2  =  E2- 

A  rigid  body  which,  measured  in  a  state  of  rest,  has  the  form 
of  a  sphere,  therefore  has  in  a  state  of  motion — viewed  from 
the  stationary  system — the  form  of  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution 
with  the  axes 

v2/c2),  R,  R. 

Thus,  whereas  the  Y  and  Z  dimensions  of  the  sphere  (and 
therefore  of  every  rigid  body  of  no  matter  what  form)  do  not 
appear  modified  by  the  motion,  the  X  dimension  appears 
shortened  in  the  ratio  1 :  ^/(l  -  v2/c2),  i.e.  the  greater  the 
value  of  v ,  the  greater  the  shortening.  For  v  =  c  all  moving 
objects — viewed  from  the  “  stationary  ”  system — shrivel  up 
into  plain  figures.  For  velocities  greater  than  that  of  light 
our  deliberations  become  meaningless  ;  we  shall,  however, 
find  in  what  follows,  that  the  velocity  of  light  in  our 
theory  plays  the  part,  physically,  of  an  infinitely  great 
velocity. 


That  is,  a  body  possessing  spherical  form  when  examined  at  rest. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


49 


It  is  clear  that  the  same  results  hold  good  of  bodies  at  rest 
in  the  “  stationary  ”  system,  viewed  from  a  system  in  uniform 
motion. 

Further,  we  imagine  one  of  the  clocks  which  are  qualified 
to  mark  the  time  t  when  at  rest  relatively  to  the  stationary 
system,  and  the  time  t  when  at  rest  relatively  to  the  moving 
system,  to  be  located  at  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates  of  k, 
and  so  adjusted  that  it  marks  the  time  t.  What  is  the  rate 
of  this  clock,  when  viewed  from  the  stationary  system  ? 

Between  the  quantities  x ,  t ,  and  t,  which  refer  to  the 
position  of  the  clock,  we  have,  evidently,  x  =  vt  and 


t  =  jq— -m(t "  ra/c'i)- 

Therefore, 

T  =  t^/il  -  tf2/c2)  =  t  -  (1  -  ^/(l  -  F2/c’2))£ 


whence  it  follows  that  the  time  marked  by  the  clock  (viewed 
in  the  stationary  system)  is  slow  by  1  -  ^/(l  -  v2/c2)  seconds 
per.  second,  or — neglecting  magnitudes  of  fourth  and  higher 
order — by  -J v'lc 2. 

From  this  there  ensues  the  following  peculiar  consequence. 
If  at  the  points  A  and  B  of  K  there  are  stationary  clocks 
which,  viewed  in  the  stationary  system,  are  synchronous  ;  and 
if  the  clock  at  A  is  moved  with  the  velocity  v  along  the  line 
AB  to  B,  then  on  its  arrival  at  B  the  two  clocks  no  longer 
synchronize,  but  the  clock  moved  from  A  to  B  lags  behind 
the  other  which  has  remained  at  B  by  ^ tv 2/c2  (up  to  magni¬ 
tudes  of  fourth  and  higher  order),  t  being  the  time  occupied 
in  the  journey  from  A  to  B. 

It  is  at  once  apparent  that  this  result  still  holds  good  if 
the  clock  moves  from  A  to  B  in  any  polygonal  line,  and  also 
when  the  points  A  and  B  coincide. 

If  we  assume  that  the  result  proved  for  a  polygonal  line 
is  also  valid  for  a  continuously  curved  line,  we  arrive  at  this 
result :  If  one  of  two  synchronous  clocks  at  A  is  moved  in  a 
closed  curve  with  constant  velocity  until  it  returns  to  A,  the 
journey  lasting  t  seconds,  then  by  the  clock  which  has 
remained  at  rest  the  travelled  clock  on  its  arrival  at  A 
will  be  second  slow.  Thence  we  conclude  that  a 


50 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


balance-clock  *  at  the  equator  must  go  more  slowly,  by  a 
very  small  amount,  than  a  precisely  similar  clock  situated  at 
one  of  the  poles  under  otherwise  identical  conditions. 

§  5.  The  Composition  of  Velocities 

In  the  system  k  moving  along  the  axis  of  X  of  the  system 
K  with  velocity  v,  let  a  point  move  in  accordance  with  the 
equations 

f  =  W£T,  7]  =  wvr,  ?  =  0, 

where  wt  and  wv  denote  constants. 

Required  :  the  motion  of  the  point  relatively  to  the  system 
K.  If  with  the  help  of  the  equations  of  transformation  de¬ 
veloped  in  §  3  we  introduce  the  quantities  x,  y,  z,  t  into  the 
equations  of  motion  of  the  point,  we  obtain 

Wt  +  v 

x  =  = — 5 - t, 

1  +  vw^c2 

V(i  -  v‘h2) 
y  1  +  vic^/c2  wv  ’ 
z  =  0. 

Thus  the  law  of  the  parallelogram  of  velocities  is  valid  ac¬ 
cording  to  our  theory  only  to  a  first  approximation.  We  set 


w1  =  +  wv2, 

a  =  tan-1  Wy/wx, 


a  is  then  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  angle  between  the  velocities 
v  and  w.  After  a  simple  calculation  we  obtain 

v  =  ±  w 2  +  2 vw  cos  a)  -  (vw  sin  a/c2)2] 

1  +  vw  cos  a/c 2 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  v  and  w  enter  into  the  expression 
for  the  resultant  velocity  in  a  symmetrical  manner.  If  w  also 
has  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  X,  we  get 

v  _  v  +  w 
1  +  vw/c2' 

*  Not  a  pendulum-clock,  which  is  physically  a  system  to  which  the  Earth 
belongs.  This  case  had  to  be  excluded. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


51 


It  follows  from  this  equation  that  from  a  composition  of  two 
velocities  which  are  less  than  c,  there  always  results  a  velocity 
less  than  c.  For  if  we  set  v  =  c-tc,w  =  c-  X,  k  and  X 
being  positive  and  less  than  c,  then 


2c  -  k,  -  X 


2c  —  k  —  X  +  /c\fc 


<c. 


It  follows,  further,  that  the  velocity  of  light  c  cannot  be 
altered  by  composition  with  a  velocity  less  than  that  of  light. 
For  this  case  we  obtain 


Y  = 


c  +  w 
1  +  wjc 


c. 


We  might  also  have  obtained  the  formula  for  V,  for  the  case 
when  v  and  w  have  the  same  direction,  by  compounding 
two  transformations  in  accordance  with  §  3.  If  in  addition 
to  the  systems  K  and  k  figuring  in  §  3  we  introduce  still 
another  system  of  co-ordinates  k'  moving  parallel  to  k,  its 
initial  point  moving  on  the  axis  of  X  with  the  velocity  w,  we 
obtain  equations  between  the  quantities  x ,  y,  zt  t  and  the 
corresponding  quantities  of  k',  which  differ  from  the  equations 
found  in  §  3  only  in  that  the  place  of  “  v  ”  is  taken  by  the 
quantity 

v  +  w 
1  +  vw/c1 9 

from  which  we  see  that  such  parallel  transformations — neces¬ 
sarily — form  a  group. 

We  have  now  deduced  the  requisite  laws  of  the  theory  of 
kinematics  corresponding  to  our  two  principles,  and  we  pro¬ 
ceed  to  show  their  application  to  electrodynamics. 


II.  Electrodynamical  Part 

§  6.  Transformation  of  the  Maxwell -Hertz  Equations  for 
Empty  Space.  On  the  Nature  of  the  Electromotive 
Forces  Occurring  in  a  Magnetic  Field  During  Motion 

Let  the  Maxwell-Hertz  equations  for  empty  space  hold 
good  for  the  stationary  system  K,  so  that  we  have 


52 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


1 

ax 

aN 

aM 

l 

aL 

aY 

az 

c 

Dt 

iy 

Iz  9 

c 

~dz 

V 

1 

aY 

aL 

aN 

1 

aM 

aZ 

ax 

c 

dt 

lx9 

c 

Tit 

Tix 

a*’ 

1 

az 

aM 

aL 

1 

ax 

aY 

c 

TiX 

V 

c 

It 

7>y 

Tix' 

where  (X,  Y,  Z)  denotes  the  vector  of  the  electric  force,  and 
(L,  M,  N)  that  of  the  magnetic  force. 

If  we  apply  to  these  equations  the  transformation  de¬ 
veloped  in  §  3,  by  referring  the  electromagnetic  processes  to 
the  system  of  co-ordinates  there  introduced,  moving  with  the 
velocity  v,  we  obtain  the  equations 


\  h W¥  -  ?N)}  - 1  -  ftWN  -  ;)Y}- 

-It  ■  -  ;N)}  -  s,Wz  +  »}• 

;  +  ;2)}  -  rf(«(z+»)  -  f' 

I  sKs  -  -!1)}  -  f  -  ffMY  -'"))• 

where 

j3  =  1!J{1  -  v*/c*). 


Now  the  principle  of  relativity  requires  that  if  the 
Maxwell-Hertz  equations  for  empty  space  hold  good  in 
system  K,  they  also  hold  good  in  system  k  ;  that  is  to  say  that 
the  vectors  of  the  electric  and  the  magnetic  force — (X',  Y',  Z') 
and  (I/,  M',  N') — of  the  moving  system  k,  which  are  defined 
by  their  ponderomotive  effects  on  electric  or  magnetic  masses 
respectively,  satisfy  the  following  equations  : — 


A.  EINSTEIN 


53 


1 

ax' 

dN' 

<>M' 

1  &L' 

DY' 

IZ’ 

c 

dr 

?)y 

ar 

C  dr 

a? 

~by  f 

1 

dY' 

dL' 

dN' 

1  <>M' 

dZ' 

*X' 

c 

2)t 

C  ~dr 

a? 

1 

DZ' 

7>M! 

dL' 

1  *N' 

ax' 

lY’ 

c 

dr 

a? 

iv* 

C  ()T 

?)y 

af 

Evidently  the  two  systems  of  equations  found  for  system 
k  must  express  exactly  the  same  thing,  since  both  systems  of 
equations  are  equivalent  to  the  Maxwell-Hertz  equations  for 
system  K.  Since,  further,  the  equations  of  the  two  systems 
agree,  with  the  exception  of  the  symbols  for  the  vectors,  it 
follows  that  the  functions  occurring  in  the  systems  of  equa¬ 
tions  at  corresponding  places  must  agree,  with  the  exception 
of  a  factor  if r(v ),  which  is  common  for  all  functions  of  the 
one  system  of  equations,  and  is  independent  of  f,  y,  ?  and  r 
but  depends  upon  v.  Thus  we  have  the  relations 

X'  =  y/r(v)X,  L'  =  jr(v)L, 

Y  =  ^-(v)fi(Y  -  ?n),  M'  =  3(m  +  ?z), 

Z'  =  f  («)/3(z  +  ^’m),  N'  =  -  jY). 

If  we  now  form  the  reciprocal  of  this  system  of  equations, 
firstly  by  solving  the  equations  just  obtained,  and  secondly 
by  applying  the  equations  to  the  inverse  transformation  (from 
k  to  K),  which  is  characterized  by  the  velocity  -  v,  it  follows, 
when  we.  consider  that  the  two  systems  of  equations  thus  ob¬ 
tained  must  be  identical,  that  ^(v)y/r(  -  v)  =  1.  Further, 
from  reasons  of  symmetry  *  yfr(v)  =  yjr(  -  v),  and  therefore 

\fr(v)  =  1, 

and  our  equations  assume  the  form 

*  If,  for  example,  X  =  Y=  Z  =  L  =  M  =  0,  and  N  =J=  O,  then  from 
reasons  of  symmetry  it  is  clear  that  when  v  changes  sign  without  changing 
its  numerical  value,  Y'  must  also  change  sign  without  changing  its  numerical 
value. 


54 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


X'  =  X,  L'  =  L, 

Y'  -  $(y  -  ^n),  M'  =  /s(m  +  ^z), 

Z'  =  /3(z  +  ^m),  N'  =  yg( N  -  ^y). 

As  to  the  interpretation  of  these  equations  we  make  the 
following  remarks :  Let  a  point  charge  of  electricity  have 
the  magnitude  “  one  ”  when  measured  in  the  stationary 
system  K,  i.e.  let  it  when  at  rest  in  the  stationary  system 
exert  a  force  of  one  dyne  upon  an  equal  quantity  of  electricity 
at  a  distance  of  one  cm.  By  the  principle  of  relativity  this 
electric  charge  is  also  of  the  magnitude  “  one  ”  when 
measured  in  the  moving  system.  If  this  quantity  of  elec¬ 
tricity  is  at  rest  relatively  to  the  stationary  system,  then  by 
definition  the  vector  (X,  Y,  Z)  is  equal  to  the  force  acting 
upon  it.  If  the  quantity  of  electricity  is  at  rest  relatively  to 
the  moving  system  (at  least  at  the  relevant  instant),  then  the 
force  acting  upon  it,  measured  in  the  moving  system,  is  equal 
to  the  vector  (X',  Y',  Z).  Consequently  the  first  three 
equations  above  allow  themselves  to  be  clothed  in  words  in 
the  two  following  ways  : — 

1.  If  a  unit  electric  point  charge  is  in  motion  in  an 
electromagnetic  field,  there  acts  upon  it,  in  addition  to  the 
electric  force,  an  “  electromotive  force  ”  which,  if  we  neglect 
the  terms  multiplied  by  the  second  and  higher  powers  of  v/c, 
is  equal  to  the  vector-product  of  the  velocity  of  the  charge 
and  the  magnetic  force,  divided  by  the  velocity  of  light. 
(Old  manner  of  expression.) 

2.  If  a  unit  electric  point  charge  is  in  motion  in  an 
electromagnetic  field,  the  force  acting  upon  it  is  equal  to  the 
electric  force  which  is  present  at  the  locality  of  the  charge, 
and  which  we  ascertain  by  transformation  of  the  field  to 
a  system  of  co-ordinates  at  rest  relatively  to  the  electrical 
charge.  (New  manner  of  expression.) 

The  analogy  holds  with  “magnetomotive  forces.”  We 
see  that  electromotive  force  plays  in  the  developed  theory 
merely  the  part  of  an  auxiliary  concept,  which  owes  its  intro¬ 
duction  to  the  circumstance  that  electric  and  magnetic  forces 


A.  EINSTEIN 


55 


do  not  exist  independently  of  the  state  of  motion  of  the 
system  of  co-ordinates. 

Furthermore  it  is  clear  that  the  asymmetry  mentioned  in 
the  introduction  as  arising  when  we  consider  the  currents 
produced  by  the  relative  motion  of  a  magnet  and  a  conductor, 
now  disappears.  Moreover,  questions  as  to  the  “seat”  of 
electrodynamic  electromotive  forces  (unipolar  machines)  now 
have  no  point. 

§  7.  Theory  of  Doppler’s  Principle  and  of  Aberration 

In  the  system  K,  very  far  from  the  origin  of  eo-ordinates, 
let  there  be  a  source  of  electrodynamic  waves,  which  in  a 
part  of  space  containing  the  origin  of  co-ordinates  may  be 
represented  to  a  sufficient  degree  of  approximation  by  the 
equations 


X  =  X0  sin  <f>,  L  =  L0  sin 

Y  =  Y0  sin  cp,  M  =  M0  sin  <l>, 

Z  =  Z0  sin  <£,  N  =  N0  sin  <I>, 


where 


Here  (X0,  Y0,  Z0)  and  (L0,  M0,  N0)  are  the  vectors  defining 
the  amplitude  of  the  wave-train,  and  l,  m,  n  the  direction- 
cosines  of  the  wave-normals.  We  wish  to  know  the  consti¬ 
tution  of  these  waves,  when  they  are  examined  by  an 
observer  at  rest  in  the  moving  system  Jc. 

Applying  the  equations  of  transformation  found  in  §  6  for 
electric  and  magnetic  forces,  and  those  found  in  §  3  for  the 
co-ordinates  and  the  time,  we  obtain  directly 


L'  =  L0  sin  <£', 


X'  =  X0  sin  <f>', 


Y'  =  £(Y0  -  «N0/c)  sin  <&',  M'  =  £(M0  +  vZJc)  sin  d>', 
Z'  =  £(Z0  +  vM Jc)  sin  <!>',  N'  =  /S(N0  -  vY Jc)  sin  <E, 


56 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


where 


(o'  =  ft>/3(l  -  lv/c), 

v  -  l  ~~  vlc 

1  -  lv/c * 


/  _  m 
“  /3(1  -  to/c)' 

/  n 

n  ”/3(l  -  te/c)' 

From  the  equation  for  co'  it  follows  that  if  an  observer  is 
moving  with  velocity  v  relatively  to  an  infinitely  distant 
source  of  light  of  frequency  v ,  in  such  a  way  that  the  connect¬ 
ing  line  “source — observer”  makes  the  angle  0  with  the 
velocity  of  the  observer  referred  to  a  system  of  co-ordinates 
which  is  at  rest  relatively  to  the  source  of  light,  the  frequency 
v  of  the  light  perceived  by  the  observer  is  given  by  the 
equation 

,  _  1  -  COS  ( f)  .  v/c 
V  V  v/(l  -  v2/c2) 

This  is  Doppler’s  principle  for  any  velocities  whatever. 
When  0  =  0  the  equation  assumes  the  perspicuous  form 

/  /I  -  v/c 

v  ~  vy  i  +  v/c 


We  see  that,  in  contrast  with  the  customary  view,  when 
v  —  -  c,  v  —  oo  . 

If  we  call  the  angle  between  the  wave-normal  (direction 
of  the  ray)  in  the  moving  system  and  the  connecting  line 
“  source — observer  ”  0',  the  equation  for  l'  assumes  the  form 


cos  0' 


cos  0  -  v/c 
1  -  cos  0  .  v/c 


This  equation  expresses  the  law  of  aberration  in  its  most 
general  form.  If  0  =  7r,  the  equation  becomes  simply 


cos  0'  =  -  v/c. 

We  still  have  to  find  the  amplitude  of  the  waves,  as  it 
appears  in  the  moving  system.  If  we  call  the  amplitude  of 
the  electric  or  magnetic  force  A  or  A'  respectively,  accordingly 


A.  EINSTEIN  57 


as  it  is  measured  in  the  stationary  system  or  in  the  moving 
system,  we  obtain 


a -2  _  ,i(!  -  cos  <f> .  v/c)' 

XA.  a  9/9 

1  -  v2/c2 

which  equation,  if  (/>  =  0,  simplifies  into 


A'2  =  A2 


1 

1 


-  v/c 
+  v/c 


It  follows  from  these  results  that  to  an  observer  approach¬ 
ing  a  source  of  light  with  the  velocity  c,  this  source  of  light 
must  appear  of  infinite  intensity. 


§  8.  Transformation  of  the  Energy  of  Light  Rays.  Theory 
of  the  Pressure  of  Radiation  Exerted  on  Perfect 
Reflectors 

Since  A2/87 r  equals  the  energy  of  light  per  unit  of  volume, 
we  have  to  regard  A'2/87t,  by  the  principle  of  relativity,  as  the 
energy  of  light  in  the  moving  system.  Thus  A'2/A2  would 
be  the  ratio  of  the  “  measured  in  motion  ”  to  the  “  measured 
at  rest  ”  energy  of  a  given  light  complex,  if  the  volume 
of  a  light  complex  were  the  same,  whether  measured  in 
K  or  in  k.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  If  l ,  m,  n  are  the 
direction-cosines  of  the  wave-normals  of  the  light  in  the 
stationary  system,  no  energy  passes  through  the  surface 
elements  of  a  spherical  surface  moving  with  the  velocity  of 
light : — 

(x  -  let)2  +  (y  -  met)2  +  {z  -  net)2  =  B2. 

We  may  therefore  say  that  this  surface  permanently  encloses 
the  same  light  complex.  We  inquire  as  to  the  quantity  of 
energy  enclosed  by  this  surface,  viewed  in  system  k,  that 
is,  as  to  the  energy  of  the  light  complex  relatively  to  the 
system  k. 

The  spherical  surface — viewed  in  the  moving  system — is 
an  ellipsoidal  surface,  the  equation  for  which,  at  the  time 
t  =  0,  is 

-  Iftgv/c)2  +  (v  -  m^v/c)2  +  (f  -  n/3t;v/c)2  =  B2. 

If  S  is  the  volume  of  the  sphere,  and  S'  that  of  this  ellipsoid, 


58  ELECTRODYNAMICS 


then  by  a  simple  calculation 

S'  =  J1  - 
S  1  -  cos  (f> .  v/c 

Thus,  if  we  call  the  light  energy  enclosed  by  this  surface  E 
when  it  is  measured  in  the  stationary  system,  and  E'  when 
measured  in  the  moving  system,  we  obtain 

E'  A'2 S'  1  -  cos  </>  .  v/c 
E  A2S  ~  */(l  “  9 


and  this  formula,  when  <£  =  0,  simplifies  into 

E'  _  II  -  v/c 
E  *  1  +  v/c' 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  energy  and  the  frequency  of  a 
light  complex  vary  with  the  state  of  motion  of  the  observer 
in  accordance  with  the  same  law. 

Now  let  the  co-ordinate  plane  f  =  0  be  a  perfectly  reflect¬ 
ing  surface,  at  which  the  plane  waves  considered  in  §  7  are 
reflected.  We  seek  for  the  pressure  of  light  exerted  on  the 
reflecting  surface,  and  for  the  direction,  frequency,  and  in¬ 
tensity  of  the  light  after  reflexion. 

Let  the  incidental  light  be  defined  by  the  quantities  A, 
cos  </>,  v  (referred  to  system  K).  Viewed  from  k  the  corre¬ 
sponding  quantities  are 

A ,  A  1  -  cos  cf) .  v/c 

A  =  \y  a  -  v*ic 2)  ’ 


cos  </>' 


COS  </)  -  v/c 
1  -  COS  (f)  .  v/c1 


1  -  cos  4> .  v/c 

x/(l  -  V*/c2)  ’ 


For  the  reflected  light,  referring  the  process  to  system  k,  we 
obtain 

A"  =  A' 

COS  (f)"  =  -  COS  (/)' 

//  / 

V  =  V 


Finally,  by  transforming  back  to  the  stationary  system  E, 
we  obtain  for  the  reflected  light 


A.  EINSTEIN 


59 


/// 


cos  </>"'  = 


A  „1  +  cos  <£"  .  v/c 

A  V(1  -  »a/ca) 

cos  <f>"  +  v/c 
1  +  cos  </>"  .  v/c 


.1-2  cos  (f) .  v/c  +  v2/c2 
A  1  -  v2lc 2 

(1  +  ?;2/c2)  cos  </>  -  2 v/c 
1-2  cos  $ .  v/c  +  v2/c2 


„1  +  COS  cf)"v/c  _  1-2  COS  (f)  .  v/c  +  v2\c 2 
^/(l  -  t;2/c2)  V  1  -  v2/c 2 


The  energy  (measured  in  the  stationary  system)  which  is 
incident  upon  unit  area  of  the  mirror  in  unit  time  is  evidently 
A2(c  cos  (f)  -  v)I8tt.  The  energy  leaving  the  unit  of  surface 
of  the  mirror  in  the  unit  of  time  is  A"'2(  -  c  cos  <£'"  +  v)j8ir. 
The  difference  of  these  two  expressions  is,  by  the  principle  of 
energy,  the  work  done  by  the  pressure  of  light  in  the  unit  of 
time.  If  we  set  down  this  work  as  equal  to  the  product  Pv, 
where  P  is  the  pressure  of  light,  we  obtain 

P  o  4!  (cos  -  vjcf 
■  8ir  1  -  v2lc2  • 

In  agreement  with  experiment  and  with  other  theories,  we 
obtain  to  a  first  approximation 


P  =  2 


4! 

8n 


cos' 


All  problems  in  the  optics  of  moving  bodies  can  be  solved 
by  the  method  here  employed.  What  is  essential  is,  that  the 
electric  and  magnetic  force  of  the  light  which  is  influenced 
by  a  moving  body,  be  transformed  into  a  system  of  co-ordin¬ 
ates  at  rest  relatively  to  the  body.  By  this  means  all  problems 
in  the  optics  of  moving  bodies  will  be  reduced  to  a  series  of 
problems  in  the  optics  of  stationary  bodies. 


§  9.  Transformation  of  the  Maxwell -Hertz  Equations  when 
Convection -Currents  are  Taken  into  Account 

We  start  from  the  equations 


i/dx  1 

1  DN 

DM 

1  5L 

DY 

DZ 

clii  +  Wxp , 

1  “  *y 

D*’ 

c  D/5 

D2 

V 

1/DY  1 

[  DLi 

DN 

1  SM 

DZ 

DX 

-e{ji  +  u*  J 

1  “  ~dz 

D®* 

c  M 

dx 

Dz  ’ 

i(dz  1 

1  DM 

DL 

1  DN 

DX 

DY 

cU  +  Uzp\ 

D# 

V 

c  M 

Zy 

D#  ’ 

60 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


where 

aX  aY  aZ 

^  7)x  +  ty  +  7)z 

denotes, 4n  times  the  density  of  electricity,  and  (ux,uy,  u£) 
the  velocity-vector  of  the  charge.  If  we  imagine  the  electric 
charges  to  be  invariably  coupled  to  small  rigid  bodies  (ions, 
electrons),  these  equations  are  the  electromagnetic  basis  of 
the  Lorentzian  electrodynamics  and  optics  of  moving  bodies. 

Let  these  equations  be  valid  in  the  system  K,  and  trans¬ 
form  them,  with  the  assistance  of  the  equations  of  transform¬ 
ation  given  in  §  §  3  and  6,  to  the  system  k.  We  then  obtain 
the  equations 


l  fax' 

aN' 

aM' 

1 

aL' 

ar 

az' 

cl  ()t 

+ 

V  j 

7)7) 

ar 

c 

aT 

at 

7)7)’ 

lpY' 

C  (  dT 

+ 

uvp  | 

7)Ij' 

a? 

aN' 

ar 

1 

c 

ii 

az' 

a? 

ax' 

a?’ 

1  raz' 

A 

aM' 

aii' 

1 

aN' 

ax' 

aY' 

cUt 

+ 

ucpj 

w 

7)7)  ’ 

c 

a  r 

7)7) 

ar 

where 

_  Ux  ~  v 
1  -  uxv/c 2 

_  uy 

Uv  ~  /3(1  -  uxv\cl) 

-  Uz 

U ^  /3(1  -  uxvjciy 

and 

,  ax'  aY'  az' 
p  =  If  +  ^  + 

=  /3(1  -  uxv/c*)  p. 

Since — as  follows  from  the  theorem  of  addition  of  velocities 
(§  5) — the  vector  (u^  uv,  u()  is  nothing  else  than  the  velocity 
of  the  electric  charge,  measured  in  the  system  k,  we  have  the 
proof  that,  on  the  basis  of  our  kinematical  principles,  the 
electrodynamic  foundation  of  Lorentz’s  theory  of  the  electro¬ 
dynamics  of  moving  bodies  is  in  agreement  with  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  relativity. 

In  addition  I  may  briefly  remark  that  the  following  import- 


A.  EINSTEIN 


61 


ant  law  may  easily  be  deduced  from  the  developed  equations  : 
If  an  electrically  charged  body  is  in  motion  anywhere  in 
space  without  altering  its  charge  when  regarded  from  a 
system  of  co-ordinates  moving  with  the  body,  its  charge  also 
remains — when  regarded  from  the  “  stationary  ”  system  K — 
constant. 


§  io.  Dynamics  of  the  Slowly  Accelerated  Electron 


Let  there  be  in  motion  in  an  electromagnetic  field  an 
electrically  charged  particle  (in  the  sequel  called  an  “  elec¬ 
tron  ”),  for  the  law  of  motion  of  which  we  assume  as 
follows  : — 

If  the  electron  is  at  rest  at  a  given  epoch,  the  motion  of 
the  electron  ensues  in  the  next  instant  of  time  according  to 
the  equations 


d2x 


eX 


m 


<Py 

dt* 


eY 


m 


d2z 

dt2 


=  eZ 


where  x ,  y,  z  denote  the  co-ordinates  of  the  electron,  and  m 
the  mass  of  the  electron,  as  long  as  its  motion  is  slow. 

Now,  secondly,  let  the  velocity  of  the  electron  at  a  given 
epoch  be  v.  We  seek  the  law  of  motion  of  the  electron  in  the 
immediately  ensuing  instants  of  time. 

Without  affecting  the  general  character  of  our  consider¬ 
ations,  we  may  and  will  assume  that  the  electron,  at  the 
moment  when  we  give  it  our  attention,  is  at  the  origin  of 
the  co-ordinates,  and  moves  with  the  velocity  v  along  the 
axis  of  X  of  the  system  K.  It  is  then  clear  that  at  the  given 
moment  {t  =  0)  the  electron  is  at  rest  relatively  to  a  system 
of  co-ordinates  which  is  in  parallel  motion  with  velocity  v 
along  the  axis  of  X. 

From  the  above  assumption,  in  combination  with  the 
principle  of  relativity,  it  is  clear  that  in  the  immediately  en¬ 
suing  time  (for  small  values  of  t)  the  electron,  viewed  from 
the  system  k,  moves  in  accordance  with  the  equations 


62 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


d 2£ 

mdT 2  “ 

d2v  _ 

dr2 

d 

= 


m 


UT2 


eX', 

eY', 

eZ\ 


in  which  the  symbols  f,  7;,  f,  r,  X',  Y',  Z'  refer  to  the  system 
k.  If,  further,  we  decide  that  when  t  =  x  =  y=  z  =  0  then 
T~f=77=f  =  0,  the  transformation  equations  of  §§  3  and 
6  hold  good,  so  that  we  have 


•  ?  =  P(x  -  vZ),  v  =  y,  Z  =  z,  t  =  $(t  -  vx/c 2) 
X'  =  X,  Y'  =  /3(Y  -  »N/c),  Z'  =  {3(Z  +  vM/c). 


With  the  help  of  these  equations  we  transform  the  above 
equations  of  motion  from  system  k  to  system  K,  and  obtain 


d2x 


dt 2 

m  ^ 

d?y 

e  ( 

dt 2 

m  ft  \ 

d2z 

e( 

dt 2  m  p 


(A) 


Taking  the  ordinary  point  of  view  we  now  inquire  as 
to  the  “  longitudinal  ”  and  the  “  transverse  ”  mass  of  the 
moving  electron.  We  write  the  equations  (A)  in  the  form 


=  eX  =  eX', 


W/32-!  =  6/3(y  -  ?n)  =  eY', 

m/3 =  tfi(z  +  -M)  =  *Z', 


and  remark  firstly  that  eX',  eY'}  eZ'  are  the  components  of 
the  ponderomotive  force  acting  upon  the  electron,  and  are  so 
indeed  as  viewed  in  a  system  moving  at  the  moment  with  the 
electron,  with  the  same  velocity  as  the  electron.  (This  force 
might  be  measured,  for  example,  by  a  spring  balance  at  rest 


A.  EINSTEIN 


63 


in  the  last-mentioned  system.)  Now  if  we  call  this  force 
simply  “  the  force  acting  upon  the  electron,”  *  and  maintain 
the  equation — mass  x  acceleration  =  force — and  if  we  also 
decide  that  the  accelerations  are  to  be  measured  in  the 
stationary  system  K,  we  derive  from  the  above  equations 


Longitudinal  mass  -  - 

(v/1  -  vL\ c2y 


Transverse  mass  = 


m 

1  -  c2* 


With  a  different  definition  of  force  and  acceleration  we 
should  naturally  obtain  other  values  for  the  masses.  This 
shows  us  that  in  comparing  different  theories  of  the  motion 
of  the  electron  we  must  proceed  very  cautiously. 

We  remark  that  these  results  as  to  the  mass  are  also  valid 
for  ponderable  material  points,  because  a  ponderable  material 
point  can  be  made  into  an  electron  (in  our  sense  of  the  word) 
by  the  addition  of  an  electric  charge,  no  matter  how  small. 

We  will  now  determine  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  electron. 
If  an  electron  moves  from  rest  at  the  origin  of  co-ordinates  of 
the  system  K  along  the  axis  of  X  under  the  action  of  an 
electrostatic  force  X,  it  is  clear  that  the  energy  withdrawn 

from  the  electrostatic  field  has  the  value  J eXdx.  As  the  elec¬ 
tron  is  to  be  slowly  accelerated,  and  consequently  may  not  give 
off  any  energy  in  the  form  of  radiation,  the  energy  withdrawn 
from  the  electrostatic  field  must  be  put  down  as  equal  to  the 
energy  of  motion  W  of  the  electron.  Bearing  in  mind  that 
during  the  whole  process  of  motion  which  we  are  considering, 
the  first  of  the  equations  (A)  applies,  we  therefore  obtain 

W  =  J  eXcZz  =  mj  ^/3‘3vdv 


=  me2  \  -  _ 

(y/1  ~  V2/C2 


Thus,  when  v  =  c,  W  becomes  infinite.  Velocities 


*  The  definition  of  force  here  given  is  not  advantageous,  as  was  first  shown 
by  M.  Planck.  It  is  more  to  the  point  to  define  force  in  such  a  way  that  the 
laws  of  momentum  and  energy  assume  the  simplest  form. 


64 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


greater  than  that  of  light  have — as  in  our  previous  results — 
no  possibility  of  existence. 

This  expression  for  the  kinetic  energy  must  also,  by 
virtue  of  the  argument  stated  above,  apply  to  ponderable 
masses  as  well. 

We  will  now  enumerate  the  properties  of  the  motion  of 
the  electron  which  result  from  the  system  of  equations  (A), 
and  are  accessible  to  experiment. 

1.  From  the  second  equation  of  the  system  (A)  it  follows 
that  an  electric  force  Y  and  a  magnetic  force  N  have  an 
equally  strong  deflective  action  on  an  electron  moving  with 
the  velocity  v,  when  Y  =  N v/c.  Thus  we  see  that  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  by  our  theory  to  determine  the  velocity  of  the  electron 
from  the  ratio  of  the  magnetic  power  of  deflexion  Am  to  the 
electric  power  of  deflexion  Ae>  for  any  velocity,  by  apply¬ 
ing  the  law 

Am  V 

a7  =  c 


This  relationship  may  be  tested  experimentally,  since  the 
velocity  of  the  electron  can  be  directly  measured,  e.g.  by 
means  of  rapidly  oscillating  electric  and  magnetic  fields. 

2.  From  the  deduction  for  the  kinetic  energy  of  the 
electron  it  follows  that  between  the  potential  difference,  P, 
traversed  and  the  acquired  velocity  v  of  the  electron  there 
must  be  the  relationship 


*  W1  ~  v*/c> 


-  1 


3.  We  calculate  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  path  of 
the  electron  when  a  magnetic  force  N  is  present  (as  the  only 
deflective  force),  acting  perpendicularly  to  the  velocity  of  the 
electron.  From  the  second  of  the  equations  (A)  we  obtain 

fpy  _  V2  _  €_  L  _  V* 
dt' !  R  ~7nc  y  c2 


or 


me 2  v/c  1 

T  V(1  -v*lc*)  *  N‘ 


These  three  relationships  are  a  complete  expression  for 


ELECTRODYNAMICS 


65 


the  laws  according  to  which,  by  the  theory  here  advanced, 
the  electron  must  move. 

In  conclusion  I  wish  to  say  that  in  working  at  the 
problem  here  dealt  with  I  have  had  the  loyal  assistance  of  my 
friend  and  colleague  M.  Besso,  and  that  I  am  indebted  to 
him  for  several  valuable  suggestions. 


DOES  THE  INERTIA  OF  A  BODY  DEPEND 
UPON  ITS  ENERGY-CONTENT? 


A.  EINSTEIN 

Translated  from  “  1st  die  Tragheit  eines  Korpers  von  seinem 
Energiegehalt  abhangig  ?  ”  Annalen  der  Physik,  17, 
1905. 


a  ■  c  • 


DOES  THE  INEBTIA  OF  A  BODY  DEPEND  UPON 

ITS  ENEBGY-CONTENT  ? 


By  A.  EINSTEIN 

THE  results  of  the  previous  investigation  lead  to 
a  very  interesting  conclusion,  which  is  here  to  be 
deduced. 

I  based  that  investigation  on  the  Maxwell-Hertz  equa¬ 
tions  for  empty  space,  together  with  the  Maxwellian 
expression  for  the  electromagnetic  energy  of  space,  and  in 
addition  the  principle  that : — 

The  laws  by  which  the  states  of  physical  systems  alter  are 
independent  of  the  alternative ,  to  which  of  two  systems  of  co¬ 
ordinates,  in  uniform  motion  of  parallel  translation  relatively 
to  each  other,  these  alterations  of  state  are  ref  erred  {principle 
of  relativity). 

With  these  principles  *  as  my  basis  I  deduced  inter  alia 
the  following  result  (§  8)  : — 

Let  a  system  of  plane  waves  of  light,  referred  to  the 
system  of  co-ordinates  (x,  y,  z),  possess  the  energy  l ;  let  the 
direction  of  the  ray  (the  wave-normal)  make  an  angle  <f)  with 
the  axis  of  x  of  the  system.  If  we  introduce  a  new  system  of 
co-ordinates  (£,  rj,  f)  moving  in  uniform  parallel  translation 
with  respect  to  the  system  {x,  y,  z),  and  having  its  origin  of 
co-ordinates  in  motion  along  the  axis  of  x  with  the  velocity  v, 
then  this  quantity  of  light — measured  in  the  system  (f,  rj,  f) 
— possesses  the  energy 

i  v  , 

1  —  cos  6 

l*  —  i _ . . 

y/1  -  vljcl 


*  The  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  is  of-  course 
contained  in  Maxwell’s  equations. 


69 


70 


INERTIA  AND  ENERGY 


where  c  denotes  the  velocity  of  light.  We  shall  make  use  of 
this  result  in  what  follows. 

Let  there  be  a  stationary  body  in  the  system  (x,  y ,  z), 
and  let  its  energy — referred  to  the  system  ( x ,  y,  z) — be  E0. 
Let  the  energy  of  the  body  relative  to  the  system  (f,  rj,  f), 
moving  as  above  with  the  velocity  v,  be  H0. 

Let  this  body  send  out,  in  a  direction  making  an  angle  </> 
with  the  axis  of  x ,  plane  waves  of  light,  of  energy  -£L 
measured  relatively  to  (x,  y,  z),  and  simultaneously  an  equal 
quantity  of  light  in  the  opposite  direction.  Meanwhile  the 
body  remains  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  system  (x,  y ,  z).  The 
principle  of  energy  must  apply  to  this  process,  and  in  fact 
(by  the  principle  of  relativity)  with  respect  to  both  systems 
of  co-ordinates.  If  we  call  the  energy  of  the  body  after  the 
emission  of  light  Ex  or  Hi  respectively,  measured  relatively  to 
the  system  (x,  y ,  z)  or  (f,  77,  f)  respectively,  then  by  employ¬ 
ing  the  relation  given  above  we  obtain 

E0  =  Ex  +  -JL  +  £L, 


v 


v 


1 - COS  (j)  1  +  -  COS  (f) 

H0  =  H,  +  .  c  v  +  *L  c 


s/1  -  v2/c 5 


^/l  -  V2!cl 


=  H1  + 


L 

s/1  -  v?/c2’ 


By  subtraction  we  obtain  from  these  equations 


H0  -  Eu  -  (H,  -  Ej)  =  L{Vl  -  l}. 

The  two  differences  of  the  form  H  -  E  occurring  in  this  ex¬ 
pression  have  simple  physical  significations.  H  and  E  are 
energy  values  of  the  same  body  referred  to  two  systems  of 
co-ordinates  which  are  in  motion  relatively  to  each  other,  the 
body  being  at  rest  in  one  of  the  two  systems  (system  (#,  y,  z)). 
Thus  it  is  clear  that  the  difference  H  -  E  can  differ  from  the 
kinetic  energy  K  of  the  body,  with  respect  to  the  other 
system  (f,  rj,  f),  only  by  an  additive  constant  C,  which  de¬ 
pends  on  the  choice  of  the  arbitrary  additive  constants  of  the 
energies  H  and  E.  Thus  we  may  place 


A.  EINSTEIN 


71 


H0  -  F0  =  K0  +  C, 
Hi  -  Ex  =  Kj  +  C, 


since  C  does  not  change  during  the  emission  of  light, 
have 


- K'  -  Lbi4 


v 2/c2 


So  we 


The  kinetic  energy  of  the  body  with  respect  to  (f ,  77,  J) 
diminishes  as  a  result  of  the  emission  of  light,  and  the  amount 
of  diminution  is  independent  of  the  properties  of  the  body. 
Moreover,  the  difference  K0  -  Kx,  like  the  kinetic  energy  of 
the  electron  (§  10),  depends  on  the  velocity. 

Neglecting  magnitudes  of  fourth  and  higher  orders  we 
may  place 


1  L 

*  —>v 


2 


From  this  equation  it  directly  follows  that : — 

If  a  body  gives  off  the  energy  L  in  the  form  of  radiation , 
its  mass  diminishes  by  L/c*.  The  fact  that  the  energy  with¬ 
drawn  from  the  body  becomes  energy  of  radiation  evidently 
makes  no  difference,  so  that  we  are  led  to  the  more  general 
conclusion  that 

The  mass  of  a  body  is  a  measure  of  its  energy-content ;  if 
the  energy  changes  by  L,  the  mass  changes  in  the  same  sense 
by  L/9  x  1020,  the  energy  being  measured  in  ergs,  and  the 
mass  in  grammes. 

It  is  not  impossible  that  with  bodies  whose  energy-con¬ 
tent  is  variable  to  a  high  degree  (e.g.  with  radium  salts)  the 
theory  may  be  successfully  put  to  the  test. 

If  the  theory  corresponds  to  the  facts,  radiation  conveys 
inertia  between  the  emitting  and  absorbing  bodies. 


Off  a  wf11 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


BY 

H.  MINKOWSKI 

A  Translation  of  an  Address  delivered  at  the  80 th  Assembly 
of  German  Natural  Scientists  and  Physicians ,  at  Cologne , 
21  September,  1908. 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


By  H.  MINKOWSKI 

THE  views  of  space  and  time  which  I  wish  to  lay  be¬ 
fore  yon  have  sprung  from  the  soil  of  experimental 
physics,  and  therein  lies  their  strength.  They  are 
radical.  Henceforth  space  by  itself,  and  time  by  itself,  are 
doomed  to  fade  away  into  mere  shadows,  and  only  a  kind 
of  union  of  the  two  will  preserve  an  independent  reality. 

I 

First  of  all  I  should  like  to  show  how  it  might  be  possible, 
setting  out  from  the  accepted  mechanics  of  the  present  day, 
along  a  purely  mathematical  line  of  thought,  to  arrive  at 
changed  ideas  of  space  and  time.  The  equations  of  Newton’s 
mechanics  exhibit  a  two-fold  invariance.  Their  form  re¬ 
mains  unaltered,  firstly,  if  we  subject  the  underlying  system 
of  spatial  co-ordinates  to  any  arbitrary  change  of  position ; 
secondly,  if  we  change  its  state  of  motion,  namely,  by  impart¬ 
ing  to  it  any  uniform  translator y  motion  ;  furthermore,  the 
zero  point  of  time  is  given  no  part  to  play.  We  are  ac¬ 
customed  to  look  upon  the  axioms  of  geometry  as  finished  with, 
when  we  feel  ripe  for  the  axioms  of  mechanics,  and  for  that 
reason  the  two  invariances  are  probably  rarely  mentioned  in 
the  same  breath.  Each  of  them  by  itself  signifies,  for  the 
differential  equations  of  mechanics,  a  certain  group  of  trans¬ 
formations.  The  existence  of  the  first  group  is  looked  upon 
as  a  fundamental  characteristic  of  space.  The  second  group 
is  preferably  treated  with  disdain,  so  that  we  with  un¬ 
troubled  minds  may  overcome  the  difficulty  of  never  being 
able  to  decide,  from  physical  phenomena,  whether  space, 

which  is  supposed  to  be  stationary,  may  not  be 'after  all  in  a 

75 


76 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


state  of  uniform  translation.  Thus  the  two  groups,  side  by  side, 
lead  their  lives  entirely  apart.  Their  utterly  heterogeneous 
character  may  have  discouraged  any  attempt  to  compound 
them.  But  it  is  precisely  when  they  are  compounded  that 
the  complete  group,  as  a  whole,  gives  us  to  think. 

We  will  try  to  visualize  the  state  of  things  by  the  graphic 
method.  Let  x,  y ,  z  be  rectangular  co-ordinates  for  space, 
and  let  t  denote  time.  The  objects  of  our  perception  invari¬ 
ably  include  places  and  times  in  combination.  Nobody  has 
ever  noticed  a  place  except  at  a  time,  or  a  time  except  at  a 
place.  But  I  still  respect  the  dogma  that  both  space  and 
time  have  independent  significance.  A  point  of  space  at  a 
point  of  time,  that  is,  a  system  of  values  x,  y ,  z,  t,  I  will  call 
a  world-point.  The  multiplicity  of  all  thinkable  x ,  y ,  z}  t 
systems  of  values  we  will  christen  the  world.  With  this 
most  valiant  piece  of  chalk  I  might  project  upon  the  blackboard 
four  world-axes.  Since  merely  one  chalky  axis,  as  it  is,  con¬ 
sists  of  molecules  all  a-thrill,  and  moreover  is  taking  part  in 
the  earth’s  travels  in  the  universe,  it  already  affords  us  ample 
scope  for  abstraction ;  the  somewhat  greater  abstraction  as¬ 
sociated  with  the  number  four  is  for  the  mathematician  no 
infliction.  Not  to  leave  a  yawning  void  anywhere,  we  will 
imagine  that  everywhere  and  every  when  there  is  something 
perceptible.  To  avoid  saying  “  matter  ”  or  “  electricity  ”  I 
will  use  for  this  something  the  word  “  substance.”  We  fix 
our  attention  on  the  substantial  point  which  is  at  the  world- 
point  x,  y ,  z,  i by  and  imagine  that  we  are  able  to  recognize  this 
substantial  point  at  any  other  time.  Let  the  variations  dx , 
dy,  dz  of  the  space  co-ordinates  of  this  substantial  point 
correspond  to  a  time  element  dt.  Then  we  obtain,  as 
an  image,  so  to  speak,  of  the  everlasting  career  of  the  sub¬ 
stantial  point,  a  curve  in  the  world,  a  world-line,  the  points 
of  which  can  be  referred  unequivocally  to  the  parameter  t 
from  -  oo  to  +  oo .  The  whole  universe  is  seen  to  resolve 
itself  into  similar  world-lines,  and  I  would  fain  anticipate 
myself  by  saying  that  in  my  opinion  physical  laws  might  find 
their  most  perfect  expression  as  reciprocal  relations  between 
these  world-lines. 

The  concepts,  space  and  time,  cause  the  x,  y,  2-manifold 
t  =  0  and  its  two  sides  t  >  0  and  t  <  0  to  fall  asunder.  If, 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


77 


for  simplicity,  we  retain  the  same  zero  point  of  space  and 
time,  the  first-mentioned  group  signifies  in  mechanics  that 
we  may  subject  the  axes  of  x,  y,  z  at  t  =  0  to  any  rotation  we 
choose  about  the  origin,  corresponding  to  the  homogeneous 
linear  transformations  of  the  expression 

x2  +  y2  +  z2. 

But  the  second  group  means  that  we  may — also  without 
changing  the  expression  of  the  laws  of  mechanics — replace 
x,  y,  z,t  by  x  -  at,  y  -  fit,  z  -  yt,t  with  any  constant  values 
of  a,  f3,  7.  Hence  we  may  give  to  the  time  axis  whatever 
direction  we  choose  towards  the  upper  half  of  the  world, 
t>0.  Now  what  has  the  requirement  of  orthogonality  in 
space  to  do  with  this  perfect  freedom  of  the  time  axis  in  an 
upward  direction  ? 

To  establish  the  connexion,  let  us  take  a  positive  para¬ 
meter  c,  and  consider  the  graphical  representation  of 

c2t2  -  x2  -  y2  -  z2  =  1. 

It  consists  of  two  surfaces  separated  by  t  =  0,  on  the  analogy 
of  a  hyperboloid  of  two  sheets.  We  consider  the  sheet  in 
the  region  t>0,  and  now  take  those  homogeneous  linear 
transformations  of  x,  y,  z,  t  into  four  new  variables  x  ,  y' ,  z,  t\ 
for  which  the  expression  for  this  sheet  in  the  new  variables 
is  of  the  same  form.  It  is  evident  that  the  rotations  of 
space  about  the  origin  pertain  to  these  transformations. 
Thus  we  gain  full  comprehension  of  the  rest  of  the 
transformations  simply  by  taking  into  consideration  one 
among  them,  such  that  y  and  z  remain  unchanged.  We  draw 
(Fig.  1)  the  section  of  this  sheet  by  the  plane  of  the  axes  of  x 
and  t — the  upper  branch  of  the  hyperbola  c2t2  -  x2  =  1,  with 
its  asymptotes.  From  the  origin  O  we  draw  any  radius 
vector  O  A'  of  this  branch  of  the  hyperbola  ;  draw  the  tangent 
to  the  hyperbola  at  A'  to  cut  the  asymptote  on  the  right  at  B' ; 
complete  the  parallelogram  OA'B'C' ;  and  finally,  for  subse¬ 
quent  use,  produce  B'C'  to  cut  the  axis  of  x  at  D'.  Now  if 
we  take  OC'  and  OA'  as  axes  of  oblique  co-ordinates  x',  t' , 
with  the  measures  OC'  =  1,  OA'  =  1/c,  then  that  branch  of 
the  hyperbola  again  acquires  the  expression  cH'2  -  x2  =  1, 
t'  >  0,  and  the  transition  from  x,  y,  z,  t  to  x,  y ,  z',  t'  is  one  of 


78 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


the  transformations  in  question.  With  these  transformations 
we  now  associate  the  arbitrary  displacements  of  the  zero 
point  of  space  and  time,  and  thereby  constitute  a  group  of 
transformations,  which  is  also,  evidently,  dependent  on  the 
parameter  c.  This  group  I  denote  by  Gc. 

If  we  now  allow  c  to  increase  to  infinity,  and  1  ]c  therefore 
to  converge  towards  zero,  we  see  from  the  figure  that  the 


branch  of  the  hyperbola  bends  more  and  more  towards  the 
axis  of  x ,  the  angle  of  the  asymptotes  becomes  more  and  more 
obtuse,  and  that  in  the  limit  this  special  transformation 
changes  into  one  in  which  the  axis  of  if  may  have  any  up¬ 
ward  direction  whatever,  while  x  approaches  more  and  more 
exactly  to  x.  In  view  of  this  it  is  clear  that  group  Gc  in  the 
limit  when  c  =  oo  ,  that  is  the  group  G^ ,  becomes  no  other 
than  that  complete  group  which  is  appropriate  to  Newtonian 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


79 


mechanics.  This  being  so,  and  since  Gc  is  mathematically 
more  intelligible  than  G^ ,  it  looks  as  though  the  thought 
might  have  struck  some  mathematician,  fancy-free,  that  after 
all,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  natural  phenomena  do  not  possess  an 
invariance  with  the  group  G^ ,  but  rather  with  a  group  Gc>  c 
being  finite  and  determinate,  but  in  ordinary  units  of  measure, 
extremely  great.  Such  a  premonition  would  have  been  an 
extraordinary  triumph  for  pure  mathematics.  Well,  mathe¬ 
matics,  though  it  now  can  display  only  staircase-wit,  has  the 
satisfaction  of  being  wise  after  the  event,  and  is  able,  thanks 
to  its  happy  antecedents,  with  its  senses  sharpened  by  an  un¬ 
hampered  outlook  to  far  horizons,  to  grasp  forthwith  the 
far-reaching  consequences  of  such  a  metamorphosis  of  our 
concept  of  nature. 

I  will  state  at  once  what  is  the  value  of  c  with  which  we 
shall  finally  be  dealing.  It  is  the  velocity  of  the  propagation 
of  light  in  empty  space.  To  avoid  speaking  either  of  space  or 
of  emptiness,  we  may  define  this  magnitude  in  another  way, 
as  the  ratio  of  the  electromagnetic  to  the  electrostatic  unit  of 
electricity. 

The  existence  of  the  invariance  of  natural  laws  for  the 
relevant  group  Gc  would  have  to  be  taken,  then,  in  this 
way : — 

From  the  totality  of  natural  phenomena  it  is  possible,  by 
successively  enhanced  approximations,  to  derive  more  and 
more  exactly  a  system  of  reference  x ,  y,  z ,  t,  space  and  time, 
by  means  of  which  these  phenomena  then  present  themselves 
in  agreement  with  definite  laws.  But  when  this  is  done, 
this  system  of  reference  is  by  no  means  unequivocally  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  phenomena.  It  is  still  possible  to  make  any 
change  in  the  system  of  reference  that  is  in  conformity  with 
the  transformations  of  the  group  GC}  and  leave  the  expression 
of  the  laws  of  nature  unaltered. 

For  example,  in  correspondence  with  the  figure  described 
above,  we  may  also  designate  time  t',  but  then  must  of  neces¬ 
sity,  in  connexion  therewith,  define  space  by  the  manifold  of 
the  three  parameters  x,  y ,  z,  in  which  case  physical  laws 
would  be  expressed  in  exactly  the  same  way  by  means  of 
x',  y,  z,  t'  as  by  means  of  x}  y ,  z,  t.  We  should  then  have  in 
the  world  no  longer  space ,  but  an  infinite  number  of  spaces, 


80 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


analogously  as  there  are  in  three-dimensional  space  an  infinite 
number  of  planes.  Three-dimensional  geometry  becomes  a 
chapter  in  four-dimensional  physics.  Now  you  know  why  I 
said  at  the  outset  that  space  and  time  are  to  fade  away  into 
shadows,  and  only  a  world  in  itself  will  subsist. 

II 

The  question  now  is,  what  are  the  circumstances  which 
force  this  changed  conception  of  space  and  time  upon  us  ? 
Does  it  actually  never  contradict  experience  ?  And  finally,  is 
it  advantageous  for  describing  phenomena  ? 

Before  going  into  these  questions,  I  must  make  an  im¬ 
portant  remark.  If  we  have  in  any  way  individualized  space 
and  time,  we  have,  as  a  world-line  corresponding  to  a  stationary 
substantial  point,  a  straight  line  parallel  to  the  axis  of  t; 
corresponding  to  a  substantial  point  in  uniform  motion,  a 
straight  line  at  an  angle  to  the  axis  of  t;  to  a  substantial 
point  in  varying  motion,  a  world-line  in  some  form  of  a  curve. 
If  at  any  world-point  x ,  y ,  z>  t  we  take  the  world-line  passing 
through  that  point,  and  find  it  parallel  to  any  radius  vector 
OA'  of  the  above-mentioned  hyperboloidal  sheet,  we  can 
introduce  OA'  as  a  new  axis  of  time,  and  with  the  new  con¬ 
cepts  of  space  and  time  thus  given,  the  substance  at  the 
world-point  concerned  appears  as  at  rest.  We  will  now  intro¬ 
duce  this  fundamental  axiom  : — 

The  substance  at  any  world-point  may  always ,  with  the 
appropriate  determination  of  space  and  timef  be  looked  upon 
as  at  rest. 

The  axiom  signifies  that  at  any  world-point  the  expression 

c2dt2  -  dx 2  -  dy2  -  dz2 

always  has  a  positive  value,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing, 
that  any  velocity  v  always  proves  less  than  c.  Accordingly  c 
would  stand  as  the  upper  limit  for  all  substantial  velocities, 
and  that  is  precisely  what  would  reveal  the  deeper  significance 
of  the  magnitude  c.  In  this  second  form  the  first  impression 
made  by  the  axiom  is  not  altogether  pleasing.  But  we  must 
bear  in  mind  that  a  modified  form  of  mechanics,  in  which  the 
square  root  of  this  quadratic  differential  expression  appears, 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


81 


will  now  make  its  way,  so  that  cases  with  a  velocity  greater 
than  that  of  light  will  henceforward  play  only  some  such 
part  as  that  of  figures  with  imaginary  co-ordinates  in 
geometry. 

Now  the  impulse  and  true  motive  for  assuming  the  group 
Gc  came  from  the  fact  that  the  differential  equation  for  the 
propagation  of  light  in  empty  space  possesses  that  group  Gc-* 
On.  the  other  hand,  the  concept  of  rigid  bodies  has  meaning 
only  in  mechanics  satisfying  the  group  Gw.  If  we  have  a 
theory  of  optics  with  Gc,  and  if  on  the  other  hand  there  were 
rigid  bodies,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  one  and  the  same  direction 
of  t  would  be  distinguished  by  the  two  hyperboloidal  sheets 
appropriate  to  Gc  and  G^ ,  and  this  would  have  the  further 
consequence,  that  we  should  be  able,  by  employing  suitable 
rigid  optical  instruments  in  the  laboratory,  to  perceive  some 
alteration  in  the  phenomena  when  the  orientation  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  direction  of  the  earth’s  motion  is  changed.  But 
all  efforts  directed  towards  this  goal,  in  particular  the  famous 
interference  experiment  of  Michelson,  have  had  a  negative 
result.  To  explain  this  failure,  H.  A.  Lorentz  set  up  an  hypo¬ 
thesis,  the  success  of  which  lies  in  this  very  invariance  in 
optics  for  the  group  Gc.  According  to  Lorentz  any  moving 
body  must  have  undergone  a  contraction  in  the  direction  of 
its  motion,  and  in  fact  with  a  velocity  v,  a  contraction  in  the 
ratio 

1  :  Jl  -  v*/ c\ 

This  hypothesis  sounds  extremely  fantastical,  for  the  con¬ 
traction  is  not  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  consequence  of  resist¬ 
ances  in  the  ether,  or  anything  of  that  kind,  but  simply  as  a 
gift  from  above, — as  an  accompanying  circumstance  of  the 
circumstance  of  motion. 

I  will  now  show  by  our  figure  that  theLorentzian  hypothesis 
is  completely  equivalent  to  the  new  conception  of  space  and 
time,  which,  indeed,  makes  the  hypothesis  much  more  intelli¬ 
gible.  If  for  simplicity  we  disregard  y  and  z>  and  imagine  a 
world  of  one  spatial  dimension,  then  a  parallel  band,  upright  like 
the  axis  of  t ,  and  another  inclining  to  the  axis  of  t  (see  Fig.  1) 

*  An  application  of  this  fact  in  its  essentials  has  already  been  given  by 
W.  Voigt,  Gottinger  Nachrichten,  1887,  p.  41. 


82 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


represent,  respectively,  the  career  of  a  body  at  rest  or  in  uni¬ 
form  motion,  preserving  in  each  case  a  constant  spatial  extent. 
If  OA'  is  parallel  to  the  second  band,  we  can  introduce  t'  as 
the  time,  and  x  as  the  space  co-ordinate,  and  then  the  second 
body  appears  at  rest,  the  first  in  uniform  motion.  We  now 
assume  that  the  first  body,  envisaged  as  at  rest,  has  the 
length  Z,  that  is,  the  cross  section  PP  of  the  first  band  on  the 
axis  of  x  is  equal  to  Z  .  OC,  where  OC  denotes  the  unit  of 
measure  on  the  axis  of  x ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  the 
second  body,  envisaged  as  at  rest,  has  the  same  length  Z, 
which  then  means  that  the  cross  section  Q'Q'  of  the  second 
band,  measured  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x ,  is  equal  to  Z .  OC'. 
We  now  have  in  these  two  bodies  images  of  two  equal 
Lorentzian  electrons,  one  at  rest  and  one  in  uniform  motion. 
But  if  we  retain  the  original  co-ordinates  x,  t,  we  must  give 
as  the  extent  of  the  second  electron  the  cross  section  of  its 
appropriate  band  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x.  Now  since  Q'Q' 
—  Z .  OC',  it  is  evident  that  QQ  =  Z .  OD'.  If  dx/dt  for  the 
second  band  is  equal  to  v ,  an  easy  calculation  gives 

OD'  =  OCV1  '  v2/c2, 

therefore  also  PP  :  QQ  =  1 :  ^/l  -  v2/c 2.  But  this  is  the 
meaning  of  Lorentz’s  hypothesis  of  the  contraction  of 
electrons  in  motion.  If  on  the  other  hand  we  envisage  the 
second  electron  as  at  rest,  and  therefore  adopt  the  system  of 
reference  x  t\  the  length  of  the  first  must  be  denoted  by  the 
cross  section  P'P'  of  its  band  parallel  to  OC',  and  we  should 
find  the  first  electron  in  comparison  with  the  second  to  be 
contracted  in  exactly  the  same  proportion ;  for  in  the  figure 

P'P' :  Q'Q'  =  OD  :  OC'  =  OD' :  OC  =  QQ  :  PP. 

Lorentz  called  the  t'  combination  of  x  and  t  the  local  time 
of  the  electron  in  uniform  motion,  and  applied  a  physical 
construction  of  this  concept,  for  the  better  understanding  of 
the  hypothesis  of  contraction.  But  the  credit  of  first  recog¬ 
nizing  clearly  that  the  time  of  the  one  electron  is  just  as  good 
as  that  of  the  other,  that  is  to  say,  that  t  and  t'  are  to  be 
treated  identically,  belongs  to  A.  Einstein.*  Thus  time,  as  a 

*  A.  Einstein,  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  17,  1905,  p.  891 ;  Jahrb.  d.  Radioaktivitat 
und  Elektronik,  4,  1907,  p.  411. 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


83 


concept  unequivocally  determined  by  phenomena,  was  first 
deposed  from  its  high  seat.  Neither  Einstein  nor  Lorentz 
made  any  attack  on  the  concept  of  space,  perhaps  because  in 
the  above-mentioned  special  transformation,  where  the  plane 
of  x ,  t'  coincides  with  the  plane  of  x}  t ,  an  interpretation 
is  possible  by  saying  that  the  z-axis  of  space  maintains  its 
position.  One  may  expect  to  find  a  corresponding  violation 
of  the  concept  of  space  appraised  as  another  act  of  audacity 
on  the  part  of  the  higher  mathematics.  Nevertheless,  this 
further  step  is  indispensable  for  the  true  understanding  of 
the  group  Gc,  and  when  it  has  been  taken,  the  word  relativity- 
postulate  for  the  requirement  of  an  invariance  with  the  group 
Gc  seems  to  me  very  feeble.  Since  the  postulate  comes  to 
mean  that  only  the  four-dimensional  world  in  space  and  time 
is  given  by  phenomena,  but  that  the  projection  in  space  and  in 
time  may  still  be  undertaken  with  a  certain  degree  of  freedom, 
I  prefer  to  call  it  th e  postulate  of  the  absolute  world  (or  briefly, 
the  world-postulate). 


Ill 

The  world-postulate  permits  identical  treatment  of  the 
four  co-ordinates  x ,  y ,  z,  t.  By  this  means,  as  I  shall  now 
show,  the  forms  in  which  the  laws  of  physics  are  displayed 
gain  in  intelligibility.  In  particular  the  idea  of  acceleration 
acquires  a  clear-cut  character. 

I  will  use  a  geometrical  manner  of  expression,  which  sug¬ 
gests  itself  at  once  if  we  tacitly  disregard  z  in  the  triplex 
x,  y,  z.  I  take  any  world-point  0  as  the  zero-point  of  space- 
time.  The  cone  c2t2  -  x2  -  y2  -  z2  =  0  with  apex  0  (Fig.  2) 
consists  of  two  parts,  one  with  values  t  <  0,  the  other  with 
values  t  >  0.  The  former,  the  front  cone  of  O,  consists,  let 
us  say,  of  all  the  world-points  which  “  send  light  to  0,”  the 
latter,  the  back  cone  of  O,  of  all  the  world-points  which  “  re¬ 
ceive  light  from  O.”  The  territory  bounded  by  the  front  cone 
alone,  we  may  call  “  before  ”  0,  that  which  is  bounded  by 
the  back  cone  alone,  “after”  0.  The  hyperboloidal  sheet 
already  discussed 

F  =  c2t2  -  x2  -  y2  -  z2  =  1,  t  >  0 
lies  after  0.  The  territory  between  the  cones  is  filled  by  the 


84  SPACE  AND  TIME 

one-sheeted  hyperboloidal  figures 

-  F  =  x2  +  y2  +  z2  -  cH 2  =  k? 

for  all  constant  positive  values  of  k.  We  are  specially 
interested  in  the  hyperbolas  with  0  as  centre,  lying  on  the 
latter  figures.  The  single  branches  of  these  hyperbolas 
may  be  called  briefly  the  internal  hyperbolas  with  centre  0. 
One  of  these  branches,  regarded  as  a  world-line,  would  repre¬ 
sent  a  motion  which,  for  t  =  -  oo  and  t  =  +  oo ,  rises 
asymptotically  to  the  velocity  of  light,  c. 

If  we  now,  on  the  analogy  of  vectors  in  space,  call  a 
directed  length  in  the  manifold  of  x,  y,zf  t  &  vector,  we  have 
to  distinguish  between  the  time-like  vectors  with  directions 
from  0  to  the  sheet  +  F  =  1,  t  >  0,  and  the  space-like  vectors 


with  directions  from  0  to  -  F  =  1.  The  time  axis  may  run 
parallel  to  any  vector  of  the  former  kind.  Any  world-point 
between  the  front  and  back  cones  of  O  can  be  arranged  by 
means  of  the  system  of  reference  so  as  to  be  simultaneous 
with  0,  but  also  just  as  well  so  as  to  be  earlier  than  0  or 
later  than  0.  Any  world-point  within  the  front  cone  of  0  is 
necessarily  always  before  0  ;  any  world-point  within  the 
back  cone  of  0  necessarily  always  after  0.  Corresponding  to 
passing  to  the  limit,  c  =  oo  ,  there  would  be  a  complete  flatten¬ 
ing  out  of  the  wedge-shaped  segment  between  the  cones  into 
the  plane  manifold  t  =  0.  In  the  figures  this  segment  is 
intentionally  drawn  with  different  widths. 

We  divide  up  any  vector  we  choose,  e.g.  that  from  0  to 
x,  y,  zy  t,  into  the  four  components  x,  yy  z}  t.  If  the  directions 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


85 


of  two  vectors  are,  respectively,  that  of  a  radius  vector  OK 
from  0  to  one  of  the  surfaces  +  F  =  1,  and  that  of  a  tangent 
KS  at  the  point  R  of  the  same  surface,  the  vectors  are  said 
to  be  normal  to  one  another.  Thus  the  condition  that  the 
vectors  with  components  x,  y,  z ,  t  and  xlf  ylt  zv  tx  may  be 
normal  to  each  other  is 

c2ttl  -  xxl  -  iyyY  -  zzx  =  0. 

For  the  measurement  of  vectors  in  different  directions  the 
units  of  measure  are  to  be  fixed  by  assigning  to  a  space-like 
vector  from  0  to  -  F  =  1  always  the  magnitude  1,  and  to  a 
time-like  vector  from  O  to  +  F  =  1,  £  >  0  always  the  magni¬ 
tude  1/c. 

If  we  imagine  at  a  world-point  P  ( x ,  y}  z,  t )  the  world¬ 
line  of  a  substantial  point  running  through  that  point,  the 
magnitude  corresponding  to  the  time-like  vector  dx,  dy ,  dz , 
dt  laid  off  along  the  line  is  therefore 

dr  =  -y/c*dt2  -  dx2  -  dy 2  -  dz2. 

The  integral  \dr  =  r  of  this  amount,  taken  along  the  world¬ 
line  from  any  fixed  starting-point  P0  to  the  variable  end¬ 
point  P,  we  call  the  proper  time  of  the  substantial  point  at  P. 
On  the  world-line  we  regard  x,  y,  z ,  t — the  components  of  the 
vector  OP — as  functions  of  the  proper  time  t  ;  denote  their 
first  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  r  by  x,  y,  z,  t; 
their  second  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  t  by 
V,  z,  t ;  and  give  names  to  the  appropriate  vectors,  calling 
the  derivative  of  the  vector  OP  with  respect  to  r  the  velocity 
vector  at  P,  and  the  derivative  of  this  velocity  vector  with 
respect  to  t  the  acceleration  vector  at  P.  Hence,  since 

c2t 2  -  x2  -  y2  -  i2  =  c2, 

we  have 

c2tt  -  xx  -  yy  -  zz  —  0, 

i.e.  the  velocity  vector  is  the  time-like  vector  of  unit  magni¬ 
tude  in  the  direction  of  the  world-line  at  P,  and  the  accelera¬ 
tion  vector  at  P  is  normal  to  the  velocity  vector  at  P,  and  is 
therefore  in  any  case  a  space-like  vector. 

Now,  as  is  readily  seen,  there  is  a  definite  hyperbola 


86 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


which  has  three 
the  world-line  at 


\  * 

'  \ 
'  \ 


infinitely  proximate  points  in  common  with 
P,  and  whose  asymptotes  are  generators  of 
a  “  front  cone  ”  and  a  “  back  cone  ”  (Fig.  3). 
Let  this  hyperbola  be  called  the  hyperbola 
of  curvature  at  P.  If  M  is  the  centre  of  this 
hyperbola,  we  here  have  to  do  with  an  in¬ 
ternal  hyperbola  with  centre  M.  Let  p  be 
the  magnitude  of  the  vector  MP  ;  then  we 
recognize  the  acceleration  vector  at  P  as  the 
vector  in  the  direction  MP  of  magnitude 
C2lp- 

If  x,  y ,  z,  i  are  all  zero,  the  hyperbola  of 
curvature  reduces  to  the  straight  line  touch¬ 
ing  the  world-line  in  P,  and  we  must  put 
p  =  oo  . 

IV 


’*  ■  To  show  that  the  assumption  of  group 
Gc  for  the  laws  of  physics  never  leads  to  a 
contradiction,  it  is  unavoidable  to  undertake  a  revision  of 
the  whole  of  physics  on  the  basis  of  this  assumption.  This 
revision  has  to  some  extent  already  been  successfully  carried 
out  for  questions  of  thermodynamics  and  heat  radiation,*  for 
electromagnetic  processes,  and  finally,  with  the  retention  of 
the  concept  of  mass,  for  mechanics.! 

For  this  last  branch  of  physics  it  is  of  prime  importance 
to  raise  the  question — When  a  force  with  the  components 
X,  Y,  Z  parallel  to  the  axes  of  space  acts  at  a  world-point  P 
(x,  y ,  z,  £),  where  the  velocity  vector  is  x ,  y,  z,  t,  what  must 
we  take  this  force  to  be  when  the  system  of  reference  is  in 
any  way  changed  ?  Now  there  exist  certain  approved  state¬ 
ments  as  to  the  ponderomotive  force  in  the  electromagnetic 
field  .in  the  cases  where  the  group  Gc  is  undoubtedly  admis¬ 
sible.  These  statements  lead  up  to  the  simple  rule  : — When 
the  system  of  reference  is  changed,  the  force  in  question 
transforms  into  a  force  in  the  new  space  co-ordinates  in  such 
a  way  that  the  appropriate  vector  with  the  components  tX., 


*  M.  Planck,  “  Zur  Dynamik  bewegter  Systeme,”  Berliner  Berichte,  1907, 
p.  542 ;  also  in  Ann.  d..Phys.,  26,  1908,  p.  1. 

t  H.  Minkowski,  “  Die  Grundgleichungen  fur  die  elektromagnetischen 
Vorgange  in  bewegten  Korpern,”  Gottinger  Nachrichten,  1908,  p.  53. 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


87 


tY,  tZ,  £T,  where 


( 


-X  +  + 

t  t 


is  the  rate  at  which  work  is  done  by  the  force  at  the  world- 
point  divided  by  c,  remains  unchanged.  This  vector  is  always 
normal  to  the  velocity  vector  at  P.  A  force  vector  of  this 
kind,  corresponding  to  a  force  at  P,  is  to  be  called  a  “  motive 
force  vector  ”  at  P. 

I  shall  now  describe  the  world-line  of  a  substantial  point 
with  constant  mechanical  mass  m,  passing  through  P.  Let 
the  velocity  vector  at  P,  multiplied  by  m,  be  called  the 
“  momentum  vector”  at  P,  and  the  acceleration  vector  at  P, 
multiplied  by  m,  be  called  the  “  force  vector  ”  of  the  motion 
at  P.  With  these  definitions,  the  law  of  motion  of  a  point 
of  mass  with  given  motive  force  vector  runs  thus  : —  *  The 
Force  Vector  of  Motion  is  Equal  to  the  Motive  Force  Vector. 
This  assertion  comprises  four  equations  for  the  components 
corresponding  to  the  four  axes,  and  since  both  vectors  men¬ 
tioned  are  a  priori  normal  to  the  velocity  vector,  the  fourth 
equation  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  consequence  of  the  other 
three.  In  accordance  with  the  above  signification  of  T,  the 
fourth  equation  undoubtedly  represents  the  law  of  energy. 
Therefore  the  component  of  the  momentum  vector  along  the 
axis  of  t,  multiplied  by  c,  is  to  be  defined  as  the  kinetic 
energy  of  the  point  mass.  The  expression  for  this  is 


«dt 


mc2^-  =  me1  Isjl  -  v*/c\ 


i.e.,  after  removal  of  the  additive  constant  me 2,  the  expression 
|mi)2  of  Newtonian  mechanics  down  to  magnitudes  of  the 
order  1/c2.  It  comes  out  very  clearly  in  this  way,  how  the 
energy  depends  on  the  system  of  reference.  But  as  the  axis 
of  t  may  be  laid  in  the  direction  of  any  time-like  vector,  the 
law  of  energy,  framed  for  all  possible  systems  of  reference, 
already  contains,  on  the  other  hand,  the  whole  system  of  the 
equations  of  motion.  At  the  limiting  transition  which  we 
have  discussed,  to  c  —  oo ,  this  fact  retains  its  importance  for 

*  H.  Minkowski,  loc.  cit.,  p  107.  Cf.  also  M.  Planck,  Verhandlungen 
der  physikalischen  Gesellschaft,  4,  1906,  p.  136. 


88 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


the  axiomatic  structure  of  Newtonian  mechanics  as  well,  and 
has  already  been  appreciated  in  this  sense  by  I.  R.  Schiitz.* 

We  can  determine  the  ratio  of  the  units  of  length  and 
time  beforehand  in  such  a  way  that  the  natural  limit  of 
velocity  becomes  c  =  1.  If  we  then  introduce,  further, 
v- 1  t  =  s  in  place  of  t,  the  quadratic  differential  ex¬ 
pression 

dr 2  =  -  dx 2  -  d\f  -  dz 2  -  ds 2 

thus  becomes  perfectly  symmetrical  in  x,  y ,  z,  s  ;  and  this 
symmetry  is  communicated  to  any  law  which  does  not  contra¬ 
dict  the  world-postulate.  Thus  the  essence  of  this  postulate 
may  be  clothed  mathematically  in  a  very  pregnant  manner  in 
the  mystic  formula 

3 . 105  km  =  -  1  secs. 

V 

The  advantages  afforded  by  the  world-postulate  will  per¬ 
haps  be  most  strikingly  exemplified  by  indicating  the  effects 
proceeding  from  a  point  charge  in  any  kind  of  motion  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  Maxwell-Lorentz  theory. 
Let  us  imagine  the  world-line  of  such 
a  point  electron  with  the  charge  e,  and 
introduce  upon  it  the  proper  time  t 
from  any  initial  point.  In  order  to  find 
the  field  caused  by  the  electron  at  any 
world-point  Plf  we  construct  the  front 
cone  belonging  to  Px  (Fig.  4).  The  cone 
evidently  meets  the  world-line,  since  the 
directions  of  the  line  are  everywhere 
those  of  time-like  vectors,  at  the  single 
point  P.  We  draw  the  tangent  to  the 
world-line  at  P,  and  construct  through 
Pj  the  normal  PTQ  to  this  tangent. 
Let  the  length  of  PXQ  be  r.  Then,  by 
the  definition  of  a  front  cone,  the  length  of  PQ  must  be  r/c. 
Now  the  vector  in  the  direction  PQ  of  magnitude  ejr  repre- 

*  I.  R.  Schiitz,  “Das  Prinzip  der  absolufcen  Erhaltung  der  Energie,” 
Gottinger  Nachr.,  1897,  p.  110. 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


89 


sents  by  its  components  along  the  axes  of  x ,  y ,  z,  the  vector 
potential  multiplied  by  c,  and  by  the  component  along  the 
axis  of  t,  the  scalar  potential  of  the  field  excited  by  e  at  the 
world-point  P.  Herein  lie  the  elementary  laws  formulated 
by  A.  Lienard  and  E.  Wiechert.* 

Then  in  the  description  of  the  field  produced  by  the 
electron  we  see  that  the  separation  of  the  field  into  electric 
and  magnetic  force  is  a  relative  one  with  regard  to  the  under¬ 
lying  time  axis  ;  the  most  perspicuous  way  of  describing  the 
two  forces  together  is  on  a  certain  analogy  with  the  wrench 
in  mechanics,  though  the  analogy  is  not  complete. 

I  will  now  describe  the  ponderomotive  action  of  a  moving 
point  charge  on  another  moving  point  charge.  Let  us 
imagine  the  world-line  of  a  second  point  electron  of  the 
charge'll,  passing  through  the  world-point  Px.  We  define  P, 
Q,  r  as  before,  then  construct  (Fig.  4)  the  centre  M  of  the 
hyperbola  of  curvature  at  P,  and  finally  the  normal  MN  from 
M  to  a  straight  line  imagined  through  P  parallel  to  QPr  With 
P  as  starting-point  we  now  determine  a  system  of  reference 
as  follows : — The  axis  of  t  in  the  direction  PQ,  the  axis  of  x 
in  direction  QPX,  the  axis  of  y  in  direction  MN,  whereby 
finally  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  z  is  also  defined  as  normal 
to  the  axes  of  t,  x,  y.  Let  the  acceleration  vector  at  P  be 
x,  yf  z,  t,  the  velocity  vector  at  Px  be  xl}  i/v  z1}  ilm  The  motive 
force  vector  exerted  at  Px  by  the  first  moving  electron  e  on 
the  second  moving  electron  e1  now  takes  the  form 

- 

where  the  components  Rx,  Rz,  Rt  of  the  vector  5?  satisfy 
the  three  relations 

cRt  -  fcr  =  Ry  =  Rz  =  0, 

and  where,  fourthly,  this  vector  £  is  normal  to  the  velocity 
vector  at  P1}  and  through  this  circumstance  alone  stands  in 
dependence  on  the  latter  velocity  vector. 

*  A.  Lienard,  “  Champ  ^lectrique  et  magnetique  produit  par  une  charge 
concentre  en  un  point  et  anim6e  d’un  mouvement  quelconque,”  L’Eclairage 
Electrique,  16,  1898,  pp.  5,  53,  106 ;  E.  Wiechert,  “  Elektrodynamische 
Elementargesetze,”  Arch.  NAerl.  (2),  5, 1900,  p.  549. 


90 


SPACE  AND  TIME 


When  we  compare  this  statement  with  previous  formu¬ 
lations  *  of  the  same  elementary  law  of  the  ponderomotive 
action  of  moving  point  charges  on  one  another,  we  are  com¬ 
pelled  to  admit  that  it  is  only  in  four  dimensions  that  the 
relations  here  taken  under  consideration  reveal  their  inner 
being  in  full  simplicity,  and  that  on  a  three  dimensional 
space  forced  upon  us  a  priori  they  cast  only  a  very  com¬ 
plicated  projection. 

In  mechanics  as  reformed  in  accordance  with  the  world- 
postulate,  the  disturbing  lack  of  harmony  between  Newtonian 
mechanics  and  modern  electrodynamics  disappears  of  its  own 
accord.  Before  concluding  I  will  just  touch  upon  the  attitude 
of  Newton’s  law  of  attraction  toward  this  postulate.  I  shall 
assume  that  when  two  points  of  mass  m ,  m1  describe  their 
world-lines,  a  motive  force  vector  is  exerted  by  m  on  mv  of 
exactly  the  same  form  as  that  just  given  in  the  case  of 
electrons,  except  that  +  mm1  must  now  take  the  place  of 
-  eev  We  now  specially  consider  the  case  where  the  ac¬ 
celeration  vector  of  m  is  constantly  zero.  Let  us  then  intro¬ 
duce  t  in  such  a  way  that  m  is  to  be  taken  as  at  rest,  and  let 
only  mx  move  under  the  motive  force  vector  which  proceeds 
from  m.  If  we  now  modify  this  given  vector  in  the  first 
place  by  adding  the  factor  t  ~  1  =  -  F2/c2,  which,  to  the 

order  of  1/c2,  is  equal  to  1,  it  will  be  seen  |  that  for  the  posi¬ 
tions  xv  ylf  zly  of  m1  and  their  variations  in  time,  we  should 
arrive  exactly  at  Kepler’s  laws  again,  except  that  the  proper 
times  Tj  of  m1  would  take  the  place  of  the  times  tv  From 
this  simple  remark  it  may  then  be  seen  that  the  proposed 
law  of  attraction  combined  with  the  new  meqhanics  is  no  less 
well  adapted  to  explain  astronomical  observations  than  the 
Newtonian  law  of  attraction  combined  with  Newtonian 
mechanics. 

The  fundamental  equations  for  electromagnetic  processes 
in  ponderable  bodies  also  fit  in  completely  with  the  world- 
postulate.  As  I  shall  show  elsewhere,  it  is  not  even  by  any 
means  necessary  to  abandon  the  derivation  of  these  funda- 

*  K.  Schwarzwald,  Gottinger  Nachr.,  1903,  p.  132 ;  H.  A.  Lorentz, 
Enzykl.  d.  math.  Wissensch.,  V,  Art.  14,  p.  199. 

+  H.  Minkowski,  loc.  cit.,  p.  110. 


H.  MINKOWSKI 


91 


mental  equations  from  ideas  of  the  electronic  theory,  as 
taught  by  Lorentz,  in  order  to  adapt  them  to  the  world- 
postulate. 

The  validity  without  exception  of  the  world-postulate,  I 
like  to  think,  is  the  true  nucleus  of  an  electromagnetic  image 
of  the  world,  which,  discovered  by  Lorentz,  and  further  re¬ 
vealed  by  Einstein,  now  lies  open  in  the  full  light  of  day.  In 
the  development  of  its  mathematical  consequences  there  will 
be  ample  suggestions  for  experimental  verifications  of  the 
postulate,  which  will  suffice  to  conciliate  even  those  to  whom 
the  abandonment  of  old-established  views  is  unsympathetic 
or  painful,  by  the  idea  of  a  pre-established  harmony  between 
pure  mathematics  and  physics. 


NOTES 

by 

A.  SOMMERFELD 

The  following  notes  are  given  in  an  appendix  so  as  to  interfere  in  no  way 
with  Minkowski’s  text.  They  are  by  no  means  essential,  having  no  other  pur¬ 
pose  than  that  of  removing  certain  small  formal  mathematical  difficulties 
which  might  hinder  the  comprehension  of  Minkowski’s  great  thoughts.  The 
bibliographical  references  are  confined  to  the  literature  dealing  expressly  with 
the  subject  of  his  address.  From  the  physical  point  of  view  there  is  nothing 
in  what  Minkowski  says  that  must  now  be  withdrawn,  with  the  exception  of 
the  final  remark  on  Newton’s  law  of  attraction.  What  will  be  the  epistemo¬ 
logical  attitude  towards  Minkowski’s  conception  of  the  time-space  problem  is 
another  question,  but,  as  it  seems  to  me,  a  question  which  does  not  essentially 
touch  his  physics. 

(1)  Page  81,  line  8.  “On  the  other  hand,  the  concept  of  rigid  bodies  has 
meaning  only  in  mechanics  satisfying  the  group  .”  This  sentence  was  con¬ 
firmed  in  the  widest  sense  in  a  discussion  on  a  paper  by  his  disciple  M.  Born, 
a  year  after  Minkowski’s  death.  Born  (Ann.  d.  Physik,  30,  1909,  p.  1) 
had  defined  a  relatively  rigid  body  as  one  in  which  every  element  of  volume, 
even  in  accelerated  motions,  undergoes  the  Lorentzian  contraction  appropriate 
to  its  velocity.  Ehrenfest  (Phys.  Zeitschr.',  10,  1909,  p.  918)  showed  that 
such  a  body  cannot  be  set  in  rotation  ;  Herglotz  (Ann.  d.  Phys.,  31,  1910, 
p.  393)  and  F.  Nother  (Ann.  d.  Phys.,  31,  1910,  p.  919)  that  it  has  only  three 
degrees  of  freedom  of  movement.  The  attempt  was  also  made  to  define  a 
relatively  rigid  body  with  six  or  nine  degrees  of  freedom.  But  Planck 
(Phys.  Zeitschr.,  11,  1910,  p.  294)  expressed  the  view  that  the  theory  of 
relativity  can  operate  only  with  more  or  less  elastic  bodies,  and  Laue  (Phys. 
Zeitschr.,  12,  1911,  p.  48),  employing  Minkowski’s  methods,  and  his  Fig.  2 
in  the  text  above,  proved  that  in  the  theory  of  relativity  every  solid  body  must 
have  an  infinite  number  of  degrees  of  freedom.  Finally  Herglotz  (Ann.  d. 
Physik,  36,  1911,  p.  453)  developed  a  relativistic  theory  of  elasticity,  accord¬ 
ing  to  which  elastic  tensions  always  occur  if  the  motion  of  the  body  is  not  rela¬ 
tively  rigid  in  Born’s  sense.  Thus  the  relatively  rigid  body  plays  the  same 
part  in  this  theory  of  elasticity  as  the  ordinary  rigid  body  plays  in  the  ordinary 
theory  of  elasticity. 

(2)  Page  82,  line  18.  “  If  dx/dt  for  the  second  band  is  equal  to  v,  an  easy 

calculation  gives  OD'  =  OG^/1  -  v2/c2.”  In  Fig.  1,  let  a  =  ^-A'OA,  3  =  ^B'OA' 
=  ^-C'OB',  in  which  the  equality  of  the  last  two  angles  follows  from  the  sym¬ 
metrical  position  of  the  asymptotes  with  respect  to  the  new  axes  of  co-ordin¬ 
ates  (conjugate  diameters  of  the  hyperbola).*  Since  a  +  3  =  |ir, 

sin  2^8  =  cos  2a. 

*  Sommerfeld  seems  to  take  ct  as  a  co-ordinate  in  the  graph  in  place  of  t  as 
used  by  Minkowski. — Trans. 


92 


A.  SOMMERFELD 


93 


In  the  triangle  OD'C'  the  law  of  sines  gives 

OD'  _  sin  2/3  _  cos  2 a 
OC'  cos  a  cos  a 

or,  as  OC'  =  OA', 

OD'  =  OA'^-^  =  OA'  cos  «(1  -  tan2  a)  .  .  .  (1) 

COS  a 

If  x,  t  are  the  co-ordinates  of  the  point  A'  in  the  x,  t  system,  and  therefore 
x  .  OA  and  ct .  OC  =  ct .  OA  respectively  are  the  corresponding  distances  from 
the  axes  of  co-ordinates,  we  have 

x  .  OA  =  sin  a  .  OA',  ct .  OA  =  cos  a  .  OA',  -  =  tan  a  =  -  .  (2) 

ct  c 


Inserting  these  values  of  x  and  ct  in  the  equation  of  the  hyperbola,  we  find 


OA'2(cos2  a  -  sin2  a)  =  OA2, 


OA'  = 


OA 

cos  a  (1  —  lan2  a) 


therefore,  on  account  of  (1)  and  (2), 

OD'  =  OA  ^/(l  -  tan2  a)  =  OAJ{l  -  u2/c2). 

This,  because  OA  =  00,  is  the  formula  to  be  proved. 

Further,  in  the  right-angled  triangle  OCD, 


(3) 


OD 


OC  =  OA 
cos  a  cos  a 


Equation  (3)  may  therefore  be  also  written  in  this  way, 


OA'  = 


OD  OD 

-  or - 

^/(l  -  tan2  a)  OA' 


This,  together  with  (4),  gives  the  proportion, 

OD  :  OA'  =  OD'  :  OA, 


which,  as  OA'  =  OC'  and  OA  =  OC,  is  identical  with 

OD  :  OC'  =  OD' :  OC 

employed  on  page  82,  line  29. 

(3)  Page  84,  line  15.  “  Any  world-point  between  the  front  and  back  cones 

of  0  can  be  arranged,  by  means  of  the  system  of  reference,  so  as  to  be  simultane¬ 
ous  with  0,  but  also  just  as  well  so  as  to  be  earlier  than  0,  or  later  than  0.” 
M.  Laue  (Phys.  Zeitschr.,  12,  1911,  p.  48)  traces  to  this  observation  the 
proof  of  Einstein’s  theorem  :  In  the  theory  of  relativity  no  process  of  causality 
can  be  propagated  with  a  velocity  greater  than  that  of  light  (“  Signal  velocity 
<c”).  Assume  that  an  event  O  causes  another  event  P,  and  that  the  world- 
point  P  lies  in  the  region  between  the  cones  of  0.  In  this  case  the  effect  would 
have  been  conveyed  from  O  to  P  with  a  velocity  greater  than  that  of  light,  rela¬ 
tively  to  the  system  of  reference-a,  t  in  question,  in  which,  of  course,  the  effect 
P  is  assumed  to  be  later  than  the  cause  O,  <P>0.  But  now,  in  accordance 
with  the  words  quoted  above,  the  system  of  reference  may  be  changed,  so  that 
P  comes  to  be  earlier  than  0,  that  is  to  say,  a  system  a?',  t'  may  be  chosen  in 


94 


NOTES 


infinitely  many  ways  so  that  t'F  becomes  <0.  This  is  irreconcilable  with  the 
idea  of  causality.  P  must  therefore  lie  either  “  after  ”  0  or  on  the  back 
cone  of  0,  i.e.  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  a  signal  to  be  sent  from  O,  which 
is  to  cause  a  second  event  at  the  world-point  P,  must  of  necessity  be  <C  c.  (Of 
course  it  is  possible,  even  in  the  theory  of  relativity,  to  define  processes  propa¬ 
gated  with  velocity  greater  than  light.  This  can  be  done  geometrically,  for 
example,  in  a  very  simple  way.  But  such  processes  can  never  serve  as  signals, 
i.e.  it  is  impossible  to  introduce  them  arbitrarily  and  by  them,  for  example,  to 
set  a  relay  in  motion  at  a  distant  place.  There  may  be  e.g.  optical  media,  in 
which  the  “  velocity  of  light  ”  is  greater  than  c.  But  in  that  case  what  is 
understood  by  the  velocity  of  light  is  the  propagation  of  phases  in  an  infinite 
periodic  wave-train.  These  can  never  be  used  for  signalling.  On  the  other 
hand  a  wave-front  is  propagated,  in  all  circumstances  and  with  any  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  optical  medium,  with  the  velocity  c  ;  cf.  e.g.  A.  Sommerfeld, 
“  Festschrift  Heinrich  Weber,”  Leipzig,  Teubner,  1912,  p.  338,  or  Ann. 
d.  Physik,  44,  1914,  p.  177. 

(4)  Page  85,  line  18.  As  Minkowski  once  remarked  to  me,  the  element  of 
proper  time  dr  is  not  a  complete  differential.  Thus  if  we  connect  two  world- 
points  0  and  P  by  two  different  world-lines  1  and  2,  then 

$i^T  =4=  \‘idr' 


If  1  runs  parallel  to  the  £-axis,  so  that  the  first  transition  in  the  chosen  system 
of  reference  signifies  rest,  it  is  evident  that 

\]dr  =t,  ^ 

On  this  depends  the  retardation  of  the  moving  clock  compared  with  the  clock 
at  rest.  The  assertion  is  based,  as  Einstein  has  pointed  out,  on  the  unprov- 
able  assumption  that  the  clock  in  motion  actually  indicates  its  own  proper 
time,  i.e.  that  it  always  gives  the  time  corresponding  to  the  state  of  velocity, 
regarded  as  constant,  at  any  instant.  The  moving  clock  must  naturally  have 
been  moved  with  acceleration  (with  changes  of  speed  or  direction)  in  order 
to  be  compared  with  the  stationary  clock  at  the  world-point  P.  The  retard¬ 
ation  of  the  moving  clock  does  not  therefore  actually  indicate  “  motion,”  but 
“  accelerated  motion.”  Hence  this  does  not  contradict  the  principle  of 
relativity. 

(5)  Page  86,  line  4.  The  term  “  hyperbola  of  curvature  ”  is  formed  exactly 
on  the  model  of  the  elementary  concept  of  the  circle  of  curvature.  The  analogy 
become  analytical  identity  if  instead  of  the  real  co-ordinate  of  time  t  the 
imaginary  u  =  ict  is  employed,  that  is,  c  times  the  co-ordinate  employed  by 
Minkowski,  page  88,  line  6. 

By  page  84  an  internal  hyperbola  in  the  x ,  tf-plane  has  the  equation,  with 

k  =  p, 

x2  -  c2t2  =  p2, 

therefore  in  the  x,  u  plane 

x2  +  u2  =  p2. 

Hence  it  may  be  written  in  parametric  form,  when  <p  denotes  a  purely  imagin¬ 
ary  angle, 

x  -■  p  cos  <p,  u  =  p  sin  cp . 


A.  SOMMERFELD 


95 


So,  as  I  suggested  in  the  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  33,  p.  649,  §  8,  hyperbolic  motion  may 
also  be  denoted  as  “  cyclic  motion,”  whereby  its  chief  properties  (convection  of 
the  field,  occurrence  of  a  kind  of  centrifugal  force)  are  characterized  with 
particular  clearness.  For  the  hyperbolic  motion  we  have 

dr  =  *^(  -  du 2  -  dx2)  =  ?  |  d<p  | 

and  thus 

x  =  —  =  -  ic  sin  <p,  u  =  —  =  +  ic  cos  <p 
dr  dr 


dx  c 2 

X  =  — -  =  -  COS  <p, 
dr  p 


u  — 


du 

dr 


c2  . 

=  —  sin  (p. 
P 


The  magnitude  of  the  acceleration  vector  in  hyperbolic  motion  is  therefore  c2/p. 
Since  any  given  world-line  is  touched  by  the  hyperbola  of  curvature  at  three 
points,  it  has  the  same  acceleration  vector  as  the  hyperbolic  motion,  and 
its  magnitude  is  c2/p,  as  indicated  on  page  86,  line  11. 

The  centre  M  of  the  cyclic  motion  x2  +  u 2  =  p2  is  evidently  the  point 
x  =  0,  u  =  0,  and  from  this  centre  all  points  of  the  hyperbola  have  the  con¬ 
stant  “  distance,”  i.e.  a  constant  magnitude  of  the  radius  vector.  Therefore  p 
denotes  the  interval  marked  MP  in  Fig.  3. 

(6)  Page  87,  line  1.  A  force  X,  Y,  Z,  to  be  made  into  a  “  force  vector,” 
must  be  multiplied  by  t  =  dt/dr.  This  may  be  explained  as  follows. 

According  to  Minkowski,  page  87,  line  10,  the  momentum  vector  is  defined 
by  mx,  my ,  mz,  mi,  where  m  denotes  the  “  constant  mechanical  mass,”  or,  as 
Minkowski  says  more  plainly  elsewhere,  the  “  rest  mass.”  If  we  retain 
Newton’s  law  of  motion  (time  rate  of  change  of  momentum  equal  to  force),  we 
have  to  set 


|(mx)  =  X,  ±(my)  =  Y,  |(mi)  =  Z. 


Multiplication  by  i  makes  the  left-hand  sides  into  vector  components  in 
Minkowski’s  sense.  Therefore  tX,  lY,  tZ  are  also  the  first  three  components 
of  the  “  force  vector.”  The  fourth  component  T  follows  without  ambiguity 
from  the  requirement  that  the  force  vector  is  to  be  normal  to  the  motion 
vector.  Minkowski’s  equations  for  the  mechanics  of  the  mass  point  are  there¬ 
fore,  with  constant  rest  mass, 

mx  =  iX,  my  =  tY,  mz  —  iZ,  mi  =  iT. 


The  assumption  of  constancy  of  rest  mass  can  only  be  maintained,  however, 
when  the  energy- content  of  the  body  is  not  changed  in  its  motion,  or  in  the 
words  of  Planck,  when  the  motion  ensues  “  adiabatically  and  isochorically.” 

(7)  Pages  88  and  89.  What  is  characteristic  of  the  constructions  here  given, 
is  their  complete  independence  of  any  special  system  of  reference.  They  give, 
as  Minkowski  postulates  on  page  88,  “  reciprocal  relations  between  world-lines  ” 
(or  world-points)  as  “  the  most  perfect  expression  of  physical  laws.”  On  page  89, 
for  example,  the  electrodynamic  potential  (four-potential)  is  not  referred  to  the 
axes  of  co-ordinates  x,  y,  z,  t  until  it  is  to  be  conventionally  divided  into  a 
scalar  and  a  vector  portion,  which  have  no  independent  invariant  meaning 
from  the  relativistic  standpoint. 

By  way  of  commentary  to  Minkowski  1  have  deduced,  from  Maxwell’s 


96 


NOTES 


equations,  by  Minkowski’s  methods,  an  invariant  analytical  form  for  the  four- 
potential  and  the  ponderomotive  action  between  two  electrons,  and  so  given 
another  view  of  these  constructions  of  Minkowski.  Instead  of  going  into  de¬ 
tails  here,  I  may  refer  to  my  article  in  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  33,  1910,  p.  649,  §  7, 
or  to  M.  Laue,  “  Das  Relativitatsprinzip,”  Braunschweig,  Vieweg,  1913,  §  19. 
Compare  also  Minkowski’s  address  on  the  principle  of  relativity,  edited  by  my¬ 
self,  in  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  47,  1915,  p.  927,  where  the  four-potential  is  placed  at 
the  head  of  electrodynamics,  and  this  theory  thus  reduced  to  its  simplest  form. 

(8)  Page  89,  line  6.  The  invariant  representation  of  the  electromagnetic  field 
by  a  “  vector  of  the  second  kind  ”  (or,  as  I  proposed  to  call  it,  a  “  six-vector,”  a 
term  which  seems  to  be  winning  acceptance)  is  a  particularly  important  part 
of  Minkowski’s  view  of  electrodynamics.  Whereas  Minkowski’s  ideas  on  the 
vector  of  the  first  kind,  or  four-vector,  were  in  part  anticipated  by  Poincar6 
(Rend.  Circ.  Mat.  Palermo,  21,  1906),  the  introduction  of  the  six-vector  is 
new.  Like  the  six- vector,  the  wrench  of  mechanics  (standing  for  a  single  force 
and  a  couple)  depends  on  six  independent  parameters.  And  as  in  the  electro¬ 
magnetic  field  “the  separation  into  electric  and  magnetic  force  is  a  relative 
one,”  so  with  the  wrench,  as  is  well  known,  the  division  into  single  force 
and  couple  can  be  made  in  very  many  ways. 

(9)  Page  90,  line  9.  Minkowski’s  relativistic  form  of  Newton’s  law  for  the 
special  case  of  zero  acceleration  mentioned  in  the  text  is  included  in  the  more 
general  form  proposed  by  Poincar6  (loc.  cit.).  On  the  other  hand,  in  taking  ac¬ 
celeration  into  consideration,  it  goes  further  than  the  latter.  Minkowski’s  or 
Poincare’s  formulation  of  the  law  of  gravitation  shows  that  it  is  possible  in 
many  ways  to  reconcile  Newton’s  law  with  the  theory  of  relativity.  That  law 
is  viewed  as  a  point  law,  and  gravitation  therefore  in  a  certain  sense  as  action 
at  a  distance.  The  general  theory  of  relativity,  which  Einstein  has  been 
developing  from  1907  on,  gets  a  deeper  grip  of  the  problem  of  gravitation. 
Gravitation  is  not  only  regarded  as  a  field  action  and  described  by  space-time 
differential  equations — which  seems  from  the  present  standpoint  irrefutable — 
but  it  is  also  united  organically  with  the  principle  of  relativity  extended  to  any 
transformations,  whereas  Minkowski  and  Poincar^  had  adapted  it  to  the  postu¬ 
late  of  relativity  in  a  more  external  manner.  In  the  general  theory  of  relativity 
the  space-time  structure  is  determined,  from  or  together  with,  gravitation.  Thus 
the  principle  of  relativity,  by  an  extension  of  Minkowski’s  ideas,  is  so  formu¬ 
lated  that  it  postulates  the  co-variance  of  physical  quantities  with  reference  to 
all  point  transformations,  so  that  the  coefficients  of  the  invariant  linear  element 
enter  into  the  laws  of  physics. 

(10)  Page  90,  line  33.  The  “fundamental  equations  for  electromagnetic 
processes  in  ponderable  bodies  ”  are  developed  by  Minkowski  in  Gottinger 
Nachrichten,  1907.  It  was  not  granted  him  to  complete  the  “  deduction  of 
this  equation  on  the  basis  of  the  theory  of  electrons.”  His  essays  in  this 
direction  have  been  worked  out  by  M.  Born,  and  together  with  the  “  Funda¬ 
mental  Equations  ”  make  up  the  first  volume  of  the  series  of  monographs  edited 
by  Otto  Blumenthal  (Leipzig,  1910). 


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  GRAVITATION 
ON  THE  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT 


A.  EINSTEIN 

Translated  from  “  Uber  den  Einfluss  der  Schwerkraft  auf 
die  Ausbreitung  des  Lichtes Annalen  der  Physik,  35, 

1911. 


. 


' 

ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  GRAVITATION  ON  THE 

PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT 


By  A.  EINSTEIN 

IN  a  memoir  published  four  years  ago  *  I  tried  to  answer 
the  question  whether  the  propagation  of  light  is  in¬ 
fluenced  by  gravitation.  I  return  to  this  theme,  because 
my  previous  presentation  of  the  subject  does  not  satisfy 
me,  and  for  a  stronger  reason,  because  I  now  see  that  one  of 
the  most  important  consequences  of  my  former  treatment 
is  capable  of  being  tested  experimentally.  For  it  follows 
from  the  theory  here  to  be  brought  forward,  that  rays  of 
light,  passing  close  to  the  sun,  are  deflected  by  its  gravita¬ 
tional  field,  so  that  the  angular  distance  between  the  sun  and 
a  fixed  star  appearing  near  to  it  is  apparently  increased  by 
nearly  a  second  of  arc. 

In  the  course  of  these  reflexions  further  results  are  yielded 
which  relate  to  gravitation.  But  as  the  exposition  of  the 
entire  group  of  considerations  would  be  rather  difficult  to 
follow,  only  a  few  quite  elementary  reflexions  will  be  given 
in  the  following  pages,  from  which  the  reader  will  readily  be 
able  to  inform  himself  as  to  the  suppositions  of  the  theory 
and  its  line  of  thought.  The  relations  here  deduced,  even  if 
the  theoretical  foundation  is  sound,  are  valid  only  to  a  first 
approximation. 

§  i.  A  Hypothesis  as  to  the  Physical  Nature  of  the 

Gravitational  Field 

In  a  homogeneous  gravitational  field  (acceleration  of 
gravity  7)  let  there  be  a  stationary  system  of  co-ordinates  K, 
orientated  so  that  the  lines  of  force  of  the  gravitational  field 
run  in  the  negative  direction  of  the  axis  of  z.  In  a  space  free 

*  A.  Einstein,  Jahrbuch  fur  Radioakt.  und  Elektronik,  4, 1907, 

99 


100 


GRAVITATION  AND  LIGHT 


of  gravitational  fields  let  there  be  a  second  system  of  co¬ 
ordinates  K',  moving  with  uniform  acceleration  (7)  in  the 
positive  direction  of  its  axis  of  z.  To  avoid  unnecessary  com¬ 
plications,  let  us  for  the  present  disregard  the  theory  of 
relativity,  and  regard  both  systems  from  the  customary  point 
of  view  of  kinematics,  and  the  movements  occurring  in  them 
from  that  of  ordinary  mechanics. 

Relatively  to  K,  as  well  as  relatively  to  K',  material  points 
which  are  not  subjected  to  the  action  of  other  material  points, 
move  in  keeping  with  the  equations 

d2x  _  „  d2y  n  d‘2z  _ 

d?  ~  U’  IP  ~  IP  y‘ 

For  the  accelerated  system  K'  this  follows  directly  from 
Galileo’s  principle,  but  for  the  system  K,  at  rest  in  a  homo¬ 
geneous  gravitational  field,  from  the  experience  that  all  bodies 
in  such  a  field  are  equally  and  uniformly  accelerated.  This 
experience,  of  the  equal  falling  of  all  bodies  in  the  gravi¬ 
tational  field,  is  one  of  the  most  universal  which  the  obser¬ 
vation  of  nature  has  yielded  ;  but  in  spite  of  that  the  law 
has  not  found  any  place  in  the  foundations  of  our  edifice  of 
the  physical  universe. 

But  we  arrive  at  a  very  satisfactory  interpretation  of  this 
law  of  experience,  if  we  assume  that  the  systems  K  and  K'  are 
physically  exactly  equivalent,  that  is,  if  we  assume  that  we 
may  just  as  well  regard  the  system  K  as  being  in  a  space  free 
from  gravitational  fields,  if  we  then  regard  K  as  uniformly 
accelerated.  This  assumption  of  exact  physical  equivalence 
makes  it  impossible  for  us  to  speak  of  the  absolute  accelera¬ 
tion  of  the  system  of  reference,  just  as  the  usual  theory  of 
relativity  forbids  us  to  talk  of  the  absolute  velocity  of  a 
system ;  *  and  it  makes  the  equal  falling  of  all  bodies  in  a 
gravitational  field  seem  a  matter  of  course. 

As  long  as  we  restrict  ourselves  to  purely  mechanical  pro¬ 
cesses  in  the  realm  where  Newton’s  mechanics  holds  sway, 
we  are  certain  of  the  equivalence  of  the  systems  K  and  K'. 

*  Of  course  we  cannot  replace  any  arbitrary  gravitational  field  by  a  state  of 
motion  of  the  system  without  a  gravitational  field,  any  more  than,  by  a  trans¬ 
formation  of  relativity,  we  can  transform  all  points  of  a  medium  in  any  kind  of 
motion  to  rest. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


101 


But  this  view  of  ours  will  not  have  any  deeper  significance 
unless  the  systems  K  and  K'  are  equivalent  with  respect  to 
all  physical  processes,  that  is,  unless  the  laws  of  nature  with 
respect  to  K  are  in  entire  agreement  with  those  with  respect 
to  K'.  By  assuming  this  to  be  so,  we  arrive  at  a  principle 
which,  if  it  is  really  true,  has  great  heuristic  importance. 
For  by  theoretical  consideration  of  processes  which  take  place 
relatively  to  a  system  of  reference  with  uniform  acceleration, 
we  obtain  information  as  to  the  career  of  processes  in  a  homo¬ 
geneous  gravitational  field.  We  shall  now  show,  first  of  all, 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  ordinary  theory  of  relativity,  what 
degree  of  probability  is  inherent  in  our  hypothesis. 

§  2.  On  the  Gravitation  of  Energy 

One  result  yielded  by  the  theory  of  relativity  is  that  the 
inertia  mass  of  a  body  increases  with  the  energy  it  contains  ; 
if  the  increase  of  energy  amounts  to  E,  the  increase  in  inertia 
mass  is  equal  to  E/c2,  when  c  denotes  the  velocity  of  light. 
Now  is  there  an  increase  of  gravitating  mass  corresponding 
to  this  increase  of  inertia  mass  ?  If  not,  then  a  body  would 
fall  in  the  same  gravitational  field  with  varying  acceleration 
according  to  the  energy  it  contained.  That  highly  satisfactory 
result  of  the  theory  of  relativity  by  which  the  law  of  the  con¬ 
servation  of  mass  is  merged  in  the  law  of  conservation  of 
energy  could  not  be  maintained,  because  it  would  compel  us 
to  abandon  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  mass  in  its  old 
form  for  inertia  mass,  and  maintain  it  for  gravitating  mass. 

But  this  must  be  regarded  as  very  improbable.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  usual  theory  of  relativity  does  not  provide  us 
with  any  argument  from  which  to  infer  that  the  weight  of  a 
body  depends  on  the  energy  contained  in  it.  But  we  shall 
show  that  our  hypothesis  of  the  equivalence  of  the  systems 
K  and  K'  gives  us  gravitation  of  energy  as  a  necessary  con¬ 
sequence. 

Let  the  two  material  systems  Sx  and  S2, provided  with  instru¬ 
ments  of  measurement,  be  situated  on  the  2-axis  of  K  at  the 
distance  h  from  each  other,*  so  that  the  gravitation  potential 
in  S2  is  greater  than  that  in  Sj  by  7 h.  Let  a  definite  quantity 

*  The  dimensions  of  Sx  and  S2  are  regarded  as  infinitely  small  in  compari¬ 
son  with  h. 


102 


GRAVITATION  AND  LIGHT 


of  energy  E  be  emitted  from  S2  towards  Sx.  Let  the  quantities 
of  energy  in  Sx  and  S2  be  measured  by  contrivances  which — 
brought  to  one  place  in  the  system  £  and  there  compared — 
shall  be  perfectly  alike.  As  to  the  process  of  this  conveyance 
of  energy  by  radiation  we  can  make  no  a  priori  assertion,  be¬ 
cause  we  do  not  know  the  influence  of  the  gravitational  field 
on  the  radiation  and  the  measuring  instruments  in  Sx  and  S2. 

But  by  our  postulate  of  the  equivalence  of  K  and  K'  we 
are  able,  in  place  of  the  system  Kin  a  homogeneous  gravi¬ 
tational  field,  to  set  -the  gravitation-free  system  K',  which 
moves  with  uniform  acceleration  in  the  direction  of  positive 
2,  and  with  the  2-axis  of  which  the  material  systems  S2  and 
S2  are  rigidly  connected. 

We  judge  of  the  process  of  the  transference  of  energy  by 

radiation  from  S2  to  Sx  from  a  system  K0, 
which  is  to  be  free  from  acceleration.  At 
the  moment  when  the  radiation  energy  E2 
is  emitted  from  S2  toward  S1}  let  the 
velocity  of  K'  relatively  to  K0  be  zero. 
The  radiation  will  arrive  at  Sx  when  the 
time  hjc  has  elapsed  (to  a  first  approxi¬ 
mation).  But  at  this  moment  the  velo¬ 
city  of  Sx  relatively  to  K0  is  yhjc  =  v. 
Therefore  by  the  ordinary  theory  of  re¬ 
lativity  the  radiation  arriving  at  Sx  does 
not  possess  the  energy  E2,  but  a  greater 
energy  El5  which  is  related  to  E2  to  a 
first  approximation  by  the  equation  * 


Z 


E,  =  E,(l  +  -  E2(l  +  yj 


■  (1) 


By  our  assumption  exactly  the  same  relation  holds  if  the 
same  process  takes  place  in  the  system  K,  which  is  not  acceler¬ 
ated,  but  is  provided  with  a  gravitational  field.  In  this  case 
we  may  replace  7 h  by  the  potential  of  the  gravitation  vector 
in  S2,  if  the  arbitrary  constant  of  in  Sj  is  equated  to  zero. 
We  then  have  the  equation 

E,  =  E2  +  J<I>  .  .  .  (la) 


*See  above,  pp.  69-71. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


103 


This  equation  expresses  the  law  of  energy  for  the  process 
under  observation.  The  energy  Ex  arriving  at  Sx  is  greater 
than  the  energy  E2,  measured  by  the  same  means,  which  was 
emitted  in  S2,  the  excess  being  the  potential  energy  of  the 
mass  E 2/c2  in  the  gravitational  field.  It  thus  proves  that  for 
the  fulfilment  of  the  principle  of  energy  we  have  to  ascribe 
to  the  energy  E,  before  its  emission  in  S2,  a  potential  energy 
due  to  gravity,  which  corresponds  to  the  gravitational  mass 
E/c2.  Our  assumption  of  the  equivalence  of  K  and  K'  thus 
removes  the  difficulty  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  this 
paragraph  which  is  left  unsolved  by  the  ordinary  theory  of 
relativity. 

The  meaning  of  this  result  is  shown  particularly  clearly  if 
we  consider  the  following  cycle  of  operations  : — 

1.  The  energy  E,  as  measured  in  S2,  is  emitted  in  the  form 
of  radiation  in  S2  towards  Sx,  where,  by  the  result  just  ob¬ 
tained,  the  energy  E(1  +  7A/C2),  as  measured  in  Slf  is  ab¬ 
sorbed. 

2.  A  body  W  of  mass  M  is  lowered  from  S2  to  Sx,  work 
M7 h  being  done  in  the  process. 

3.  The  energy  E  is  transferred  from  Sx  to  the  body  W 
while  W  is  in  Sr  Let  the  gravitational  mass  M  be  thereby 
changed  so  that  it  acquires  the  value  M'. 

4.  Let  W  be  again  raised  to  S2,  work  M'7 h  being  done 
in  the  process. 

5.  Let  E  be  transferred  from  W  back  to  S2. 

The  effect  of  this  cycle  is  simply  that  S1  has  undergone 
the  increase  of  energy  E7 life1,  and  that  the  quantity  of 
energy  M'7 h  -  M7 h  has  been  conveyed  to  the  system  in  the 
form  of  mechanical  work.  By  the  principle  of  energy,  we 
must  therefore  have 

E y\  =  M 'yh  -  Uyh, 
c 

or 

M'  -  M  -  E/c2 . (lb) 

The  increase  in  gravitational  mass  is  thus  equal  to  E/c2,  and 
therefore  equal  to  the  increase  in  inertia  mass  as  given  by  the 
theory  of  relativity. 

The  result  emerges  still  more  directly  from  the  equivalence 


104 


GRAVITATION  AND  LIGHT 


of  the  systems  K  and  K',  according  to  which  the  gravitational 
mass  in  respect  of  K  is  exactly  equal  to  the  inertia  mass  in 
respect  of  K' ;  energy  must  therefore  possess  a  gravitational 
mass  which  is  equal  to  its  inertia  mass.  If  a  mass  M0  be 
suspended  on  a  spring  balance  in  the  system  K',  the  balance 
will  indicate  the  apparent  weight  M0y  on  account  of  the 
inertia  of  M0.  If  the  quantity  of  energy  E  be  transferred 
to  M0,  the  spring  balance,  by  the  law  of  the  inertia  of 
energy,  will  indicate  (M0  +  E /c2)y.  By  reason  of  our  funda¬ 
mental  assumption  exactly  the  same  thing  must  occur  when 
the  experiment  is  repeated  in  the  system  K,  that  is,  in  the 
gravitational  field. 

§  3.  Time  and  the  Velocity  of  Light  in  the  Gravitational 

Field 

If  the  radiation  emitted  in  the  uniformly  accelerated 
system  K'  in  S2  toward  Sx  had  the  frequency  v2  relatively  to 
the  clock  in  S2,  then,  relatively  to  Slf  at  its  arrival  in  Sx  it  no 
longer  has  the  frequency  v2  relatively  to  an  identical  clock  in 
Sj,  but  a  greater  frequency  vlt  such  that  to  a  first  approxi¬ 
mation 

vx  =  i/2(l  +  y^j  .  .  .  .  (2) 

For  if  we  again  introduce  the  unaccelerated  system  of  refer¬ 
ence  K0,  relatively  to  which,  at  the  time  of  the  emission  of 
light,  K'  has  no  velocity,  then  Sx,  at  the  time  of  arrival  of  the 
radiation  at  Sx,  has,  relatively  to  K0,  the  velocity  7 hjc,  from 
which,  by  Doppler’s  principle,  the  relation  as  given  results 
immediately. 

In  agreement  with  our  assumption  of  the  equivalence  of 
the  systems  K'  and  K,  this  equation  also  holds  for  the 
stationary  system  of  co-ordinates  K,  provided  with  a  uniform 
gravitational  field,  if  in  it  the  transference  by  radiation  takes 
place  as  described.  It  follows,  then,  that  a  ray  of  light 
emitted  in  S2  with  a  definite  gravitational  potential,  and  pos¬ 
sessing  at  its  emission  the  frequency  v.2 — compared  with  a 
clock  in  S2 — will,  at  its  arrival  in  Sx,  possess  a  different  fre¬ 
quency  iq — measured  by  an  identical  clock  in  Sj.  For  7 h  we 
substitute  the  gravitational  potential  <I>  of  S2 — that  of  Sx 


A.  EINSTEIN 


105 


being  taken  as  zero — and  assume  that  the  relation  which  we 
have  deduced  for  the  homogeneous  gravitational  field  also 
holds  for  other  forms  of  field.  Then 


This  result  (which  by  our  deduction  is  valid  to  a  first  ap¬ 
proximation)  permits,  in  the  first  place,  of  the  following  appli¬ 
cation.  Let  v0  be  the  vibration-number  of  an  elementary 
light-generator,  measured  by  a  delicate  clock  at  the  same 
place.  Let  us  imagine  them  both  at  a  place  on  the  surface 
of  the  Sun  (where  our  S2  is  located).  Of  the  light  there 
emitted,  a  portion  reaches  the  Earth  (Sx),  where  we  measure 
the  frequency  of  the  arriving  light  with  a  clock  U  in  all  re¬ 
spects-  resembling  the  one  just  mentioned.  Then  by  (2a), 


v  = 


where  <I>  is  the  (negative)  difference  of  gravitational  potential 
between  the  surface  of  the  Sun  and  the  Earth.  Thus  accord¬ 
ing  to  our  view  the  spectral  lines  of  sunlight,  as  compared 
with  the  corresponding  spectral  lines  of  terrestrial  sources  of 
light,  must  be  somewhat  displaced  toward  the  red,  in  fact  by 
the  relative  amount 


Vp  ~  v 
Vp 


3> 

-=5  =  2. 10-6 


If  the  conditions  under  which  the  solar  bands  arise  were 
exactly  known,  this  shifting  would  be  susceptible  of  measure¬ 
ment.  But  as  other  influences  (pressure,  temperature)  affect 
the  position  of  the  centres  of  the  spectral  lines,  it  is  difficult 
to  discover  whether  the  inferred  influence  of  the  gravitational 
potential  really  exists.* 

On  a  superficial  consideration  equation  (2),  or  (2a), 
respectively,  seems  to-  assert  an  absurdity.  If  there  is  con¬ 
stant  transmission  of  light  from  S2  to  S1}  how  can  any  other 
number  of  periods  per  second  arrive  in  S2  than  is  emitted 

*L.  F.  Jewell  (Journ.  de  Phys.,  6,  1897,  p.  84)  and  particularly  Ch. 
Fabry  and  H.  Boisson  (Comptes  rendus,  148,  1909,  pp.  688-690)  have  actually 
found  such  displacements  of  fine  spectral  lines  toward  the  red  end  of  the 
spectrum,  of  the  order  of  magnitude  here  calculated,  but  have  ascribed  them 
to  an  effect  of  pressure  in  the  absorbing  layer. 


106 


GRAVITATION  AND  LIGHT 


in  S2  ?  But  the  answer  is  simple.  We  cannot  regard  v2  or 
respectively  vx  simply  as  frequencies  (as  the  number  of  periods 
per  second)  since  we  have  not  yet  determined  the  time  in 
system  K.  What  v2  denotes  is  the  number  of  periods  with 
reference  to  the  time-unit  of  the  clock  U  in  S2,  while  v1  de¬ 
notes  the  number  of  periods  per  second  with  reference  to  the 
identical  clock  in  Sx.  Nothing  compels  us  to  assume  that  the 
clocks  U  in  different  gravitation  potentials  must  be  regarded 
as  going  at  the  same  rate.  On  the  contrary,  we  must  certainly 
define  the  time  in  K  in  such  a  way  that  the  number  of  wave 
crests  and  troughs  between  S2  and  Sx  is  independent  of  the 
absolute  value  of  time  ;  for  the  process  under  observation  is 
by  nature  a  stationary  one.  If  we  did  not  satisfy  this  con¬ 
dition,  we  should  arrive  at  a  definition  of  time  by  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  which  time  would  merge  explicitly  into  the  laws 
of  nature,  and  this  would  certainly  be  unnatural  and  un¬ 
practical.  Therefore  the  two  clocks  in  S2  and  S2  do  not  both 
give  the  “  time  ”  correctly.  If  we  measure  time  in  Sj  with 
the  clock  U,  then  we  must  measure  time  in  S2  with  a  clock 
which  goes  1  +  <E>/c2  times  more  slowly  than  the  clock  U  when 
compared  with  U  at  one  and  the  same  place.  For  when 
measured  by  such  a  clock  the  frequency  of  the  ray  of  light 
which  is  considered  above  is  at  its  emission  in  S2 


v2\ 


■♦a 


and  is  therefore,  by  (2a),  equal  to  the  frequency  vY  of  the  same 
ray  of  light  on  its  arrival  in  Sx. 

This  has  a  consequence  which  is  of  fundamental  impor¬ 
tance  for  our  theory.  For  if  we  measure  the  velocity  of  light 
at  different  places  in  the  accelerated,  gravitation-free. system 
K',  employing  clocks  U  of  identical  constitution,  we  obtain 
the  same  magnitude  at  all  these  places.  The  same  holds 
good,  by  our  fundamental  assumption,  for  the  system  K  as 
well.  But  from  what  has  just  been  said  we  must  use  clocks 
of  unlike  constitution,  for  measuring  time  at  places  with 
differing  gravitation  potential.  For  measuring  time  at  a 
place  which,  relatively  to  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates,  has 
the  gravitation  potential  <I>,  we  must  employ  a  clock  which — 
when  removed  to  the  origin  of  co-ordinates — goes  (1  +  <F/c2) 
times  more  slowly  than  the  clock  used  for  measuring  time  at 


A.  EINSTEIN 


107 


the  origin  of  co-ordinates.  If  we  call  the  velocity  of  light  at 
the  origin  of  co-ordinates  c0,  then  the  velocity  of  light  c  at  a 
place  with  the  gravitation  potential  <E>  will  be  given  by  the 
relation 

c  =  c0(l  +  ^)  •  •  •  •  (3) 

The  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  holds 
good  according  to  this  theory  in  a  different  form  from  that 
which  usually  underlies  the  ordinary  theory  of  relativity. 


§  4.  Bending  of  Light- Rays  in  the  Gravitational  Field 

From  the  proposition  which  has  just  been  proved,  that  the 
velocity  of  light  in  the  gravitational  field  is  a  function  of  the 
place,  we  may  easily  infer,  by  means  of  Huyghens’s  principle, 
that  light-rays  propagated  across  a  gravitational  field  undergo 
deflexion.  For  let  E  be  a  wave  front  of  a  plane  light-wave  at 
the  time  t,  and  let  'Pl  and  P2  be  two  points  in  that  plane  at 


unit  distance  from  each  other.  Pj  and  P2  lie  in  the  plane  of 
the  paper,  which  is  chosen  so  that  the  differential  coefficient 
of  d>,  taken  in  the  direction  of  the  normal  to  the  plane, 
vanishes,  and  therefore  also  that  of  c.  We  obtain  the  corre¬ 
sponding  wave  front  at  time  t  +  dt,  or,  rather,  its  line 
of  section  with  the  plane  of  the  paper,  by  describing  circles 
round  the  points  Px  and  P2  with  radii  cxdt  and  c.2dt  respectively, 
where  and  c2  denote  the  velocity  of  light  at  the  points  Pj 
and  P2  respectively,  and  by  drawing  the  tangent  to  these 
circles.  The  angle  through  which  the  light-ray  is  deflected 
in  the  path  cdt  is  therefore 


Oi  -  c2)dt  =  -  ~dt, 

if  we  calculate  the  angle  positively  when  the  ray  is  bent  to¬ 
ward  the  side  of  increasing  n .  The  angle  of  deflexion  per 
unit  of  path  of  the  light-ray  is  thus 

1 


-  -  1^/ ,  or  by  (3)  - 
c^n  J 


108 


GRAVITATION  AND  LIGHT 


Finally,  we  obtain  for  the  deflexion  which  a  light-ray  experi¬ 
ences  toward  the  side  n  on  any  path  (s)  the  expression 

“  =  "  in'dS  '  '  '  '  ^ 

We  might  have  obtained  the  same  result  by  directly  consider¬ 
ing  the  propagation  of  a  ray  of  light  in  the  uniformly  acceler¬ 
ated  system  K',  and  transferring  the  result  to  the  system  K, 
and  thence  to  the  case  of  a  gravitational  field  of  any  form. 

By  equation  (4)  a  ray  of  light  passing  along  by  a  heavenly 
body  suffers  a  deflexion  to  the  side  of  the  diminishing  gravi¬ 
tational  potential,  that  is,  on  the  side  directed  toward  the 
heavenly  body,  of  the  magnitude 


a  =  —n 


=  \ir 

kM. 


0  =  - 


cos  6ds  =  2 


A;M 


c2  A 


where  k  denotes  the  constant  of  gravitation,  M  the  mass  of 

the  heavenly  body,  A  the  distance  of  the 
ray  from  the  centre  of  the  body.  A  ray 
of  light  going  past  the  Sun  would  accord¬ 
ingly  undergo  deflexion  to  the  amount  of 
4’ 10  ~  6  =  *83  seconds  of  arc.  The  angu¬ 
lar  distance  of  the  star  from  the  centre  of 
the  Sun  appears  to  be  increased  by  this 
amount.  As  the  fixed  stars  in  the  parts 
of  the  sky  near  the  Sun  are  visible 
during  total  eclipses  of  the  Sun,  this 
consequence  of  the  theory  may  be  com¬ 
pared  with  experience.  With  the  planet 
Jupiter  the  displacement  to  be  expected 
reaches  to  about  of  the  amount 


fS 


Fig.  7. 


given.  It  would  be  a  most  desirable  thing  if  astronomers 
would  take  up  the  question  here  raised.  For  apart  from 
any  theory  there  is  the  question  whether  it  is  possible  with 
the  equipment  at  present  available  to  detect  an  influence  of 
gravitational  fields-  on  the  propagation  of  light. 


THE  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  GENERAL 
THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 

BY 

A.  EINSTEIN 

Translated  from  “  Die  Grundlage  der  allgemeinen  Rela- 
tivitatstheorief  Annalen  der  Physik,  49,  1918. 


THE  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  GENERAL  THEORY 

OF  RELATIVITY 


By  A.  EINSTEIN 

A.  Fundamental  Considerations  on  the  Postulate  of 

Relativity 

§  i.  Observations  on  the  Special  Theory  of  Relativity 

THE  special  theory  of  relativity  is  based  on  the 
following  postulate,  which  is  also  satisfied  by  the 
mechanics  of  Galileo  and  Newton. 

If  a  system  of  co-ordinates  K  is  chosen  so  that,  in  re¬ 
lation  to  it,  physical  laws  hold  good  in  their  simplest  form, 
the  same  laws  also  hold  good  in  relation  to  any  other  system 
of  co-ordinates  K'  moving  in  uniform  translation  relatively 
to  K.  This  postulate  we  call  the  “  special  principle  of 
relativity.”  The  word  “  special  ”  is  meant  to  intimate 
that  the  principle  is  restricted  to  the  case  when  K'  has  a 
motion  of  uniform  translation  relatively  to  K,  but  that  the 
equivalence  of  K'  and  K  does  not  extend  to  the  case  of  non- 
uniform  motion  of  K'  relatively  to  K. 

Thus  the  special  theory  of  relativity  does  not  depart  from 
classical  mechanics  through  the  postulate  of  relativity,  but 
through  the  postulate  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light 
in  vacuo ,  from  which,  in  combination  with  the  special  prin¬ 
ciple  of  relativity,  there  follow,  in  the  well-known  way,  the 
relativity  of  simultaneity,  the  Lorentzian  transformation,  and 
the  related  laws  for  the  behaviour  of  moving  bodies  and 
clocks. 

The  modification  to  which  the  special  theory  of  relativity 

has  subjected  the  theory  of  space  and  time  is  indeed  far- 

reaching,  but  one  important  point  has  remained  unaffected. 

ill 


112 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


For  the  laws  of  geometry,  even  according  to  the  special  theory 
of  relativity,  are  to  be  interpreted  directly  as  laws  relating  to 
the  possible  relative  positions  of  solid  bodies  at  rest ;  and,  in 
a  more  general  way,  the  laws  of  kinematics  are  to  be  inter¬ 
preted  as  laws  which  describe  the  relations  of  measuring 
bodies  and  clocks.  To  two  selected  material  points  of  a 
stationary  rigid  body  there  always  corresponds  a  distance  of 
quite  definite  length,  which  is  independent  of  the  locality  and 
orientation  of  the  body,  and  is  also  independent  of  the  time. 
To  two  selected  positions  of  the  hands  of  a  clock  at  rest 
relatively  to  the  privileged  system  of  reference  there  always 
corresponds  an  interval  of  time  of  a  definite  length,  which  is 
independent  of  place  and  time.  We  shall  soon  see  that  the 
general  theory  of  relativity  cannot  adhere  to  this  simple 
physical  interpretation  of  space  and  time. 

§  2.  The  Need  for  an  Extension  of  the  Postulate  of 

Relativity 

In  classical  mechanics,  and  no  less  in  the  special  theory 
of  relativity,  there  is  an  inherent  epistemological  defect  which 
was,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  clearly  pointed  out  by  Ernst 
Mach.  We  will  elucidate  it  by  the  following  example  : — Two 
fluid  bodies  of  the  same  size  and  nature  hover  freely  in  space 
at  so  great  a  distance  from  each  other  and  from  all  other 
masses  that  only  those  gravitational  forces  need  be  taken  into 
account  which  arise  from  the  interaction  of  different  parts  of 
the  same  body.  Let  the  distance  between  the  two  bodies  be 
invariable,  and  in  neither  of  the  bodies  let  there  be  any 
relative  movements  of  the  parts  with  respect  to  one  another. 
But  let  either  mass,  as  judged  by  an  observer  at  rest 
relatively  to  the  other  mass,  rotate  with  constant  angular 
velocity  about  the  line  joining  the  masses.  This  is  a  verifi¬ 
able  relative  motion  of  the  two  bodies.  Now  let  us  imagine 
that  each  of  the  bodies  has  been  surveyed  by  means  of 
measuring  instruments  at  rest  relatively  to  itself,  and  let  the 
surface  of  Sj  prove  to  be  a  sphere,  and  that  of  S2  an  ellipsoid 
of  revolution.  Thereupon  we  put  the  question — What  is  the 
reason  for  this  difference  in  the  two  bodies  ?  No  answer  can 


A.  EINSTEIN 


113 


be  admitted  as  epistemologically  satisfactory,*  unless  the 
reason  given  is  an  observable  fact  of  experience.  The  law  of 
causality  has  not  the  significance  of  a  statement  as  to  the 
world  of  experience,  except  when  observable  facts  ultimately 
appear  as  causes  and  effects. 

Newtonian  mechanics  does  not  give  a  satisfactory  answer 
to  this  question.  It  pronounces  as  follows : — The  laws  of 
mechanics  apply  to  the  space  R1}  in  respect  to  which  the  body 
Sj  is  at  rest,  but  not  to  the  space  R2,  in  respect  to  which  the 
body  S2  is  at  rest.  But  the  privileged  space  Rx  of  Galileo, 
thus  introduced,  is  a  merely  factitious  cause,  and  not  a  thing 
that  can  be  observed.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  Newtons 
mechanics  does  not  really  satisfy  the  requirement  of  causality 
in  the  case  under  consideration,  but  only  apparently  does  so, 
since  it  makes  the  factitious  cause  Rj  responsible  for  the  ob¬ 
servable  difference  in  the  bodies  Sx  and  S2. 

The  only  satisfactory  answer  must  be  that  the  physical 
system  consisting  of  Sx  and  S2  reveals  within  itself  no  imagin¬ 
able  cause  to  which  the  differing  behaviour  of  Sx  and  S2  can 
be  referred.  The  cause  must  therefore  lie  outside  this  system. 
We  have  to  take  it  that  the  general  laws  of  motion,  which  in 
particular  determine  the  shapes  of  Sj  and  S2,  must  be  such 
that  the  mechanical  behaviour  of  Sx  and  S2  is  partly  con¬ 
ditioned,  in  quite  essential  respects,  by  distant  masses  which 
we  have  not  included  in  the  system  under  consideration. 
These  distant  masses  and  their  motions  relative  to  Sx  and 
S2  must  then  be  regarded  as  the  seat  of  the  causes  (which 
must  be  susceptible  to  observation)  of  the  different  behaviour 
of  our  two  bodies  Sx  and  S2.  They  take  over  the  role  of  the 
factitious  cause  Rx.  Of  all  imaginable  spaces  Rx,  R2,  etc.,  in 
any  kind  of  motion  relatively  to  one  another,  there  is  none 
which  we  may  look  upon  as  privileged  a  priori  without  re¬ 
viving  the  above-mentioned  epistemological  objection.  The 
laws  of  physics  must  be  of  such  a  nature  that  they  apply  to 
systems  of  reference  in  any  kind  of  motion.  Along  this  road 
we  arrive  at  an  extension  of  the  postulate  of  relativity. 

In  addition  to  this  weighty  argument  from  the  theory  of 

*  Of  course  an  answer  may  be  satisfactory  from  the  point  of  view  of  episte¬ 
mology,  and  yet  be  unsound  physically,  if  it  is  in  conflict  with  other  experi¬ 
ences. 


114 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


knowledge,  there  is  a  well-known  physical  fact  which  favours 
an  extension  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  Let  K  be  a  Galilean 
system  of  reference,  i.e.  a  system  relatively  to  which  (at  least 
in  the  four-dimensional  region  under  consideration)  a  mass, 
sufficiently  distant  from  other  masses,  is  moving  with  uniform 
motion  in  a  straight  line.  Let  K'  be  a  second  system  of 
reference  which  is  moving  relatively  to  K  in  uniformly 
accelerated  translation.  Then,  relatively  to  K',  a  mass 
sufficiently  distant  from  other  masses  would  have  an  acceler¬ 
ated  motion  such  that  its  acceleration  and  direction  of 
acceleration  are  independent  of  the  material  composition  and 
physical  state  of  the  mass. 

Does  this  permit  an  observer  at  rest  relatively  to  K'  to 
infer  that  he  is  on  a  “  really  ”  accelerated  system  of  reference  ? 
The  answer  is  in  the  negative  ;  for  the  above-mentioned 
relation  of  freely  movable  masses  to  K'  may  be  interpreted 
equally  well  in  the  following  way.  The  system  of  reference 
K'  is  unaccelerated,  but  the  space-time  territory  in  question 
is  under  the  sway  of  a  gravitational  field,  which  generates  the 
accelerated  motion  of  the  bodies  relatively  to  K'. 

This  view  is  made  possible  for  us  by  the  teaching  of 
experience  as  to  the  existence  of  a  field  of  force,  namely,  the 
gravitational  field,  which  possesses  the  remarkable  property 
of  imparting  the  same  acceleration  to  all  bodies.*  The 
mechanical  behaviour  of  bodies  relatively  to  K'  is  the  same 
as  presents  itself  to  experience  in  the  case  of  systems  which 
we  are  wont  to  regard  as  “  stationary  ”  or  as  “  privileged.” 
Therefore,  from  the  physical  standpoint,  the  assumption 
readily  suggests  itself  that  the  systems  K  and  K'  may  both 
with  equal  right  be  looked  upon  as  “  stationary,”  that  is  to 
say,  they  have  an  equal  title  as  systems  of  reference  for  the 
physical  description  of  phenomena. 

It  will  be  seen  from  these  reflexions  that  in  pursuing  the 
general  theory  of  relativity  we  shall  be  led  to  a  theory  of 
gravitation,  since  we  are  able  to  “produce  ”  a  gravitational 
field  merely  by  changing  the  system  of  co-ordinates.  It  will 
also  be  obvious  that  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the 
velocity  of  light  in  vacuo  must  be  modified,  since  we  easily 

*  Eotvos  has  proved  experimentally  that  the  gravitational  field  has  this 
property  in  great  accuracy. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


115 


recognize  that  the  path  of  a  ray  of  light  with  respect  to  K' 
must  in  general  be  curvilinear,  if  with  respect  to  K  light  is 
propagated  in  a  straight  line  with  a  definite  constant  velocity. 


§  3.  The  Space-Time  Continuum.  Requirement  of  General 
Co-Variance  for  the  Equations  Expressing  General 
Laws  of  Nature 

In  classical  mechanics,  as  well  as  in  the  special  theory  of 
relativity,  the  co-ordinates  of  space  and  time  have  a  direct 
physical  meaning.  To  say  that  a  point-event  has  the  Xx  co¬ 
ordinate  xx  means  that  the  projection  of  the  point-event  on  the 
axis  of  Xx,  determined  by  rigid  rods  and  in  accordance  with  the. 
rules  of  Euclidean  geometry,  is  obtained  by  measuring  off  a 
given  rod  (the  unit  of  length)  times  from  the  origin  of  co¬ 
ordinates  along  the  axis  of  Xr  To  say  that  a  point-event 
has  the  X4  co-ordinate  #4  =  t,  means  that  a  standard  clock, 
made  to  measure  time  in  a  definite  unit  period,  and  which  is 
stationary  relatively  to  the  system  of  co-ordinates  and  practic¬ 
ally  coincident  in  space  with  the  point-event,*  will  have 
measured  off  xA  =  t  periods  at  the  occurrence  of  the  event. 

This  view  of  space  and  time  has  always  been  in  the  minds 
of  physicists,  even  if,  as  a  rule,  they  have  been  unconscious 
of  it.  This  is  clear  from  the  part  which  these  concepts  play 
in  physical  measurements ;  it  must  also  have  underlain  the 
reader’s  reflexions  on  the  preceding  paragraph  (§  2)  for 
him  to  connect  any  meaning  with  what  he  there  read.  But 
we  shall  now  show  that  we  must  put  it  aside  and  replace  it 
by  a  more  general  view,  in  order  to  be  able  to  carry  through 
the  postulate  of  general  relativity,  if  the  special  theory  of 
relativity  applies  to  the  special  case  of  the  absence  of  a  gravi¬ 
tational  field. 

In  a  space  which  is  free  of  gravitational  fields  we  introduce 
a  Galilean  system  of  reference  K  (x,  y,  z ,  t),  and  also  a  system 
of  co-ordinates  K'  y\  z\  t')  in  uniform  rotation  relatively 
to  K.  Let  the  origins  of  both  systems,  as  well  as  their  axes 

*  We  assume  the  possibility  of  verifying  “simultaneity”  for  events  im¬ 
mediately  proximate  in  space,  or — to  speak  more  precisely — for  immediate 
proximity  or  coincidence  in  space-time,  without  giving  a  definition  of  this 
fundamental  concept. 


116 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


of  Z,  permanently  coincide.  We  shall  show  that  for  a  space- 
time  measurement  in  the  system  K'  the  above  definition  of 
the  physical  meaning  of  lengths  and  times  cannot  be  main¬ 
tained.  For  reasons  of  symmetry  it  is  clear  that  a  circle 
around  the  origin  in  the  X,  Y  plane  of  K  may  at  the  same 
time  be  regarded  as  a  circle  in  the  X',  Y'  plane  of  K'.  We 
suppose  that  the  circumference  and  diameter  of  this  circle 
have  been  measured  with  a  unit  measure  infinitely  small 
compared  with  the  radius,  and  that  we  have  the  quotient  of 
the  two  results.  If  this  experiment  were  performed  with  a 
measuring-rod  at  rest  relatively  to  the  Galilean  system  K,the 
quotient  would  be  it.  With  a  measuring-rod  at  rest  relatively 
to  K',  the  quotient  would  be  greater  than  7 r.  This  is  readily 
understood  if  we  envisage  the  whole  process  of  measuring 
from  the  “  stationary  ”  system  K,  and  take  into  consideration 
that  the  measuring-rod  applied  to  the  periphery  undergoes 
a  Lorentzian  contraction,  while  the  one  applied  along  the 
radius  does  not.  Hence  Euclidean  geometry  does  not  apply 
to  K'.  The  notion  of  co-ordinates  defined  above,  which  pre¬ 
supposes  the  validity  of  Euclidean  geometry,  therefore  breaks 
down  in  relation  to  the  system  K'.  So,  too,  we  are  unable 
to  introduce  a  time  corresponding  to  physical  requirements 
in  K',  indicated  by  clocks  at  rest/  relatively  to  K'.  To 
convince  ourselves  of  this  impossibility,  let  us  imagine  two 
clocks  of  identical  constitution  placed,  one  at  the  origin  of 
co-ordinates,  and  the  other  at  the  circumference  of  the 
circle,  and  both  envisaged  from  the  “  stationary  ”  system 
K.  By  a  familiar  result  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity, 
the  clock  at  the  circumference — judged  from  K — goes  more 
slowly  than  the  other,  because  the  former  is  in  motion  and 
the  latter  at  rest.  An  observer  at  the  common  origin  of 
co-ordinates,  capable  of  observing  the  clock  at  the  circum¬ 
ference  by  means  of  light,  would  therefore  see  it  lagging  be¬ 
hind  the  clock  beside  him.  As  he  will  not  make  up  his  mind 
to  let  the  velocity  of  light  along  the  path  in  question  depend 
explicitly  on  the  time,  he  will  interpret  his  observations  as 
showing  that  the  clock  at  the  circumference  “  really  ”  goes 
more  slowly  than  the  clock  at  the  origin.  So  he  will  be 
obliged  to  define  time  in  such  a  way  that  the  rate  of  a  clock 
depends  upon  where  the  clock  may  be. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


117 


We  therefore  reach  this  result : — In  the  general  theory  of 
relativity,  space  and  time  cannot  be  defined  in  such  a  way 
that  differences  of  the  spatial  co-ordinates  can  be  directly 
measured  by  the  unit  measuring-rod,  or  differences  in  the 
time  co-ordinate  by  a  standard  clock. 

The  method  hitherto  employed  for  laying  co-ordinates 
into  the  space-time  continuum  in  a  definite  manner  thus  breaks 
down,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  other  way  which  would  allow 
us  to  adapt  systems  of  co-ordinates  to  the  four-dimensional 
universe  so  that  we  might  expect  from  their  application  a 
particularly  simple  formulation  of  the  laws  of  nature.  So 
there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  regard  all  imaginable  systems 
of  co-ordinates,  on  principle,  as  equally  suitable  for  the 
description  of  nature.  This  comes  to  requiring  that : — 

The  general  laws  of  nature  are  to  be  expressed  by  equations 
which  hold  good  for  all  systems  of  co-ordinates ,  that  is,  are 
co-variant  with  respect  to  any  substitutions  whatever  {generally 
co-variant) . 

It  is  clear  that  a  physical  theory  which  satisfies  this 
postulate  will  also  be  suitable  for  the  general  postulate  of 
relativity.  For  the  sum  of  all  substitutions  in  any  case  in¬ 
cludes  those  which  correspond  to  all  relative  motions  of  three- 
dimensional  systems  of  co-ordinates.  That  this  requirement 
of  general  co-variance,  which  takes  away -from  space  and 
time  the  last  remnant  of  physical  objectivity,  is  a  natural 
one,  will  be  seen  from  the  following  reflexion.  All  our 
space-time  verifications  invariably  amount  to  a  determination 
of  space-time  coincidences.  If,  for  example,  events  consisted 
merely  in  the  motion  of  material  points,  then  ultimately 
nothing  would  be  observable  but  the  meetings  of  two  or  more 
of  these  points.  Moreover,  the  results  of  our  measurings  are 
nothing  but  verifications  of  such  meetings  of  the  material 
points  of  our  measuring  instruments  with  other  material 
points,  coincidences  between  the  hands  of  a  clock  and  points 
on  the  clock  dial,  and  observed  point-events  happening  at  the 
same  place  at  the  same  time. 

The  introduction  of  a  system  of  reference  serves  no  other 
purpose  than  to  facilitate  the  description  of  the  totality  of  such 
coincidences.  We  allot  to  the  universe  four  space-time  vari¬ 
ables  xv  x2,  xz,  x4  in  such  a  way  that  for  every  point-event 


118 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


there  is  a  corresponding  system  of  values  of  the  variables 
xx  .  .  .  x4.  To  two  coincident  point-events  there  corre¬ 
sponds  one  system  of  values  of  the  variables  x1  .  .  .  x±,  i.e. 
coincidence  is  characterized  by  the  identity  of  the  co-ordindtes. 
If,  in  place  of  the  variables  x1  .  .  .  x4,  we  introduce  functions 
of  them,  x\,  x2,  x\,  x\,  as  a  new  system  of  co-ordinates,  so 
that  the  systems  of  values  are  made  to  correspond  to  one 
another  without  ambiguity,  the  equality  of  all  four  co-ordin¬ 
ates  in  the  new  system  will  also  serve  as  an  expression  for 
the  space-time  coincidence  of  the  two  point-events.  As  all 
our  physical  experience  can  be  ultimately  reduced  to  such 
coincidences,  there  is  no  immediate  reason  for  preferring 
certain  systems  of  co-ordinates  to  others,  that  is  to  say,  we 
arrive  at  the  requirement  of  general  co-variance. 

§  4.  The  Relation  of  the  Four  Co-ordinates  to  Measure¬ 
ment  in  Space  and  Time 

It  is  not  my  purpose  in  this  discussion  to  represent  the 
general  theory  of  relativity  as  a  system  that  is  as  simple  and 
logical  as  possible,  and  with  the  minimum  number  of  axioms  ; 
but  my  main  object  is  to  develop  this  theory  in  such  a  way 
that  the  reader  will  feel  that  the  path  we  have  entered  upon 
is  psychologically  the  natural  one,  and  that  the  underlying 
assumptions  will  seem  to  have  the  highest  possible  degree 
of  security.  With  this  aim  in  view  let  it  now  be  granted 
that : — 

For  infinitely  small  four-dimensional  regions  the  theory 
of  relativity  in  the  restricted  sense  is  appropriate,  if  the  co¬ 
ordinates  are  suitably  chosen. 

For  this  purpose  we  must  choose  the  acceleration  of  the 
infinitely  small  (“  local  ”)  system  of  co-ordinates  so  that  no 
gravitational  field  occurs ;  this  is  possible  for  an  infinitely 
small  region.  Let  X1}  X2,  X3,  be  the  co-ordinates  of  space, 
and  X4  the  appertaining  co-ordinate  of  time  measured  in  the 
appropriate  unit.*  If  a  rigid  rod  is  imagined  to  be  given  as 
the  unit  measure,  the  co-ordinates,  with  a  given  orientation 
of  the  system  of  co-ordinates,  have  a  direct  physical  meaning 

*  The  unit  of  time  is  to  be  chosen  so  that  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuo  as 
measured  in  the  “  local  ”  system  of  co-ordinates  is  to  be  equal  to  unity. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


119 


in  the  sense  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity.  By  the 
special  theory  of  relativity  the  expression 

ds2  =  -  dX[  -  dX\  -  dX 3  +  dX\  .  .  (1) 

then  has  a  value  which  is  independent  of  the  orientation  of 
the  local  system  of  co-ordinates,  and  is  ascertainable  by 
measurements  of  space  and  time.  The  magnitude  of  the 
linear  element  pertaining  to  points  of  the  four-dimensional 
continuum  in  infinite  proximity,  we  call  ds.  If  the  ds  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  element  dXx  .  .  .  dX4  is  positive,  we  follow 
Minkowski  in  calling  it  time-like  ;  if  it  is  negative,  we  call  it 
space-like. 

To  the  “  linear  element  ”  in  question,  or  to  the  two  infin¬ 
itely  .proximate  point-events,  there  will  also  correspond 
definite  differentials  dxx  .  .  .  dx±  of  the  four-dimensional 
co-ordinates  of  any  chosen  system  of  reference.  If  this 
system,  as  well  as  the  “  local  ”  system,  is  given  for  the  region 
under  consideration,  the  dXv  will  allow  themselves  to  be 
represented  here  by  definite  linear  homogeneous  expressions 
of  the  dxa : — 

dX^y  =:  ^ CLycxdX  (J  ....  (2) 

a 

Inserting  these  expressions  in  (1),  we  obtain 

ds2  =  2g(rTdX(rdxT, .  .  ,  .  (3) 

TOT 

where  the  gw  will  be  functions  of  the  xa.  These  can  no 
longer  be  dependent  on  the  orientation  and  the  state  of 
motion  of  the  “local”  system  of  co-ordinates,  for  ds 2  is  a 
quantity  ascertainable  by  rod-clock  measurement  of  point- 
events  infinitely  proximate  in  space-time,  and  defined  inde¬ 
pendently  of  any  particular  choice  of  co-ordinates.  The  gw 
are  to  be  chosen  here  so  that  gw  =  gT<r ;  the  summation  is 
to  extend  over  all  values  of  a  and  t,  so  that  the  sum  consists 
of  4  x  4  terms,  of  which  twelve  are  equal  in  pairs. 

The  case  of*the  ordinary  theory  of  relativity  arises  out  of 
the  case  here  considered,  if  it  is  possible,  by  reason  of  the 
particular  relations  of  the  gw  in  a  finite  region,  to  choose  the 
system  of  reference  in  the  finite  region  in  such  a  way  that 
the  gw  assume  the  constant  values 


120 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


-  1  0  0  0) 

0-1  0  ol 

0  0-1  of 

0  0  0  +  lj 


We  shall  find  hereafter  that  the  choice  of  such  co-ordinates 
is,  in  general,  not  possible  for  a  finite  region. 

From  the  considerations  of  §  2  and  §  3  it  follows  that 
the  quantities  gT(T  are  to  be  regarded  from  the  physical  stand¬ 
point  as  the  quantities  which  describe  the  gravitational 
field  in  relation  to  the  chosen  system  of  reference.  For,  if 
we  now  assume  the  special  theory  of  relativity  to  apply  to  a 
certain  four-dimensional  region  with  the  co-ordinates  properly 
chosen,  then  the  gaT  have  the  values  given  in  (4).  A  free 
material  point  then  moves,  relatively  to  this  system,  with 
uniform  motion  in  a  straight  line.  Then  if  we  introduce  new 
space-time  co-ordinates  xlt  x2 ,  x3,  x4,  by  means  of  any  substi¬ 
tution  we  choose,  the  g<rT  in  this  new  system  will  no  longer 
be  constants,  but  functions  of  space  and  time.  At  the  same 
time  the  motion  of  the  free  material  point  will  present  itself 
in  the  new  co-ordinates  as  a  curvilinear  non-uniform  motion, 
and  the  law  of  this  motion  will  be  independent  of  the  nature 
of  the  moving  particle.  We  shall  therefore  interpret  this 
motion  as  a  motion  under  the  influence  of  a  gravitational 
field.  We  thus  find  the  occurrence  of  a  gravitational  field 
connected  with  a  space-time  variability  of  the  ga  .  So,  too, 
in  the  general  case,  when  we  are  no  longer  able  by  a  suitable 
choice  of  co-ordinates  to  apply  the  special  theory  of  relativity 
to  a  finite  region,  we  shall  hold  fast  to  the  view  that  the  g<n 
describe  the  gravitational  field. 

Thus,  according  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  gravi¬ 
tation  occupies  an  exceptional  position  with  regard  to  other 
forces,  particularly  the  electromagnetic  forces,  since  the  ten 
functions  representing  the  gravitational  field  at  the  same  time 
define  the  metrical  properties  of  the  space  measured. 


B.  Mathematical  Aids  to  the  Formulation  of 
Generally  Covariant  Equations 

Having  seen  in  the  foregoing  that  the  general  postulate 
of  relativity  leads  to  the  requirement  that  the  equations  of 


A.  EINSTEIN 


121 


physics  shall  be  covariant  in  the  face  of  any  substitution  of 
the  co-ordinates  xY  .  .  .  #4,  we  have  to  consider  how  such 
generally  covariant  equations  can  be  found.  We  now  turn 
to  this  purely  mathematical  task,  and  we  shall  find  that  in  its 
solution  a  fundamental  r61e  is  played  by  the  invariant  ds 
given  in  equation  (3),  which,  borrowing  from  Gauss’s  theory 
of  surfaces,  we  have  called  the  “  linear  element.” 

The  fundamental  idea  of  this  general  theory  of  covariants 
is  the  following  : — Let  certain  things  (“  tensors  ”)  be  defined 
with  respect  to  any  system  of  co-ordinates  by  a  number  of 
functions  of  the  co-ordinates,  called  the  “  components  ”  of 
the  tensor.  There  are  then  certain  rules  by  which  these 
components  can  be  calculated  for  a  new  system  of  co-ordin¬ 
ates,  if  they  are  known  for  the  original  system  of  co-ordinates, 
and  if  the  transformation  connecting  the  two  systems  is 
known.  The  things  hereafter  called  tensors  are  further 
characterized  by  the  fact  that  the  equations  of  transformation 
for  their  components  are  linear  and  homogeneous.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  all  the  components  in  the  new  system  vanish,  if  they 
all  vanish  in  the  original  system.  If,  therefore,  a  law  of 
nature  is  expressed  by  equating  all  the  components  of  a  tensor 
to  zero,  it  is  generally  covariant.  By  examining  the  laws 
of  the  formation  of  tensors,  we  acquire  the  means  of  formu¬ 
lating  generally  covariant  laws. 


§  5.  Contravariant  and  Covariant  Four- vectors 

Contravariant  Four-vectors. — The  linear  element  is  de¬ 
fined  by  the  four  “  components  ”  dxv,  for  which  the  law  of 
transformation  is  expressed  by  the  equation 

dx  .  .  .  .  (5) 

v  d Xv  v  ' 


The  dx  a  are  expressed  as  linear  and  homogeneous  functions 
of  the  dxv.  Hence  we  may  look  upon  these  co-ordinate  differ¬ 
entials  as  the  components  of  a  “  tensor  ”  of  the  particular 
kind  which  we  call  a  contravariant  four-vector.  Any  thing 
which  is  defined  relatively  to  the  system  of  co-ordinates  by 
four  quantities  A1',  and  which  is  transformed  by  the  same  law 


A,<r 


(5a) 


122 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


we  also  call  a  contravariant  four-vector.  From  (5a)  it 
follows  at  once  that  the  sums  A*7  +  B0-  are  also  components 
of  a  four-vector,  if  A*7  and  B0-  are  such.  Corresponding  rela¬ 
tions  hold  for  all  “  tensors  ”  subsequently  to  be  introduced. 
(Buie  for  the  addition  and  subtraction  of  tensors.) 

Covariant  Four-vectors. — We  call  four  quantities  A„  the 
components  of  a  covariant  four-vector,  if  for  any  arbitrary 
choice  of  the  contravariant  four-vector  Bv 

XA„B*'  =  Invariant  .  .  .  (6) 

V 

The  law  of  transformation  of  a  covariant  four-vector  follows 
from  this  definition.  For  if  we  replace  B*'  on  the  right-hand 
side  of  the  equation 

ZMfB"  =  ZEVBV 

<r  v 

by  the  expression  resulting  from  the  inversion  of  (5a), 


we  obtain 


Z 


~bxv 

c )Xa 


B 


/<7 


ZB'" 2^-  A,  =  SB"’ A.'  . 


Since  this  equation  is  true  for  arbitrary  values  of  the  B,<7,  it 
follows  that  the  law  of  transformation  is 

AV  =  2^A„  .  .  .  .  (7) 

v  CX  O' 

Note  on  a  Simplified  Way  of  Writing  the  Expressions . — 
A  glance  at  the  equations  of  this  paragraph  shows  that  there 
is  always  a  summation  with  respect  to  the  indices  which 
occur  twice  under  a  sign  of  summation  (e.g.  the  index  v  in 
(5)),  and  only  with  respect  to  indices  which  occur  twice.  It 
is  therefore  possible,  without  loss  of  clearness,  to  omit  the  sign 
of  summation.  In  its  place  we  introduce  the  convention : — 
If  an  index  occurs  twice  in  one  term  of  an  expression,  it  is 
always  to  be  summed  unless  the  contrary  is  expressly  stated. 

The  difference  between  covariant  and  contravariant  four- 
vectors  lies  in  the  law  of  transformation  ((7)  or  (5)  respectively). 
Both  forms  are  tensors  in  the  sense  of  the  general  remark 
above.  Therein  lies  their  importance.  Following  Bicci  and 


A.  EINSTEIN  123 

Levi-Civita,  we  denote  the  contravariant  character  by  placing 
the  index  above,  the  covariant  by  placing  it  below. 


§  6.  Tensors  of  the  Second  and  Higher  Ranks 

Contravariant  Tensors. — If  we  form  all  the  sixteen  pro¬ 
ducts  of  the  components  AM  and  B1'  of  two  contravariant 
four-vectors 

AMV  =  AMBV  ....  (8) 


then  by  (8)  and  (5a)  A'"'  satisfies  the  law  of  transformation 


A/<7T 


'bx’ff 


7)7’’ 

'bXv 


We  call  a  thing  which  is  described  relatively  to  any  system 
of  reference  by  sixteen  quantities,  satisfying  the  law  of  trans¬ 
formation  (9),  a  contravariant  tensor  of  the  second  rank.  Not 
every  such  tensor  allows  itself  to  be  formed  in  accordance 
with  (8)  from  two  four-vectors,  but  it  is  easily  shown  that 
any  given  sixteen  PSV  can  be  represented  as  the  sums  of  the 
A^B"  of  four  appropriately  selected  pairs  of  four-vectors. 
Hence  we  can  prove  nearly  all  the  laws  which  apply  to  the 
tensor  of  the  second  rank  defined  by  (9)  in  the  simplest 
manner  by  demonstrating  them  for  the  special  tensors  of  the 
type  (8). 

Contravariant  Tensors  of  Any  Bank. — It  is  clear  that,  on 
the  lines  of  (8)  and  (9),  contravariant  tensors  of  the  third  and 
higher  ranks  may  also  be  defined  with  43  components,  and  so 
on.  In  the  same  way  it  follows  from  (8)  and  (9)  that  the 
contravariant  four-vector  may  be  taken  in  this  sense  as  a 
contravariant  tensor  of  the  first  rank. 

Covariant  Tensors. — On  the  other  hand,  if  we  take  the 
sixteen  products  A/*„  of  two  covariant  four- vectors  A p  and  B„, 

Am„  ==  A^Bj/j  ....  (10) 

the  law  of  transformation  for  these  is 

a  '  _  'tejL  A  n  1  \ 

A "  “  aaV  lx'rAtUf  •  •  •  ( } 

This  law  of  transformation  defines  the  covariant  tensor  of 
the  second  rank.  All  our  previous  remarks  on  contravariant 
tensors  apply  equally  to  co variant  tensors. 


124 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


Note. — It  is  convenient  to  treat  the  scalar  (or  invariant) 
both  as  a  contravariant  and  a  covariant  tensor  of  zero  rank. 

Mixed  Tensors. — We  may  also  define  a  tensor  of  the 
second  rank  of  the  type 

a;  =  ....  (12) 

which  is  covariant  with  respect  to  the  index  y,  arrd  contra¬ 
variant  with  respect  to  the  index  v.  Its  law  of  transforma¬ 
tion  is 


7)x  «j-  7)X/x 
7)Xy  'bx'ff  P 


Naturally  there  are  mixed  tensors  with  any  number  of 
indices  of  covariant  character,  and  any  number  of  indices  of 
contravariant  character.  Covariant  and  contravariant  tensors 
may  be  looked  upon  as  special  cases  of  mixed  tensors. 

Symmetrical  Tensors. — A  contravariant,  or  a  covariant 
tensor,  of  the  second  or  higher  rank  is  said  to  be  symmetrical 
if  two  components,  which  are  obtained  the  one  from  the  other 
by  the  interchange  of  two  indices,  are  equal.  The  tensor  A*v, 
or  the  tensor  Apy,  is  thus  symmetrical  if  for  any  combination 
of  the  indices  y,  v , 

A'"1'  =  A1'*,  ....  (14) 

or  respectively, 

A jxv  =  Af/fj,.  .....  (14a) 


It  has  to  be  proved  that  the  symmetry  thus  defined  is  a 
property  which  is  independent  of  the  system  of  reference. 
It  follows  in  fact  from  (9),  when  (14)  is  taken  into  consider¬ 
ation,  that 


A 


>(TT 


~&X  ff  ~&X  t  ^  2)3/  (j-  "fox  «r  \  vix  t) X  ff  ~&X  «] 


'bXu  'bXi 


-A'*"  = 


^ Xu,  ~&Xj/ 


AVM  = 


'foXy  "tiXi 


■AT  =  A 


>T(T 


The  last  equation  but  one  depends  upon  the  interchange  of 
the  summation  indices  y  and  v,  i.e.  merely  on  a  change  of 
notation. 

Antisymmetrical  Tensors. — A  contravariant  or  a  covariant 
tensor  of  the  second,  third,  or  fourth  rank  is  said  to  be  anti¬ 
symmetrical  if  two  components,  which  are  obtained  the  one 
from  the  other  by  the  interchange  of  two  indices,  are  equal 
and  of  opposite  sign.  The  tensor  A'*1',  or  the  tensor  AM„,  is 
therefore  antisymmetrical,  if  always 


125 


A.  EINSTEIN 


or  respectively, 


•  (15) 
.  (15a) 


Of  the  sixteen  components  AMV,  the  four  components 
vanish ;  the  rest  are  equal  and  of  opposite  sign  in  pairs,  so 
that  there  are  only  six  components  numerically  different  (a 
six- vector).  Similarly  we  see  that  the  antisymmetrical  tensor 
of  the  third  rank  AMl,<r  has  only  four  numerically  different 
components,  while  the  antisymmetrical  tensor  AMl,crT  has  only 
one.  There  are  no  antisymmetrical  tensors  of  higher  rank 
than  the  fourth  in  a  continuum  of  four  dimensions. 


§  7.  Multiplication  of  Tensors 

Outer  Multiplication  of  Tensors. — We  obtain  from  the 
components  of  a  tensor  of  rank  n  and  of  a  tensor  of  rank  m 
the  components  of  a  tensor  of  rank  n  +  m  by  multiplying 
each  component  of  the  one  tensor  by  each  component  of  the 
other.  Thus,  for  example,  the  tensors  T  arise  out  of  the 
tensors  A  and  B  of  different  kinds, 


T  fjivcr 

rp/ui'crT 


A^yBcr, 


=  AMVB‘ 


T 


<TT 


><TT 

=  A^B^. 


The  proof  of  the  tensor  character  of  T  is  given  directly 
by  the  representations  (8),  (10),  (12),  or  by  the  laws  of  trans¬ 
formation  (9),  (11),  (13).  The  equations  (8),  (10),  (12)  are 
themselves  examples  of  outer  multiplication  of  tensors  of  the 
first  rank. 

“  Contraction  ”  of  a  Mixed  Tensor. — From  any  mixed 
tensor  we  may  form  a  tensor  whose  rank  is  less  by  two,  by 
equating  an  index  of  covariant  with  one  of  contravariant 
character,  and  summing  with  respect  to  this  index  (“  con¬ 
traction  ”).  Thus,  for  example,  from  the  mixed  tensor  of  the 

fourth  rank  A^,  we  obtain  the  mixed  tensor  of  the  second 
rank, 

a;  -  A£  (  =  SAp, 

and  from  this,  by  a  second  contraction,  the  tensor  of  zero 
rank, 


126 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


The  proof  that  the  result  of  contraction  really  possesses 
the  tensor  character  is  given  either  by  the  representation  of  a 
tensor  according  to  the  generalization  of  (12)  in  combination 
with  (6),  or  by  the  generalization  of  (13). 

Inner  and  Mixed  Multiplication  of  Tensors. — These  consist 
in  a  combination  of  outer  multiplication  with  contraction. 

Examples. — From  the  covariant  tensor  of  the  second  rank 
A /xv  and  the  contravariant  tensor  of  the  first  rank  Ba  we  form 
by  outer  multiplication  the  mixed  tensor 


=  A^B0-- 


On  contraction  with  respect  to  the  indices  v  and  cr,  we  obtain 
the*covariant  four-vector 

=  A^B". 

This  we  call  the  inner  product  of  the  tensors  and  B0-. 
Analogously  we  form  from  the  tensors  A^v  and  BffT,  by  outer 
multiplication  and  double  contraction,  the  inner  product 
A^B'4".  By  outer  multiplication  and  one  contraction,  we 
obtain  from  AM„  and  ~BaT  the  mixed  tensor  of  the  second  rank 

=  A/iyBVT.  This  operation  may  be  aptly  characterized  as 

a  mixed  one,  being  “outer”  with  respect  to  the  indices  p 
and  t,  and  “  inner  ”  with  respect  to  the  indices  v  and  cr. 

We  now  prove  a  proposition  which  is  often  useful  as  evi¬ 
dence  of  tensor  character.  From  what  has  just  been  ex¬ 
plained,  AfxvW'  is  a  scalar  if  A^  and  BaT  are  tensors.  But 
we  may  also  make  the  following  assertion  :  If  A^yB^  is 
a  scalar  for  any  choice  of  the  tensor  B'41',  then  AM„  has  tensor 
character.  For,  by  hypothesis,  for  any  substitution, 


AVtB"7  =  Au,B 


HV 


But  by  an  inversion  of  (9) 


~  7>X',  IX'+ 


This,  inserted  in  the  above  equation,  gives 


DXfi  ^Xy  A  \1D,(n- 


This  can  only  be  satisfied  for  arbitrary  values  of  B'ar  if  the 


A.  EINSTEIN 


127 


bracket  vanishes.  The  result  then  follows  by  equation  (11). 
This  rule  applies  correspondingly  to  tensors  of  any  rank  and 
character,  and  the  proof  is  analogous  in  all  cases. 

The  rule  may  also  be  demonstrated  in  this  form  :  If 
and  C*'  are  any  vectors,  and  if,  for  all  values  of  these,  the 
inner  product  is  a  scalar,  then  A^  is  a  covariant 

tensor.  This  latter  proposition  also  holds  good  even  if  only 
the  more  special  assertion  is  correct,  that  with  any  choice  of 
the  four-vector  BM  the  inner  product  A^B^B1'  is  a  scalar,  if 
in  addition  it  is  known  that  satisfies  the  condition  of 
symmetry  AM„  =  Avfl.  For  by  the  method  given  above  we 
prove  the  tensor  character  of  ( A ^  +  A„M),  and  from  this  the 
tensor  character  of  A follows  on  account  of  symmetry. 
This  also  can  be  easily  generalized  to  the  case  of  covariant 
and  contravariant  tensors  of  any  rank. 

Finally,  there  follows  from  what  has  been  proved,  this 
law,  which  may  also  be  generalized  for  any  tensors :  If  for 
any  choice  of  the  four-vector  Bv  the  quantities  A/U„B‘'  form  a 
tensor  of  the  first  rank,  then  A is  a  tensor  of  the  second 
rank.  For,  if  is  any  four-vector,  then  on  account  of  the 
tensor  character  of  A^B1',  the  inner  product  A^jJETC'*  is  a 
scalar  for  any  choice  of  the  two  four-vectors  B*'  and  CM.  From 
which  the  proposition  follows. 

§  8.  Some  Aspects  of  the  Fundamental  Tensor  g^v 

The  Covariant  Fundamental  Tensor. — In  the  invariant 
expression  for  the  square  of  the  linear  element, 

ds2  =  giivdxibLdxv) 

the  part  played  by  the  dx ^  is  that  of  a  contravariant  vector 
which  may  be  chosen  at  will.  Since  further,  g^v  =  gv/x,  it 
follows  from  the  considerations  of  the  preceding  paragraph 
that  g^  is  a  covariant  tensor  of  the  second  rank.  We  call 
it  the  “  fundamental  tensor/’  In  what  follows  we  deduce 
some  properties  of  this  tensor  which,  it  is  true,  apply  to  any 
tensor  of  the  second  rank.  But  as  the  fundamental  tensor 
plays  a  special  part  in  our  theory,  which  has  its  physical  basis 
in  the  peculiar  effects  of  gravitation,  it  so  happens  that  the 
relations  to  be  developed  are  of  importance  to  us  only  in  the 
case  of  the  fundamental  tensor. 


128 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


The  Contravariant  Fundamental  Tensor. — If  in  the  deter¬ 
minant  formed  by  the  elements  g^,  we  take  the  co-factor  of 
each  of  the  g^v  and  divide  it  by  the  determinant  g  =  |  g^v  |  , 
we  obtain  certain  quantities  g^v(  =  gvfx)  which,  as  we  shall 
demonstrate,  form  a  contravariant  tensor. 

By  a  known  property  of  determinants 

9^9'"’  =  S'  .  .  .  .  (16) 

where  the  symbol  8 v  denotes  1  or  0,  according  as  yu,  =  v  or 
/*  +  v. 

Instead  of  the  above  expression  for  ds 2  we  may  thus  write 


or,  by  (16) 


g^8v  dx/xdx 


v 


g^gvrg^dx^dxv. 


But,  by  the  multiplication  rules  of  the  preceding  paragraphs, 
the  quantities 

d%<r  =  g^crdx^ 


form  a  covariant  four- vector,  and  in  fact  an  arbitrary  vector, 
since  the  dx M  are  arbitrary.  By  introducing  this  into  our  ex¬ 
pression  we  obtain 

ds2  =  g^dgffdi-T- 

Since  this,  with  the  arbitrary  choice  of  the  vector  d f<r,  is  a 
scalar,  and  gffT  by  its  definition  is  symmetrical  in  the  indices 
a  and  t,  it  follows  from  the  results  of  the  preceding  paragraph 
that  gaT  is  a  contravariant  tensor. 

It  further  follows  from  (16)  that  8^  is  also  a  tensor,  which 
we  may  call  the  mixed  fundamental  tensor. 

The  Determinant  of  the  Fundamental  Tensor. — By  the 
rule  for  the  multiplication  of  determinants 

I  Mav  I  =  I  9^  I  x  I  9““  I  • 

On  the  other  hand 

I  9^9ay  I  =  I  K  I  =1- 

It  therefore  follows  that 

I  9^  I  x  |  gr*  |  =  1  .  .  .  (17) 

The  Volume  Scalar. — We  seek  first  the  law  of  transfor- 


A.  EINSTEIN  129 

mation  of  the  determinant  g  =  |  g^  \  .  In  accordance  with 
(11) 

,  _  hXf,  ix 

9  ~  W,  ix^9^  • 

Hence,  by  a  double  application  of  the  rule  for  the  multipli¬ 
cation  of  determinants,  it  follows  that 


or 


On  the  other  hand,  the  law  of  transformation  of  the  element 
of  volume 

dr  =  xdx^dx^dx^dx^ 


is,  in  accordance  with  the  theorem  of  Jacobi, 


dr'  = 


'bXg 
^ X/x 


dr. 


By  multiplication  of  the  last  two  equations,  we  obtain 


sjgdr  =  Jgdx  .  .  .  (18). 

Instead  of  g ,  we  introduce  in  what  follows  the  quantity 
V-  g,  which  is  always  real  on  account  of  the  hyperbolic 

character  of  the  space-time  continuum.  The  invariant  -  gdr 
is  equal  to  the  magnitude  of  the  four-dimensional  element 
of  volume  in  the  “  local  ”  system  of  reference,  as  measured 
with  rigid  rods  and  clocks  in  the  sense  of  the  special  theory 
of  relativity. 

Note  on  the  Character  of  the  Space-time  Continuum. — Our 
assumption  that  the  special  theory  of  relativity  can  always 
be  applied  to  an  infinitely  small  region,  implies  that  ds*  can 
always  be  expressed  in  accordance  with  (1)  by  means  of  real 
quantities  dX.-^  .  .  .  dX4.  If  we  denote  by  dr0  the  “  natural  ” 
element  of  volume  dXlt  dX2,  c?X3,  <2X4,  then 


dr0  =  J  -  gdr 


.  (18a) 


130 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


V-  g  were  to  vanish  at  a  point  of  the  fonr-dimensional 
continuum,  it  would  mean  that  at  this  point  an  infinitely  small 
“  natural  ”  volume  would  correspond  to  a  finite  volume  in 
the  co-ordinates.  Let  us  assume  that  this  is  never  the  case. 
Then  g  cannot  change  sign.  We  will  assume  that,  in  the 
sense  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  g  always  has  a  finite 
negative  value.  This  is  a  hypothesis  as  to  the  physical 
nature  of  the  continuum  under  consideration,  and  at  the  same 
time  a  convention  as  to  the  choice  of  co-ordinates. 

But  if  -  g  is  always  finite  and  positive,  it  is  natural  to  settle 
the  choice  of  co-ordinates  a  posteriori  in  such  a  way  that  this 
quantity  is  always  equal  to  unity.  We  shall  see  later  that 
by  such  a  restriction  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates  it  is  possible 
to  achieve  an  important  simplification  of  the  laws  of  nature. 

In  place  of  (18),  we  then  have  simply  dr  =  dr}  from 
which,  in  view  of  Jacobi’s  theorem,  it  follows  that 


7>x'ff 
b Xfi 


=  1 


(19) 


Thus,  with  this  choice  of  co-ordinates,  only  substitutions  for 
which  the  determinant  is  unity  are  permissible. 

But  it  would  be  erroneous  to  believe  that  this  step  indicates 
a  partial  abandonment  of  the  general  postulate  of  relativity. 
We  do  not  ask  “  What  are  the  laws  of  nature  which  are  co¬ 
variant  in  face  of  all  substitutions  for  which  the  determinant 
is  unity  ?  ”  but  our  question  is  “  What  are  the  generally  co¬ 
variant  laws  of  nature  ?  ”  It  is  not  until  we  have  formulated 
these  that  we  simplify  their  expression  by  a  particular  choice 
of  the  system  of  reference. 

The  Formation  of  New  Tensors  by  Means  of  the  Funda¬ 
mental  Tensor. — Inner,  outer,  and  mixed  multiplication  of  a 
tensor  by  the  fundamental  tensor  give  tensors  of  different 
character  and  rank.  For  example, 


=  gw  A«r, 

A  =  AMV. 

The  following  forms  may  be  specially  noted  : — 

=  gt^g^Aafi, 

A/iv  =  gnagv$ A  ^ 


A.  EINSTEIN  131 

(the  “  complements  ”  of  covariant  and  contravariant  tensors 
respectively),  and 

=  g^gaPAap. 

We  call  B^,,  the  reduced  tensor  associated  with  AMI/.  Similarly, 

B*'  =  gt"gaf}Aafi. 

It  may  be  noted  that  gt*  is  nothing  more  than  the  comple¬ 
ment  of  g^y,  since 

g^grPgag  =  g^K  =  g^- 


9.  The  Equation  of  the  Geodetic  Line.  The  Motion  of  a 

Particle 


As  the  linear  element  ds  is  defined  independently  of  the 
system  of  co-ordinates,  the  line  drawn  between  two  points  P 
and  P'  of  the  four-dimensional  continuum  in  such  a  way  that 
$ ds  is  stationary — a  geodetic  line — has  a  meaning  which  also 
is  independent  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates.  Its  equation  is 


8 


(20) 


p 


Carrying  out  the  variation  in  the  usual  way,  we  obtain 
from  this  equation  four  differential  equations  which  define  the 
geodetic  line  ;  this  operation  will  be  inserted  here  for  the  sake 
of  completeness.  Let  A,  be  a  function  of  the  co-ordinates  xVy 
and  let  this  define  a  family  of  surfaces  which  intersect  the 
required  geodetic  line  as  well  as  all  the  lines  in  immediate 
proximity  to  it  which  are  drawn  through  the  points  P  and  P'. 
Any  such  line  may  then  be  supposed  to  be  given  by  expres¬ 
sing  its  co-ordinates  xv  as  functions  of  X.  Let  the  symbol  8 
indicate  the  transition  from  a  point  of  the  required  geodetic 
to  the  point  corresponding  to  the  same  X  on  a  neighbouring 
line.  Then  for  (20)  we  may  substitute 


fx2 


wl 


8wd\  =  0 

dx fx  dxv 


9n* 


d\  d\ 


1 

j 


.  (20a) 


But  since 


182 


and 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 

sG  £  S?  £  ^ 

Kt)  -  s<8*->' 


we  obtain  from  (20a),  after  a  partial  integration, 


Kahx^dX  =  0, 


where 


f\iy 

_  d  f^fiu  1  ^fffxv  dx^  dxv 

k<t  d\l  w  d\  J  2 w  'dXa  d\  d\  ^ 


Since  the  values  of  hxa  are  arbitrary,  it  follows  from  this  that 

=  0  .  .  .  (20c) 


Kc 


are  the  equations  of  the  geodetic  line. 

If  ds  does  not  vanish  along  the  geodetic  line  we  may 
choose  the  “  length  of  the  arc  ”  s,  measured  along  the  geodetic 
line,  for  the  parameter  X.  Then  w  =  1,  and  in  place  of  (20c) 
we  obtain 


d2xfl  +  ^PW  dxt T  dx^  _  1  'dg^  dx^  dxv  _  ^ 


ds 2 


^Xa  ds  ds  2  'dXa  ds  ds 


d2xa  r  jdx  u_  dxv  _ 

+  I/jLV,  crj— - —  =  0 


or,  by  a  mere  change  of  notation, 

^a<T  ds1  '  Lr~’ ds 
where,  following  Christoffel,  we  have  written 


(20d) 


'1  ■  Kfe  +  S;  -  £•) 


(21) 


Finally,  if  we  multiply  (20d)  by  gffT  (outer  multiplication  with 
respect  to  t,  inner  with  respect  to  a),  we  obtain  the  equations 
of  the  geodetic  line  in  the  form 


d2xr  ,  ,  ,dx^  dxv  n 
d?  +  ^  t} IF  *  "  0 

where,  following  Christoffel,  we  have  set 

W,  v}  =  g,a\jiv,  a] 


(22) 


(23) 


A.  EINSTEIN 


133 


§  io.  The  Formation  of  Tensors  by  Differentiation 

With  the  help  of  the  equation  of  the  geodetic  line  we  can 
now  easily  deduce  the  laws  by  which  new  tensors  can  be 
formed  from  old  by  differentiation.  By  this  means  we  are 
able  for  the  first  time  to  formulate  generally  covariant 
differential  equations.  We  reach  this  goal  by  repeated  appli¬ 
cation  of  the  following  simple  law  : — 

If  in  our  continuum  a  curve  is  given,  the  points  of  which 
are  specified  by  the  arcual  distance  s  measured  from  a  fixed 
point  on  the  curve,  and  if,  further,  <£  is  an  invariant  function 
of  space,  then  d(j)Jds  is  also  an  invariant.  The  proof  lies  in 
this,  that  ds  is  an  invariant  as  well  as  d</>. 

As 

d<f)  _  7)(f)  dx^ 
ds  7>x^  ds 

therefore 


dx  jx 
dx^  ds 


is  also  an  invariant,  and  an  invariant  for  all  curves  starting 
from  a  point  of  the  continuum,  that  is,  for  any  choice  of  the 
vector  dx^.  Hence  it  immediately  follows  that 


a  =  H- 


is  a  covariant  four-vector — the  “gradient  ”  of  </>. 
According  to  our  rule,  the  differential  quotient 


(24) 


dyfr 

*=al 


taken  on  a  curve,  is  similarly  an  invariant.  Inserting  the 
value  of  yjr,  we  obtain  in  the  first  place 

_  d2</)  dx^  dxv  ~d(f)  d2Xp 

^  'bXfx'bXy  ds  ds  'bXp  ds 2  ' 

The  existence  of  a  tensor  cannot  be  deduced  from  this  forth¬ 
with.  But  if  we  may  take  the  curve  along  which  we  have 
differentiated  to  be  a  geodetic,  we  obtain  on  substitution  for 
d^Xvjds2  from  (22), 


%  = 


dxu  dxv 


ds  ds  ’ 


Since  we  may  interchange  the  order  of  the  differentiations, 


134 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


and  since  by  (23)  and  (21)  {/av,  t}  is  symmetrical  in  n  and  v, 
it  follows  that  the  expression  in  brackets  is  symmetrical  in  yx 
and  v.  Since  a  geodetic  line  can  be  drawn  in  any  direction 
from  a.point  of  the  continuum,  and  therefore  dx^ds  is  a  four- 
vector  with  the  ratio  of  its  components  arbitrary,  it  follows 
from  the  results  of  §  7  that 


a  ^  f  M 

Ml/  bx^Xv  T 


(25) 


is  a  covariant  tensor  of  the  second  rank.  We  have  therefore 
come  to  this  result :  from  the  covariant  tensor  of  the  first 
rank 

A  =  M 

we  can,  by  differentiation,  form  a  covariant  tensor  of  the 
second  rank 

A 

A,„  =  -  {fiv,  t}At  .  .  .  (26) 


We  call  the  tensor  AM„  the  “  extension  ”  (covariant  derivative) 
of  the  tensor  AM.  In  the  first  place  we  can  readily  show  that 
the  operation  leads  to  a  tensor,  even  if  the  vector  A^  cannot 
be  represented  as  a  gradient.  To  see  this,  we  first  observe 
that 


is  a  covariant  vector,  if  yjr  and  <£  are  scalars, 
four  such  terms 


S, .  *»££!  +  .  + 


+  ^  asT’ 


The  sum  of 


is  also  a  covariant  vector,  if  a/t (1> ,  .  .  .  a/t(4),  ^(4)  are  scalars. 

But  it  is  clear  that  any  covariant  vector  can  be  represented 
in  the  form  SM.  For,  if  A^  is  a  vector  whose  components  are 
any  given  functions  of  the  xV}  we  have  only  to  put  (in  terms 
of  the  selected  system  of  co-ordinates) 


a/t(1)  =  A1}  </>(1)  =  aq, 

a/t(2)  =  A2,  <f >(‘2>  =  x2, 

^(3)  =  A3,  <£(3)  =  X3, 

a/t(4>  =  A4,  =  X4, 


in  order  to  ensure  that  -SM  shall  be  equal  to  AM. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


135 


Therefore,  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  is  a  tensor  if 
any  covariant  vector  is  inserted  on  the  right-hand  side  for  AM, 
we  only  need  show  that  this  is  so  for  the  vector  SM.  But  for 
this  latter  purpose  it  is  sufficient,  as  a  glance  at  the  right- 
hand  side  of  (26)  teaches  us,  to  furnish  the  proof  for  the  case 


bx» 


Now  the  right-hand  side  of  (25)  multiplied  by 

,  a24>  f  , ,  T>4> 

+  ^  T}^r 


is  a  tensor.  Similarly 


d  c )(f> 
bx^  ~bxv 


being  the  outer  product  of  two  vectors,  is  a  tensor.  By  ad¬ 
dition,  there  follows  the  tensor  character  of 


~bxv 


As  a  glance  at  (26)  will  show,  this  completes 
stration  for  the  vector 


‘\J/' 


b(f) 

bx^ 


the  demon- 


and  consequently,  from  what  has  already  been  proved,  for  any 
vector  Am. 

By  means  of  the  extension  of  the  vector,  we  may  easily 
define  the  “extension”  of  a  covariant  tensor  of  any  rank. 
This  operation  is  a  generalization  of  the  extension  of  a  vector. 
We  restrict  ourselves  to  the  case  of  a  tensor  of  the  second 
rank,  since  this  suffices  to  give  a  clear  idea  of  the  law  of 
formation. 

As  has  already  been  observed,  any  covariant  tensor  of  the 
second  rank  can  be  represented  *  as  the  sum  of  tensors  of  the 


*  By  outer  multiplication  of  the  vector  with  arbitrary  components  An,  A12, 
Ajj,  A14  by  the  vector  with  components  1,  0,  0,  0,  we  produce  a  tensor  with 
components 

A11  AU  A13  A14 

0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  0. 

By  the  addition  of  four  tensors  of  this  type,  we  obtain  the  tensor  A with  any 
ssigned  components. 


136 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


type  AmB„.  It  will  therefore  be  sufficient  to  deduce  the  ex¬ 
pression  for  the  extension  of  a  tensor  of  this  special  type. 
By  (26)  the  expressions 


{o-yx,  T}Ar, 


dB„ 

'dXa 


{(TV,  T}  Bt, 


are  tensors.  On  outer  multiplication  of  the  first  by  Bv,  and 
of  the  second  by  AM,  we  obtain  in  each  case  a  tensor  of  the 
third  rank.  By  adding  these,  we  have  the  tensor  of  the  third 
rank 


A 


tXa 


{(T/JL,  t}At„  -  {(TV,  T}AMr  • 


(27) 


where  we  have  put  A =  AMB*,.  As  the  right-hand  side 
of  (27)  is  linear  and  homogeneous  in  the  AM„  and  their  first 
derivatives,  this  law  of  formation  leads  to  a  tensor,  not  only 
in  the  case  of  a  tensor  of  the  type  AMBV,  but  also  in  the  case 
of  a  sum  of  such  tensors,  i.e.  in  the  case  of  any  covariant 
tensor  of  the  second  rank.  We  call  A^v<r  the  extension  of  the 
tensor  AM„. 

It  is  clear  that  (26)  and  (24)  concern  only  special  cases 
of  extension  (the  extension  of  the  tensors  of  rank  one  and 
zero  respectively). 

In  general,  all  special  laws  of  formation  of  tensors  are  in¬ 
cluded  in  (27)  in  combination  with  the  multiplication  of 
tensors. 


§  ii.  Some  Cases  of  Special  Importance 

The  Fundamental  Tensor. — We  will  first  prove’  some 
lemmas  which  will  be  useful  hereafter.  By  the  rule  for  the 
differentiation  of  determinants 

dg  =  g^gdg^y  =  -  g»vgdg»v  .  .  (28) 

The  last  member  is  obtained  from  the  last  but  one,  if  we  bear 
in  mind  that  g^vgtx>v  =  ,  so  that  gtxvgli-v  =  4,  and  conse- 

quently 


g*vdg»v  +  g^dg^  =  0. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


137 


From  (28),  it  follows  that 


1  V  -  9  =  ,aiog(-  g)  ,  tyw 
s/  -  g  <> x*  <> X* 


(29) 


Further,  from  =  Bv  it  follows  on  differentiation  that 


g^dg 

g  m 


V(T 

vcr 


gv<Tdg  fia 

*g^ 


TiXx 


—  nv(T 


gl 


~dx> 


(30) 


From  these,  by  mixed  multiplication  by  gaT  and  gvK  re¬ 
spectively,  and  a  change  of  notation  for  the  indices,  we  have 


and 


dg»v  = 

W  = 

(^Xa- 


g ^  dgafi 

—  Q,xaQvP  — — 
* 


dg  fxv 
tg»v 
~dxa 


-  g^gvP  dg+\ 

~dq^  y 

- 


(31) 


(32) 


The  relation  (31)  admits  of  a  transformation,  of  which  we 
also  have  frequently  to  make  use.  From  (21) 


^  =  [a<7,  /3]  +  [pa,  a]  .  .  .  (33) 

Inserting  this  in  the  second  formula  of  (31),  we  obtain,  in 
view  of  (23) 

7)q,jlv 

___  =  -  g^{r(T}  v]  -  gvr{r(x}  /a}  •  •  (34) 


Substituting  the  right-hand  side  of  (34)  in  (29),  we  have 


=  w-  /*>  •  •  (‘29a> 

J  -  g  °X<r 

The  “  Divergence  ”  of  a  Contravariant  Vector. — If  we 
take  the  inner  product  of  (26)  by  the  contravariant  funda¬ 
mental  tensor  g*v,  the  right-hand  side,  after  a  transformation 
of  the  first  term,  assumes  the  form 


_d_ 

<)Xy 


(g^K)  - 


'dg^ 

~dXy 


138 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


In  accordance  with  (31)  and  (29),  the  last  term  of  this  ex¬ 
pression  may  be  written 


U  Uy  i/  U  %Aj  n 


1  *s/  -  9 


J  -  g 


g^k,. 


As  the  symbols  of  the  indices  of  summation  are  immaterial, 
the  first  two  terms  of  this  expression  cancel  the  second  of  the 
one  above.  If  we  then  write  g*v =  Av,  so  that  Av  like  AM 
is  an  arbitrary  vector,  we  finally  obtain 

■  ■  <35> 


This  scalar  is  the  divergence  of  the  contravariant  vector  A*. 

The  “  Curl  ”  of  a  Covariant  Vector. — The  second  term  in 
(26)  is  symmetrical  in  the  indices  /i  and  v.  Therefore 
A^v  -  Av.  is  a  particularly  simply  constructed  antisym- 
metrical  tensor.  We  obtain 


dx„ 


SA, 


Antisymmetrical  Extension  of  a  Six-vector. — Applying 
(27)  to  an  antisymmetrical  tensor  of  the  second  rank  AM„, 
forming  in  addition  the  two  equations  which  arise  through 
cyclic  permutations  of  the  indices,  and  adding  these  three 
equations,  we  obtain  the  tensor  of  the  third  rank 


B 


fxva 


A  fxva-  + 


Aj/0-,*  "I"  Ag-fxv 


<>A 


HV 


~dx< 


+ 


t)A 

7>X. 


V(T 


+ 


<>A 


O’M 


(37) 


which  it  is  easy  to  prove  is  antisymmetrical. 

The  Divergence  of  a  Six-vector. — Taking  the  mixed  pro¬ 
duct  of  (27)  by  g^g^,  we  also  obtain  a  tensor.  The  first 
term  on  the  right-hand  side  of  (27)  may  be  written  in  the 
form 

-  g-JL- -  g^K*. 


If  we  write  Aaf  for  g^agv& A^vff  and  Aa^  for  g^g^A^,  and  in 
the  transformed  first  term  replace 


*9* 

dXv 


and 


?)g*a 

HXa 


A.  EINSTEIN 


139 


by  their  values  as  given  by  (34),  there  results  from  the  right- 
hand  side  of  (27)  an  expression  consisting  of  seven  terms,  of 
which  four  cancel,  and  there  remains 

2)\aP 

+  W,  a}A*  +  {07,£}A-\  .  (38) 


a:* 


This  is  the  expression  for  the  extension  of  a  contravariant 
tensor  of  the  second  rank,  and  corresponding  expressions  for 
the  extension  of  contravariant  tensors  of  higher  and  lower 
rank  may  also  be  formed. 

We  note  that  in  an  analogous  way  we  may  also  form  the 
extension  of  a  mixed  tensor  : — 


Aa 

“7 AO* 


~dx 


-  -  {(T/JL,  t}A“  +  {<7T,  Cl}A*  . 


(39) 


On  contracting  (38)  with  respect  to  the  indices  (3  and  a 
(inner  multiplication  by  S^),  we  obtain  the  vector 

7>A.afi 


A*  = 


7>x 


ft 


+  !/37)  /8}A*»  +  {/9y,  a! A1"3. 


On  account  of  the  symmetry  of  {$7,  a}  with  respect  to  the  in¬ 
dices  /3  and  7,  the  third  term  on  the  right-hand  side  vanishes, 
if  Aa/3  is,  as  we  will  assume,  an  antisymmetrical  tensor.  The 
second  term  allows  itself  to  be  transformed  in  accordance 
with  (29a).  Thus  we  obtain 


Aa  = 


1  -  gk*) 


7)x 


ft 


(40) 


9 

This  is  the  expression  for  the  divergence  of  a  contravariant 
six-vector. 

The  Divergence  of  a  Mixed  Tensor  of  the  Second  Bank. — 
Contracting  (39)  with  respect  to  the  indices  a  and  a,  and 

taking  (29a)  into  consideration,  we  obtain 


\f  ~  gK  =  ^  T\(J  _ 

oX„ 


(41) 


If  we  introduce  the  contravariant  tensor  Aptr  =  gPT AJ  in  the 
last  term,  it  assumes  the  form 


-  [°>.  pW  -  gk’"’. 


140  THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


If,  further,  the  tensor  A pff  is  symmetrical,  this  reduces  to 

- 

Had  we  introduced,  instead  of  Ap<r,  the  covariant  tensor 
A p(r  =  gpaQa jsA^,  which  is  also  symmetrical,  the  last  term,  by 
virtue  of  (31),  would  assume  the  form 

In  the  case  of  symmetry  in  question,  (41)  may  therefore  be 
replaced  by  the  two  forms 

J~gK  =  a<V  ~  .  (41a) 

cX(x  OXfx 

-  *=£=23  +  .  <4ib) 

which  we  have  to  employ  later  on. 


§  12.  The  Riemann-Christoffel  Tensor 

We  now  seek  the  tensor  which  can  be  obtained  from  the 
fundamental  tensor  alone ,  by  differentiation.  At  first  sight 
the  solution  seems  obvious.  We  place  the  fundamental 
tensor  of  the  g^v  in  (27)  instead  of  any  given  tensor  AM„,  and 
thus  have  a  new  tensor,  namely,  the  extension  of  the  funda¬ 
mental  tensor.  But  we  easily  convince  ourselves  that  this 
extension  vanishes  identically.  We  reach  our  goal,  however, 
in  the  following  way.  In  (27)  place 

K*  =  p)K, 


i.e.  the  extension  of  the  four- vector  AM.  Then  (with  a  some¬ 
what  different  naming  of  the  indices)  we  get  the  tensor  of  the 
third  rank 


'dXa'bXr 


{°"r.  P) 


aAg 

<> Xp 


[ 


—{per,  p}  +  {ht,  a}{a<rt  p}  +  {<tt, 


+ 


A.  EINSTEIN 


141 


This  expression  suggests  forming  the  tensor  A  /xar  AMr<r. 
For,  if  we  do  so,  the  following  terms  of  the  expression  for 
A  per  cancel  those  of  AMT(r,  the  first,  the  fourth,  and  the 
member  corresponding  to  the  last  term  in  square  brackets  ; 
because  all  these  are  symmetrical  in  a  and  t.  The  same 
holds  good  for  the  sum  of  the  second  and  third  terms.  Thus 
we  obtain 


A|x<r  t  A  ^T(T  —  B^g-j-Ao  .  •  •  (42) 


where 

B £<„•  =  -  p }  +  ^-W»  p}  ~  W,  a){ar,  p } 

+  {p>T ,  a}{acr,  p }  (43) 

The  essential  feature  of  the  result  is  that  on  the  right  side  of 
(42)  the  A p  occur  alone,  without  their  derivatives.  From  the 
tensor  character  of  AM<rT  -  A MT(r  in  conjunction  with  the  fact 
that  A p  is  an  arbitrary  vector,  it  follows,  by  reason  of  §  7, 

that  W  ffT  is  a  tensor  (the  Riemann-Christoffel  tensor). 

The  mathematical  importance  of  this  tensor  is  as  follows  : 
If  the  continuum  is  of  such  a  nature  that  there  is  a  co-ordinate 
system  with  reference  to  which  the  g M„  are  constants,  then 

all  the  W  ar  vanish.  If  we  choose  any  new  system  of  co¬ 
ordinates  in  place  of  the  original  ones,  the  g^v  referred 
thereto  will  not  be  constants,  but  in  consequence  of  its  tensor 

nature,  the  transformed  components  of  B^T  will  still  vanish 

in  the  new  system.  Thus  the  vanishing  of  the  Riemann 
tensor  is  a  necessary  condition  that,  by  an  appropriate  choice 
of  the  system  of  reference,  the  g^v  may  be  constants.  In  our 
problem  this  corresponds  to  the  case  in  which,*  with  a 
suitable  choice  of  the  system  of  reference,  the  special 
theory  of  relativity  holds  good  for  a  finite  region  of  the 
continuum. 

Contracting  (43)  with  respect  to  the  indices  r  and  p  we 
obtain  the  covariant  tensor  of  second  rank 

*  The  mathematicians  have  proved  that  this  is  also  a  sufficient  condition. 


142 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


where 


G>v  =  B£„p  =  R  ^  +  SM„ 


Rmv  =  -  —  {/Jbv,  a}  +  {fia,  /3]  {v/3,  a} 


~^xa 

d2  lo  gJ~9 

~dX^Xv 


-  {pv>  cl} 


*logJ -g 

'dXa 


(44) 


Note  on  the  Choice  of  Co-ordinates. — It  has  already  been 
observed  in  §  8,  in  connexion  with  equation  (18a),  that  the 
choice  of  co-ordinates  may  with  advantage  be  made  so  that 
-  g  =  1.  A  glance  at  the  equations  obtained  in  the  last 
two  sections  shows  that  by  such  a  choice  the  laws  of  forma¬ 
tion  of  tensors  undergo  an  important  simplification.  This 
applies  particularly  to  GM„,  the  tensor  just  developed,  which 
plays  a  fundamental  part  in  the  theory  to  be  set  forth.  For 
this  specialization  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates  brings  about 
the  vanishing  of  SM„,  so  that  the  tensor  GMV  reduces  to  RM„. 

On  this  account  I  shall  hereafter  give  all  relations  in  the 
simplified  form  which  this  specialization  of  the  choice  of  co¬ 
ordinates  brings  with  it.  It  will  then  be  an  easy  matter  to 
revert  to  the  generally  covariant  equations,  if  this  seems 
desirable  in  a  special  case. 


C.  Theory  of  the  Gravitational  Field 

§  13.  Equations  of  Motion  of  a  Material  Point  in  the 
Gravitational  Field.  Expression  for  the  Field -com¬ 
ponents  of  Gravitation 

A  freely  movable  body  not  subjected  to  external  forces 
moves,  according  to  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  in  a 
straight  line  and  uniformly.  This  is  also  the  case,  according 
to  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  for  a  part  of  four-di¬ 
mensional  space  in  which  the  system  of  co-ordinates  K0,  may 
be,  and  is,  so  chosen  that  they  have  the  special  constant 
values  given  in  (4). 

If  we  consider  precisely  this  movement  from  any  chosen 
system  of  co-ordinates  Kx,  the  body,  observed  from  K1}  moves, 
according  to  the  considerations  in  §  2,  in  a  gravitational  field. 
The  law  of  motion  with  respect  to  Kx  results  without  diffi- 


A.  EINSTEIN 


143 


culty  from  the  following  consideration.  With  respect  to  K0 
the  law  of  motion  corresponds  to  a  four-dimensional  straight 
line,  i.e.  to  a  geodetic  line.  Now  since  the  geodetic  line 
is  defined  independently  of  the  system  of  reference,  its 
equations  will  also  be  the  equation  of  motion  of  the  material 
point  with  respect  to  Kx.  If  we  set 


r'„  =  -  {/*">  t'i  ...  (45) 

the  equation  of  the  motion  of  the  point  with  respect  to  Kv 
becomes 


d2xr 
ds 2 


=  r 


T  dx,j.  dxv 
ds  ds 


(46) 


We  now  make  the  assumption,  which  readily  suggests  itself, 
that  this  covariant  system  of  equations  also  defines  the  motion 
of  the  point  in  the  gravitational  field  in  the  case  when  there 
is  no  system  of  reference  K0,  with  respect  to  which  the 
special  theory  of  relativity  holds  good  in  a  finite  region. 
We  have  all  the  more  justification  for  this  assumption  as  (46) 
contains  only  first  derivatives  of  the  g^v,  between  which  even 
in  the  special  case  of  the  existence  of  K0,  no  relations  sub¬ 
sist.* 

If  the  r;„  vanish,  then  the  point  moves  uniformly  in  a 

straight  line.  These  quantities  therefore  condition  the  devi¬ 
ation  of  the  motion  from  uniformity.  They  are  the  com¬ 
ponents  of  the  gravitational  field. 


§  14.  The  Field  Equations  of  Gravitation  in  the  Absence 

of  Matter 

We  make  a  distinction  hereafter  between  “  gravitational 
field  ”  and  “  matter  ”  in  this  way,  that  we  denote  everything 
but  the  gravitational  field  as  “  matter.”  Our  use  of  the  word 
therefore  includes  not  only  matter  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but 
the  electromagnetic  field  as  well. 

Our  next  task  is  to  find  the  field  equations  of  gravitation 
in  the  absence  of  matter.  Here  we  again  apply  the  method 

*  It  is  only  between  the  second  (and  first)  derivatives  that,  by  §  12,  the 
relations  Bp  =*  0  subsist. 

H<TT 


144 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


employed  in  the  preceding  paragraph  in  formulating  the 
equations  of  motion  of  the  material  point.  A  special  case  in 
which  the  required  equations  must  in  any  case  be  satisfied  is 
that  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  in  which  the  g MV  have 
certain  constant  values.  Let  this  be  the  case  in  a  certain 
finite  space  in  relation  to  a  definite  system  of  co-ordinates  K0. 
Relatively  to  this  system  all  the  components  of  the  Riemann 

tensor  B^£t,  defined  in  (43),  vanish.  For  the  space  under 

consideration  they  then  vanish,  also  in  any  other  system  of 
co-ordinates. 

Thus  the  required  equations  of  the  matter-free  gravita¬ 
tional  field  must  in  any  case  be  satisfied  if  all  B^£T  vanish. 

But  this  condition  goes  too  far.  For  it  is  clear  that,  e.g.,  the 
gravitational  field  generated  by  a  material  point  in  its  environ¬ 
ment  certainly  cannot  be  “  transformed  away  ”  by  any  choice 
of  the  system  of  co-ordinates,  i.e.  it  cannot  be  transformed  to 
the  case  of  constant  g M„. 

This  prompts  us  to  require  for  the  matter-free  gravitational 
field  that  the  symmetrical  tensor  GM„,  derived  from  the  tensor 

BP  shall  vanish.  Thus  we  obtain  ten  equations  for  the  ten 
quantities  gilVi  which  are  satisfied  in  the  special  case  of  the 
vanishing  of  all  B^T.  With  the  choice  which  we  have  made 

of  a  system  of  co-ordinates,  and  taking  (44)  into  considera¬ 
tion,  the  equations  for  the  matter-free  field  are 

a  T",a 

if.  +  'V*  -  0 
J  -  g  =  i 

It  must  be  pointed  out  that  there  is  only  a  minimum  of 
arbitrariness  in  the  choice  of  these  equations.  For  besides 
there  is  no  tensor  of  second  rank  which  is  formed  from 
the  g and  its  derivatives,  contains  no  derivations  higher  than 
second,  and  is  linear  in  these  derivatives.* 

These  equations,  which  proceed,  by  the  method  of  pure 

*  Properly  speaking,  this  can  be  affirmed  only  of  the  tensor 

where  A  is  a  constant.  If,  however,  we  set  this  tensor  *=  0,  we  come  back  again 
to  the  equations  G  =  0. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


145 


mathematics,  from  the  requirement  of  the  general  theory  of 
relativity,  give  us,  in  combination  with  the  equations  of 
motion  (46),  to  a  first  approximation  Newton’s  law  of  at¬ 
traction,  and  to  a  second  approximation  the  explanation  of 
the  motion  of  the  perihelion  of  the  planet  Mercury  discovered 
by  Leverrier  (as  it  remains  after  corrections  for  perturbation 
have  been  made).  These  facts  must,  in  my  opinion,  be 
taken  as  a  convincing  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the  theory. 


§  15.  The  Hamiltonian  Function  for  the  Gravitational 
Field.  Laws  of  Momentum  and  Energy 

To  show  that  the  field  equations  correspond  to  the  laws  of 
momentum  and  energy,  it  is  most  convenient  to  write  them 
in  the  following  Hamiltonian  form  : — 

g  j  Hdr  =  0 

H  -JT  K?  K 
-J  ~  9  =  1 


where,  on  the  boundary  of  the  finite  four-dimensional  region 
of  integration  which  we  have  in  view,  the  variations  vanish. 

We  first  have  to  show  that  the  form  (47a)  is  equivalent 
to  the  equations  (47).  For  this  purpose  we  regard  H  as  a 
function  of  the  g ^  and  the  g*1*  (=  N/^/dav). 

Then  in  the  first  place 

m  -  i%il8{r  +  2g^r;,srt 
=  -  itX  sg »  +  2r;%  g(srr?„). 

But 


The  terms  arising  from  the  last  two  terms  in  round  brackets 
are  of  different  sign,  and  result  from  each  other  (since  the  de¬ 
nomination  of  the  summation  indices  is  immaterial)  through 
interchange  of  the  indices  /jl  and  f$.  They  cancel  each  other 
in  the  expression  for  8H,  because  they  are  multiplied  by  the 


146 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


quantity  which  is  symmetrical  with  respect  to  the  in¬ 
dices  yu,  and  ft.  Thus  there  remains  only  the  first  term  in 
round  brackets  to  be  considered,  so  that,  taking  (31)  into  ac¬ 
count,  we  obtain 


Thus 


8H  =  - 

^  H  _  Tla  T~fi 

b^M*'  ~  va 


m 


=  r 

ixv  M^ 


.  (48) 


Carrying  out  the  variation  in  (47a),  we  get  in  the  first  place 


5 1 

^gy 

aH 


(47b) 


which,  on  account  of  (48),  agrees  with  (47),  as  was  to  be 
proved. 

If  we  multiply  (47b)  by  g^,  then  because 


and,  consequently, 

2>  /2>H 


9 


fXV 


we  obtain  the  equation 

J/ 


 *97 

'bXa 

'dXa 

d 

W 

v  2>H 

/  dfZo- 

<)H  *9a 


ixv 


'dg^  ’ 


0 


or 


* 


K 

sf.-° 

-  =  or—  _  g“H 

C T  <T  -s.  fAV  V  (T 


w. 


•  (49) 


where,  on  account  of  (48),  the  second  equation  of  (47),  and 
(34) 

<  =  .  .  (50) 

*  The  reason  for  the  introduction  of  the  factor  -  2 k  will  be  apparent  later. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


147 


It  is  to  be  noticed  that  is  not  a  tensor ;  on  the  other 
hand  (49)  applies  to  all  systems  of  co-ordinates  for  which 
<7=1.  This  equation  expresses  the  law  of  conservation 
of  momentum  and  of  energy  for  the  gravitational  field. 
Actually  the  integration  of  this  equation  over  a  three- 
dimensional  volume  Y  yields  the  four  equations 


t^dV 


j*(Z^  +  mt\  +  nt\)d S  . 


(49a) 


where  l ,  m,  n  denote  the  direction-cosines  of  direction  of  the 
inward  drawn  normal  at  the  element  dS  of  the  bounding  sur¬ 
face  (in  the  sense  of  Euclidean  geometry).  We  recognize  in 
this  the  expression  of  the  laws  of  conservation  in  their  usual 

form.  The  quantities  t*  we  call  the  “  energy  components  ” 
of  the  gravitational  field. 

I  will  now  give  equations  (47)  in  a  third  form,  which  is 
particularly  useful  for  a  vivid  grasp  of  our  subject.  By 
multiplication  of  the  field  equations  (47)  by  gV(T  these  are  ob¬ 
tained  in  the  “  mixed  ”  form.  Note  that 


9 


V<T 


~dxn 


_JL(V<T  ^  -  tyy°rtt 

ixa\g  <")  ixa  1 


which  quantity,  by  reason  of  (34),  is  equal  to 

^(<rC)  -  g*r* C  -  grnW, 

or  (with  different  symbols  for  the  summation  indices) 

^(-r'r;,)  - 


The  third  term  of  this  expression  cancels  with  the  one  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  second  term  of  the  field  equations  (47) ;  using 
relation  (50),  the  second  term  may  be  written 

where  t  =  t*.  Thus  instead  of  equations  (47)  we  obtain 

=  -  df.  -  i&’t)\ 

_  (51) 

V  -  9  =  1 


~dx, 


148 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


§  1 6.  The  General  Form  of  the  Field  Equations  of 

Gravitation 

The  field  equations  for  matter-free  space  formulated  in 
§  15  are  to  be  compared  with  the  field  equation 

V2</>  =  0 

of  Newton’s  theory.  We  require  the  equation  corresponding 
to  Poisson’s  equation 

V2</>  =  4lttkp, 

where  p  denotes  the  density  of  matter. 

The  special  theory  of  relativity  has  led  to  the  conclusion 
that  inert  mass  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  energy,  which 
finds  its  complete  mathematical  expression  in  a  symmetrical 
tensor  of  second  rank,  the  energy-tensor.  Thus  in  the 
general  theory  of  relativity  we  must  introduce  a  correspond¬ 
ing  energy-tensor  of  matter  T“,  which,  like  the  energy-com¬ 
ponents  ta  [equations  (49)  and  (50)]  of  the  gravitational  field, 

will  have  mixed  character,  but  will  pertain  to  a  symmetrical 
covariant  tensor.* 

The  system  of  equation  (51)  shows  how  this  energy-tensor 
(corresponding  to  the  density  p  in  Poisson’s  equation)  is  to 
be  introduced  into  the  field  equations  of  gravitation.  For  if 
we  consider  a  complete  system  (e.g.  the  solar  system),  the 
total  mass  of  the  system,  and  therefore  its  total  gravitating 
action  as  well,  will  depend  on  the  total  energy  of  the  system, 
and  therefore  on  the  ponderable  energy  together  with  the 
gravitational  energy.  This  will  allow  itself  to  be  expressed 
by  introducing  into  (51),  in  place  of  the  energy-components 

of  the  gravitational  field  alone,  the  sums  t"  +  T*of  the  energy- 

components  of  matter  and  of  gravitational  field.  Thus  instead 
of  (51)  we  obtain  the  tensor  equation 

=  -  4(<;  +  t;>  -  K(<  +  t>],  i  _ 

J  -  9  =  1  ) 


where  we  have  set  T  =  T£  (Laue’s  scalar).  These  are  the 

*  gaTT“  =  To-t  and  g<r& T®  =  Ta^are  to  be  symmetrical  tensors. 


A.  EINSTEIN  149 

required  general  field  equations  of  gravitation  in  mixed  form. 
Working  back  from  these,  we  have  in  place  of  (47) 

+  KXL  =  -  -  i9v,T), 

-J  -  g  =  i 

It  must  be  admitted  that  this  introduction  of  the  energy- 
tensor  of  matter  is  not  justified  by  the  relativity  postulate 
alone.  For  this  reason  we  have  here  deduced  it  from  the 
requirement  that  the  energy  of  the  gravitational  field  shall 
act  gravitatively  in  the  same  way  as  any  other  kind  of  energy. 
But  the  strongest  reason  for  the  choice  of  these  equations 
lies  in  their  consequence,  that  the  equations  of  conservation 
of  momentum  and  energy,  corresponding  exactly  to  equations 
(49)  and  (49a),  hold  good  for  the  components  of  the  total 
energy.  This  will  be  shown  in  §  17. 


§  17.  The  Laws  of  Conservation  in  the  General  Case 

Equation  (52)  may  readily  be  transformed  so  that  the 
second  term  on  the  right-hand  side  vanishes.  Contract  (52) 
with  respect  to  the  indices  ^  and  a,  and  after  multiplying  the 

resulting  equation  by  subtract  it  from  equation"  (52). 
This  gives 

£<9*1%  ~  i£g»I»)  =  -  +  Tlx  .  (52a) 

On  this  equation  we  perform  the  operation  'b/'bxc.  We  have 


a2 


})2 


'dxJiXa 


<r[3sja\ 


g  pg 


d g mA  +  3A 

~dxp  'dXp 


()Xx  ) 


The  first  and  third  terms  of  the  round  brackets  yield  con¬ 
tributions  which  cancel  one  another,  as  may  be  seen  by 
interchanging,  in  the  contribution  of  the  third  term,  the 
summation  indices  a  and  a  on  the  one  hand,  and  (3  and  X 
on  the  other.  The  second  term  may  be  re-modelled  by  (31), 
so  that  we  have 

'dxa7)X(r\9  pPJ  ^  'dxaL'dXp'dxfJi  ’  ' 

The  second  term  on  the  left-hand  side  of  (52a)  yields  in  the 


150 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


first  place 

or 

_  W)1 

40iTa^ML  \  OZ/j  0£A  0£s/J 

With  the  choice  of  co-ordinates  which  we  have  made,  the 
term  deriving  from  the  last  term  in  round  brackets  disappears 
by  reason  of  (29).  The  other  two  may  be  combined,  and 
together,  by  (31),  they  give 

-  x  ay  , 

'dXadXpC )XfJL 


so  that  in  consideration  of  (54),  we  have  the  identity 

.  ,  (55) 

From  (55)  and  (52a),  it  follows  that 


w;  +  t;) 


=  0. 


(56) 


Thus  it  results  from  our  field  equations  of  gravitation 
that  the  laws  of  conservation  of  momentum  and  energy  are 
satisfied.  This  may  be  seen  most  easily  from  the  consider¬ 
ation  which  leads  to  equation  (49a) ;  except  that  here,  instead 

of  the  energy  components  f  of  the  gravitational  field,  we  have 

to  introduce  the  totality  of  the  energy  components  of  matter 
and  gravitational  field. 


§  1 8.  The  Laws  of  Momentum  and  Energy  for  Matter,  as 
a  Consequence  of  the  Field  Equations 

Multiplying  (53)  by  'dgtuvl'bx<T,  we  obtain,  by  the  method 
adopted  in  §  15,  in  view  of  the  vanishing  of 

y^-bx.' 

*£  +  TV  -  o, 

TiXu  IX" 


the  equation 


A.  EINSTEIN 


151 


or,  in  view  of  (56), 


(57) 


Comparison  with  (41b)  shows  that  with  the  choice  of 
system  of  co-ordinates  which  we  have  made,  this  equation 
predicates  nothing  more  or  less  than  the  vanishing  of  di¬ 
vergence  of  the  material  energy-tensor.  Physically,  the 
occurrence  of  the  second  term  on  the  left-hand  side  shows 
that  laws  of  conservation  of  momentum  and  energy  do  not 
apply  in  the  strict  sense  for  matter  alone,  or  else  that  they 
apply  only  when  the  g ^  are  constant,  i.e.  when  the  field  in¬ 
tensities  of  gravitation  vanish.  This  second  term  is  an  ex¬ 
pression  for  momentum,  and  for  energy,  as  transferred  per 
unit  of’  volume  and  time  from  the  gravitational  field  to  matter. 
This  is  brought  out  still  more  clearly  by  re-writing  (57)  in  the 
sense  of  (41)  as 


'dXa 


-  rl t; 


(57a) 


The  right  side  expresses  the  energetic  effect  of  the  gravita¬ 
tional  field  on  matter. 

Thus  the  field  equations  of  gravitation  contain  four  con¬ 
ditions  which  govern  the  course  of  material  phenomena. 
They  give  the  equations  of  material  phenomena  completely, 
if  the  latter  is  capable  of  being  characterized  by  four  differ¬ 
ential  equations  independent  of  one  another.* 


D.  Material  Phenomena 

The  mathematical  aids  developed  in  part  B  enable  us 
forthwith  to  generalize  the  physical  laws  of  matter  (hydro¬ 
dynamics,  Maxwell’s  electrodynamics),  as  they  are  formulated 
in  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  so  that  they  will  fit  in  with 
the  general  theory  of  relativity.  When  this  is  done,  the 
general  principle  of  relativity  does  not  indeed  afford  us  a 
further  limitation  of  possibilities  ;  but  it  makes  us  acquainted 
with  the  influence  of  the  gravitational  field  on  all  processes, 

*  On  this  question  cf.  H.  Hilbert,  Nachr.  d.  K.  Gesellsch.  d.  Wiss.  zu 
Gottingen,  Math.-phys.  Klasse,  1915,  p.  3. 


152  THE  GENERAL  THEORY 

without  our  having  to  introduce  any  new  hypothesis  what¬ 
ever. 

Hence  it  comes  about  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  introduce 
definite  assumptions  as  to  the  physical  nature  of  matter  (in 
the  narrower  sense).  In  particular  it  may  remain  an  open 
question  whether  the  theory  of  the  electromagnetic  field  in 
conjunction  with  that  of  the  gravitational  field  furnishes  a 
sufficient  basis  for  the  theory  of  matter  or  not.  The  general 
postulate  of  relativity  is  unable  on  principle  to  tell  us  anything 
about  this.  It  must  remain  to  be  seen,  during  the  working 
out  of  the  theory,  whether  electromagnetics  and  the  doctrine 
of  gravitation  are  able  in  collaboration  to  perform  what  the 
former  by  itself  is  unable  to  do. 


§  19.  Euler’s  Equations  for  a  Frictionless  Adiabatic  Fluid 

Let  p  and  p  be  two  scalars,  the  former  of  which  we  call 
the  “  pressure,”  the  latter  the  “  density  ”  of  a  fluid;  and  let 
an  equation  subsist  between  them.  Let  the  contravariant 
symmetrical  tensor 

T*  -  -  rt>  +  3?  •  ■  <58> 


be  the  contravariant  energy-tensor  of  the  fluid, 
the  covariant  tensor 

m  dXd  dx  a 

—  “  9^vP  +  -foP’ 

as  well  as  the  mixed  tensor  * 

dx  g  dXa. 

T:=  -  Kp  +  Sf-fi  wp 


To  it  belongs 
.  (58a) 

.  (58b) 


Inserting  the  right-hand  side  of  (58b)  in  (57a),  we  obtain  the 
Eulerian  hydrodynamical  equations  of  the  general  theory  of 
relativity.  They  give,  in  theory,  a  complete  solution  of  the 
problem  of  motion,  since  the  four  equations  (57a),  together 


*  For  an  observer  using  a  system  of  reference  in  the  sense  of  the  special 
theory  of  relativity  for  an  infinitely  small  region,  and  moving  with  it,  the 

density  of  energy  equals  p  -  p.  This  gives  the  definition  of  p.  Thus  p  is 
not  constant  for  an  incompressible  fluid. 


A.  EINSTEIN  153 

with  the  given  equation  between  p  and  p,  and  the  equation 

dx  d  dXj 3  ^ 

g^~ds  ~ds  =  l’ 

are  sufficient,  ga$  being  given,  to  define  the  six  unknowns 

dxt  dx  2  dxs  dx 4 
P’  p’~ds’  ~di’  ~ds'  ~ds ' 

If  the  g^v  are  also  unknown,  the  equations  (53)  are 
brought  in.  These  are  eleven  equations  for  defining  the  ten 
functions  g^v,  so  that  these  functions  appear  over-defined. 
We  must  remember,  however,  that  the  equations  (57a)  are 
already  contained  in  the  equations  (53),  so  that  the  latter 
represent  only  seven  independent  equations.  There  is  good 
reason  for  this  lack  of  definition,  in  that  the  wide  freedom  of 
the  choice  of  co-ordinates  causes  the  problem  to  remain 
mathematically  undefined  to  such  a  degree  that  three  of  the 
functions  of  space  may  be  chosen  at  will* 


§  20.  Maxwell’s  Electromagnetic  Field  Equations  for  Free 

Space 

Let  (f>v  be  the  components  of  a  covariant  vector — the 
electromagnetic  potential  vector.  From  them  we  form,  in 
accordance  with  (36),  the  components  F p(T  of  the  covariant 
six-vector  of  the  electromagnetic  field,  in  accordance  with 
the  system  of  equations 


'bXv 


d</><r 

~dxp 


(59) 


It  follows  from  (59)  that  the  system  of  equations 


^Fpq.  +  dFgr  +  dFrp  =  q 
i)X  x  'bXa 


(60) 


is  satisfied,  its  left  side  being,  by  (37),  an  antisymmetrical 
tensor  of  the  third  rank.  System  (60)  thus  contains  essenti¬ 
ally  four  equations  which  are  written  out  as  follows : — 


*  On  the  abandonment  of  the  choice  of  co-ordinates  with  g  =  -  1,  there 
remain  four  functions  of  space  with  liberty  of  choice,  corresponding  to  the  four 
arbitrary  functions  at  our  disposal  in  the  choice  of  co-ordinates. 


154 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


dF23 

dF34 

dF4l 

'dXo 

*X3 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 


*F34 

+ 

II 

pH 

T)x  2 

oXz 

f41 

+ 

11 

CO 

rH 

PH 

T)x  3 

OX  ^ 

>f12 

+ 

II 

pH 

n 

Tix^ 

TixY 

>f23 

+ 

^F3i 

'bX  2 

0 

0 

0 

0 


.  (60a) 


This  system  corresponds  to  the  second  of  Maxwell’s 
systems  of  equations.  We  recognize  this  at  once  by  setting 


F23  =  F14  =  Ex 

Fgi  =  H y,  F24  =  E y  -  . 
E 12  =  H z,  F34  =  E,, 


(61) 


Then  in  place  of  (60a)  we  may  set,  in  the  usual  notation  of 
three-dimensional  vector  analysis, 


m 

Tit' 


=  curl  E 


div  H  =  0 


(60b) 


We  obtain  Maxwell’s  first  system  by  generalizing  the 
form  given  by  Minkowski.  We  introduce  the  contravariant 
six- vector  associated  with  Fa/3 


F^  =  .  .  .  (62) 

and  also  the  contravariant  vector  of  the  density  of  the 
electric  current.  Then,  taking  (40)  into  consideration,  the 
following  equations  will  be  invariant  for  any  substitution 
whose  invariant  is  unity  (in  agreement  with  the  chosen  co¬ 
ordinates)  : — 

=  r  .  .  .  .  (63) 

7)xv 

Let 

F23  =  H'x,  F14  =  -  E'A 

F31  =  H V,  F24  =  -  E'y  \  .  .  (64) 

F12  =  H'l,  F34  =  -  E' J 

which  quantities  are  equal  to  the  quantities  Hx  .  .  .  Ez  in 


A.  EINSTEIN  155 

the  special  case  of  the  restricted  theory  of  relativity  ;  and  in 
addition 


J1  =  jx,  J2  =  jy,  J3  =  jz,  J4 
we  obtain  in  place  of  (63) 

dE' 


=  P> 


+  j  =  curl  H' 


div  E '  =  p 


7>t 


.  (63a) 


The  equations  (60),  (62),  and  (63)  thus  form  the  generali¬ 
zation  of  Maxwell’s  field  equations  for  free  space,  with  the 
convention  which  we  have  established  with  respect  to  the 
choice  of  co-ordinates. 

The  Energy-components  of  the  Electromagnetic  Field. — 
We  form  the  inner  product 


av  =  F^T1  ....  (65) 

By  (61)  its  components,  written  in  the  three-dimensional 
manner,  are 


*i  =  pEx  +[j  .  H]*’ 

•  •  •  • 

*4  =  :  O'E)  *  . 


(65a) 


k<t  is  a  covariant  vector  the  components  of  which  are 
equal  to  the  negative  momentum,  or,  respectively,  the  energy, 
which  is  transferred  from  the  electric  masses  to  the  electro¬ 
magnetic  field  per  unit  of  time  and  volume.  If  the  electric 
masses  are  free,  that  is,  under  the  sole  influence  of  the 
electromagnetic  field,  the  covariant  vector  Kff  will  vanish. 

To  obtain  the  energy-components  T£  of  the  electromagnetic 

field,  we  need  only  give  to  equation  kv  =  0  the  form  of 
equation  (57) .  From  (63)  and  (65)  we  have  in  the  first  place 


fc* 


dP- 

dXy 


(F<r/lFflu)  -  FMP 


j>FafX 

DXy 


The  second  term  of  the  right-hand  side,  by  reason  of  (60), 
permits  the  transformation 


p*1 


,*F 


(TM 


1  T7VjH/^Fm„ 

"  air 


-  isrsrwj^f, 


1 


156 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


which  latter  expression  may,  for  reasons  of  symmetry,  also 
be  written  in  the  form 


But  for  this  we  may  set 

The  first  of  these  terms  is  written  more  briefly 

the  second,  after  the  differentiation  is  carried  out,  and  after 
some  reduction,  results  in 


Taking  all  three  terms  together  we  obtain  the  relation 


where 


K(j 


ST" 

c r 

'bXv 


ix„ 


rjiv 

r 


FaaFva  +  l8vFapFafi. 


(66) 


Equation  (66),  if  av  vanishes,  is,  on  account  of  (30), 
equivalent  to  (57)  or  (57 a)  respectively.  Therefore  the  T£ 

are  the  energy-components  of  the  electromagnetic  field. 
With  the  help  of  (61)  and  (64),  it  is  easy  to  show  that  these 
energy-components  of  the  electromagnetic  field  in  the  case 
of  the  special  theory  of  relativity  give  the  well-known  Maxwell- 
Poynting  expressions. 

We  have  now  deduced  the  general  laws  which  are  satisfied 
by  the  gravitational  field  and  matter,  by  consistently  using  a 
system  of  co-ordinates  for  which  -  g  =  1.  We  have 
thereby  achieved  a  considerable  simplification  of  formulae 
and  calculations,  without  failing  to  comply  with  the  require¬ 
ment  of  general  covariance  ;  for  we  have  drawn  our  equations 
from  generally  covariant  equations  by  specializing  the  system 
of  co-ordinates. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


157 


Still  the  question  is  not  without  a  formal  interest,  whether 
with  a  correspondingly  generalized  definition  of  the  energy- 
components  of  gravitational  field  and  matter,  even  without 
specializing  the  system  of  co-ordinates,  it  is  possible  to  formu¬ 
late  laws  of  conservation  in  the  form  of  equation  (56),  and 
field  equations  of  gravitation  of  the  same  nature  as  (52)  or 
(52a),  in  such  a  manner  that  on  the  left  we  have  a  divergence 
(in  the  ordinary  sense),  and  on  the  right  the  sum  of  the 
energy-components  of  matter  and  gravitation.  I  have  found 
that  in  both  cases  this  is  actually  so.  But  I  do  not  think 
that  the  communication  of  my  somewhat  extensive  reflexions 
on  this  subject  would  be  worth  while,  because  after  all  they 
do  not  give  us  anything  that  is  materially  new. 

E 

§  21.  Newton’s  Theory  as  a  First  Approximation 

As  has  already  been  mentioned  more  than  once,  the 
special  theory  of  relativity  as  a  special  case  of  the  general 
theory  is -characterized  by  the  g M„  having  the  constant  values 
(4).  From  what  has  already  been  said,  this  means  complete 
neglect  of  the  effects  of  gravitation.  We  arrive  at  a  closer 
approximation  to  reality  by  considering  the  case  where  the 
g differ  from  the  values  of  (4)  by  quantities  which  are  small 
compared  with  1,  and  neglecting  small  quantities  of  second 
and  higher  order.  (First  point  of  view  of  approximation.) 

It  is  further  to  be  assumed  that  in  the  space-time  territory 
under  consideration  the  g^v  at  spatial  infinity,  with  a  suitable 
choice  of  co-ordinates,  tend  toward  the  values  (4) ;  i.e.  we  are 
considering  gravitational  fields  which  may  be  regarded  as 
generated  exclusively  by  matter  in  the  finite  region. 

It  might  be  thought  that  these  approximations  must  lead 
us  to  Newton’s  theory.  But  to  that  end  we  still  need  to  ap¬ 
proximate  the  fundamental  equations  from  a  second  point  of 
view.  We  give  our  attention  to  the  motion  of  a  material 
point  in  accordance  with  the  equations  (16).  In  the  case  of 
the  special  theory  of  relativity  the  components 

dxi  dx2  dxz 
ds’  ds}  ds 


158  THE  GENERAL  THEORY 

may  take  on  any  values.  This  signifies  that  any  velocity 


v  = 


may  occur,  which  is  less  than  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuo. 
If  we  restrict  ourselves  to  the  case  which  almost  exclusively 
offers  itself  to  our  experience,  of  v  being  small  as  compared 
with  the  velocity  of  light,  this  denotes  that  the  components 

dxx  dx 2  dx  3 
ds  *  ds’  ds 


are  to  be  treated  as  small  quantities,  while  dxjds,  to  the 
second  order  of  small  quantities,  is  equal  to  one.  (Second 
point  of  view  of  approximation.) 

Now  we  remark  that  from  the  first  point  of  view  of  ap¬ 
proximation  the  magnitudes  TJ  are  all  small  magnitudes  of 

at  least  the  first  order.  A  glance  at  (46)  thus  shows  that  in 
this  equation,  from  the  second  point  of  view  of  approximation, 
we  have  to  consider  only  terms  for  which  =  v  —  4.  Re¬ 
stricting  ourselves  to  terms  of  lowest  order  we  first  obtain  in 
place  of  (46)  the  equations 


dlxT 

~dt? 


where  we  have  set  ds  =  dx±  =  dt ;  or  with  restriction  to  terms 
which  from  the  first  point  of  view  of  approximation  are  of 
first  order  : — 

=  [44,  t]  (t  =  1,  2,  3) 

d“X 4  r  A  A  A~\ 

W  =  -  [44,  4], 

If  in  addition  we  suppose  the  gravitational  field  to  be  a  quasi¬ 
static  field,  by  confining  ourselves  to  the  case  where  the 
motion  of  the  matter  generating  the  gravitational  field  is  but 
slow  (in  comparison  with  the  velocity  of  the  propagation  of 
light),  we  may  neglect  on  the  right-hand  side  differentiations 
with  respect  to  the  time  in  comparison  with  those  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  space  co-ordinates,  so  that  we  have 


A.  EINSTEIN 


159 


•  ■  <«’> 

This  is  the  equation  of  motion  of  the  material  point  accord¬ 
ing  to  Newton’s  theory,  in  which  plays  the  part  of  the 
gravitational  potential.  What  is  remarkable  in  this  result 
is  that  the  component  g 44  of  the  fundamental  tensor  alone 
defines,  to  a  first  approximation,  the  motion  of  the  material 
point. 

We  now  turn  to  the  field  equations  (53).  Here  we 
have  to  take  into  consideration  that  the  energy-tensor  of 
“matter”  is  almost  exclusively  defined  by  the  density  of 
matter  in  the  narrower  sense,  i.e.  by  the  second  term  of  the 
right-hand  side  of  (58)  [or,  respectively,  (58a)  or  (58b)]. 
If  we  form  the  approximation  in  question,  all  the  components 
vanish  with  the  one  exception  of  T44  =  p  =  T.  On  the  left- 
hand  side  of  (53)  the  second  term  is  a  small  quantity  of 
second  order ;  the  first  yields,  to  the  approximation  in 
question, 

iyv’ 1]  +  2]  +  ifr*' 3]  -  4]- 


For  ya  =  v  =  4,  this  gives,  with  the  omission  of  terms  differ¬ 
entiated  with  respect  to  time, 


/d2£44  tfgu  ,  7>2gu\ 

+  *2  +  “ 
14  3 

The  last  of  equations  (53)  thus  yields 

VV44  =  *P 


iWi  4. 


(68) 


The  equations  (67)  and  (68)  together  are  equivalent  to 
Newton’s  law  of  gravitation. 

By  (67)  and  (68)  the  expression  for  the  gravitational 
potential  becomes 


k  f  pdr 
87rJ  r 


(68a) 


while  Newton’s  theory,  with  the  unit  of  time  which  we  have 
chosen,  gives 


160 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


in  which  K  denotes  the  constant  6’ 7  x  10  8,  usually  called 

the  constant  of  gravitation.  By  comparison  we  obtain 


8ttK 


1*87  x  10- 27 


(69) 


§  22.  Behaviour  of  Rods  and  Clocks  in  the  Static  Gravi¬ 
tational  Field.  Bending  of  Light-rays.  Motion  of 
the  Perihelion  of  a  Planetary  Orbit 

To  arrive  at  Newton’s  theory  as  a  first  approximation  we 
had  to  calculate  only  one  component,  ^44,  of  the  ten  of  the 
gravitational  field,  since  this  component  alone  enters  into  the 
first  approximation,  (67),  of  the  equation  for  the  motion  of  the 
material  point  in  the  gravitational  field.  From  this,  however, 
it  is  already  apparent  that  other  components  of  the  g^v  must 
differ  from  the  values  given  in  (4)  by  small  quantities  of  the 
first  order.  This  is  required  by  the  condition  g  =  -  1. 

For  a  field-producing  point  mass  at  the  origin  of  co-ordin¬ 
ates,  we  obtain,  to  the  first  approximation,  the  radially 
symmetrical  solution 


g ~  op<r 


gP  4  =  £4p  =  o 


(P>  *  =  1,  2,  3)' 
(p  =  1,  2,  3)  . 


(70) 


where  8p(r  is  1  or  0,  respectively,  accordingly  as  p  =  a  or  p  4=  c, 
and  r  is  the  quantity  +  ^/x‘1  +  x\  +  ar“  On  account  of  (68a) 


a 


fcM 
477  ’ 


(70a) 


if  M  denotes  the  field-producing  mass.  It  is  easy  to  verify 
that  the  field  equations  (outside  the  mass)  are  satisfied  to  the 
first  order  of  small  quantities. 

We  now  examine  the  influence  exerted  by  the  field  of  the 
mass  M  upon  the  metrical  properties  of  space.  The  relation 

ds 2  =  g  [xvdx  fxdXy . 

always  holds  between  the  “  locally  ”  (§  4)  measured  lengths 
and  times  ds  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  differences  of  co-ordin¬ 
ates  dxv  on  the  other  hand. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


161 


For  a  unit-measure  of  length  laid  “  parallel”  to  the  axis 
of  x ,  for  example,  we  should  have  to  set  ds2  =  -  1 ;  dx2  =  dxz 
=  dx 4  =  0.  Therefore  -  1  =  gndx\ .  If,  in  addition,  the 

unit-measure  lies  on  the  axis  of  x,  the  first  of  equations  (70) 
gives 

<7n  “  -  (l  +  “)• 

From  these  two  relations  it  follows  that,  correct  to  a  first 
order  of  small  quantities, 

dx  =  1  -  £  .  .  .  .  (71) 

The  unit  measuring-rod  thus  appears  a  little  shortened  in 
relation  to  the  system  of  co-ordinates  by  the  presence  of  the 
gravitational  field,  if  the  rod  is  laid  along  a  radius. 

In  an  analogous  manner  we  obtain  the  length  of  co¬ 
ordinates  in  tangential  direction  if,  for  example,  we  set 
ds 2  =  -  1 ;  dxl  =  dxz  =  dx±  =  0 ;  x1  =  r,  x2  =  xz  =  0. 

The  result  is 

-  1  =  g^dx\  =  -  dx\  .  .  .  (71a) 

With  the  tangential  position,  therefore,  the  gravitational 
field  of  the  point  of  mass  has  no  influence  on  the  length  of  a 
rod. 

Thus  Euclidean  geometry  does  not  hold  even  to  a  first  ap¬ 
proximation  in  the  gravitational  field,  if  we  wish  to  take  one 
and  the  same  rod,  independently  of  its  place  and  orientation, 
as  a  realization  of  the  same  interval ;  although,  to  be  sure,  a 
glance  at  (70a)  and  (69)  shows  that  the  deviations  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  are  much  too  slight  to  be  noticeable  in  measurements 
of  the  earth’s  surface. 

Further,  let  us  examine  the  rate  of  a  unit  clock,  which  is 
arranged  to  be  at  rest  in  a  static  gravitational  field.  Here  we 
have  for  a  clock  period  ds  =  1 ;  dxi  =  dx2  =  dxz  =  0 
Therefore 

1  =  gudx] ; 

^  =  ^  =  V(1  +  (044  -  D)  =  1  _  ^  ^ 


162 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


or 

dx*  =  1  +  £\  PT  '  •  •  <72> 

Thus  the  clock  goes  more  slowly  if  set  up  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  ponderable  masses.  From  this  it  follows  that  the 
spectral  lines  of  light  reaching  us  from  the  surface  of  large 
stars  must  appear  displaced  towards  the  red  end  of  the 
spectrum.* 

We  now  examine  the  course  of  light-rays  in  the  static 
gravitational  field.  By  the  special  theory  of  relativity  the 
velocity  of  light  is  given  by  the  equation 

-  dx\  -  dx2  -  dx\  +  dx\  =  0 


and  therefore  by  the  general  theory  of  relativity  by  the 
equation 

ds*  =  gf]ivdxlldxv  =  0  .  .  (73) 

If  the  direction,  i.e.  the  ratio  dxl :  dx2 :  dx3  is  given,  equation 
(73)  gives  the  quantities 

dx1  dx2  dxz 
dx±  dx 4*  dx± 

and  accordingly  the  velocity 


=  7 


defined  in  the  sense  of  Euclidean  geometry.  We  easily 
recognize  that  the  course  of  the  light-rays  must  be  bent  with 
regard  to  the  system  of  co-ordinates,  if  the  g^v  are  not  con¬ 
stant.  If  n  is  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  propagation  of 
light,  the  Huyghens  principle  shows  that  the  light-ray,  en¬ 
visaged  in  the  plane  (7,  n ),  has  the  curvature  -  <Vy fan. 

We  examine  the  curvature  undergone  by  a  ray  of  light 
passing  by  a  mass  M  at  the  distance  A.  If  we  choose  the 
system  of  co-ordinates  in  agreement  with  the  accompanying 
diagram,  the  total  bending  of  the  ray  (calculated  positively  if 


*  According  to  E.  Freundlich,  spectroscopical  observations  on  fixed  stars  of 
certain  types  indicate  the  existence  of  an  effect  of  this  kind,  but  a  crucial 
test  of  this  consequence  has  not  yet  been  made. 


A.  EINSTEIN  163 


concave  towards  the  origin)  is  given  in  sufficient  approxi¬ 
mation  by 


B  = 


2> 


while  (73)  and  (70)  give 


Carrying  out  the  calculation,  this  gives 


kM 

2ttA' 


(74) 


A 


A 

Fig.  8. 


According  to  this,  a  ray  of  light  going  past  the  sun  under¬ 
goes  a  deflexion  of  1*7";  and  a  ray  going  past  the  planet 
Jupiter  a  deflexion  of  about  ’02". 

If  we  calculate  the  gravitational  field  to  a  higher  degree 
of  approximation,  and  likewise  with  corresponding  accuracy 
the  orbital  motion  of  a  material  point  of  relatively  infinitely 
small  mass,  we  find  a  deviation  of  the  following  kind  from 
the  Kepler-Newton  laws  of  planetary  motion.  The  orbital 
ellipse  of  a  planet  undergoes  a  slow  rotation,  in  the  direction 
of  motion,  of  amount 


T2c2(l  -  e2) 


■  (75) 


164 


THE  GENERAL  THEORY 


per  revolution.  In  this  formula  a  denotes  the  major  semi¬ 
axis,  c  the  velocity  of  light  in  the  usual  measurement,  e  the 
eccentricity,  T  the  time  of  revolution  in  seconds.* 

Calculation  gives  for  the  planet  Mercury  a  rotation  of  the 
orbit  of  43"  per  century,  corresponding  exactly  to  astronomical 
observation  (Leverrier) ;  for  the  astronomers  have  discovered 
in  the  motion  of  the  perihelion  of  this  planet,  after  allowing 
for  disturbances  by  other  planets,  an  inexplicable  remainder 
of  this  magnitude. 

*  For  the  calculation  I  refer  to  the  original  papers:  A.  Einstein, 
Sitzungsber.  d.  Preuss.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.,  1915,  p.  831 ;  K.  Schwarzschild, 
ibid.,  1916,  p.  189. 


HAMILTON’S  PRINCIPLE  AND  THE 
GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 

BY 

A.  EINSTEIN 

Translated  from  “  Hamiltonsches  Princip  und  allgemeine 
Relativitatstheorie Sitzungsberichte  der  Preussi- 
schen  Akad.  d.  Wissenschaften,  1916. 


- 


HAMILTON’S  PRINCIPLE  AND  THE  GENERAL 

THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 

By  A.  EINSTEIN 


THE  general  theory  of  relativity  has  recently  been 
given  in  a  particularly  clear  form  by  H.  A.  Lorentz 
and  D.  Hilbert,*  who  have  deduced  its  equations 
from  one  single  principle  of  variation.  The  same  thing 
will  be  done  in  the  present  paper.  But  my  purpose  here 
is  to  present  the  fundamental  connexions  in  as  perspicuous 
a  manner  as  possible,  and  in  as  general  terms  as  is  per¬ 
missible  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  general  theory  of 
relativity.  In  particular  we  shall  make  as  few  specializing 
assumptions  as  possible,  in  marked  contrast  to  Hilbert’s 
treatment  of  the  subject.  On  the  other  hand,  in  antithesis 
to  my  own  most  recent  treatment  of  the  subject,  there  is  to 
be  complete  liberty  in  the  choice  of  the  system  of  co-ordinates. 


i.  The  Principle  of  Variation  and  the  Field -equations  of 

Gravitation  and  Matter 


Let  the  gravitational  field  be  described  as  usual  by  the 

tensor  f  of  the  g (or  the  g*i. * * * v)  ;  and  matter,  including  the 
electromagnetic  field,  by  any  number  of  space-time  functions 
q(p).  How  these  functions  may  be  characterized  in  the  theory 
of  invariants  does  not  concern  us.  Further,  let  $  be  a  function 

of  the 


g^f  C 


( 


<?M  and  ?(p)« 


tyM) 

()Xa  / 


*  Four  papers  by  Lorentz  in  the  Publications  of  the  Koninkl.  Akad.  van 
Wetensch.  te  Amsterdam,  1915  and  1916;  D.  Hilbert,  Gottinger  Nachr.,  1915, 
Part  3. 

t  No  use  is  made  for  the  present  of  the  tensor  character  of  the  g^v. 

167 


168 


HAMILTON’S  PRINCIPLE 


The  principle  of  variation 


>J  $dr  = 


0 


(1) 


then  gives  us  as  many  differential  equations  as  there  are 
functions  g and  g(p)  to  be  defined,  if  the  g ^  and  g(p)  are 
varied  independently  of  one  another,  and  in  such  a  way  that 

at  the  limits  of  integration  the  Sg(p),  £gMV,  and  (SgM„)  all 

OX(j 

vanish. 

We  will  now  assume  that  £  is  linear  in  the  gaTy  and  that 

the  coefficients  of  the  g depend  only  on  the  g*v.  We  may 

then  replace  the  principle  of  variation  (1)  by  one  which  is 
more  convenient  for  us.  For  by  appropriate  partial  integra¬ 
tion  we  obtain 

fa*-  =  j  £*dr  +  F  .  .  .  (2) 

where  F  denotes  an  integral  over  the  boundary  of  the  domain 
in  question,  and  «£)*  depends  only  on  the  g*v,  g^J,  g(p>,  g(p)a ,  and 

no  longer  on  the  g*vT.  From  (2)  we  obtain,  for  such  vari¬ 
ations  as  are  of  interest  to  us, 


=  S  j*  $*dr, 


(3) 


so  that  we  may  replace  our  principle  of  variation  (1)  by  the 
more  convenient  form 


;  j  sfdr  =  o. 


(la) 


By  carrying  out  the  variation  of  the  g*v  and  the  g(p)  we 
obtain,  as  field-equations  of  gravitation  and  matter,  the 
equations  f 

a  _  <>£* 

:a\^J 


~dXc 


*  (*§*)  _ 

\c )g(p)a/ 


=  0 


(4) 


=  0 


(5) 


t  For  brevity  the  summation  symbols  are  omitted  in  the  formulae.  In¬ 
dices  occurring  twice  in  a  term  are  always  to  be  taken  as  summed.  Thus  in 

(4),  for  example,  \  denotes  the  term  V 

OXaVdQ^J  ^dXa\^g^J 


A.  EINSTEIN 


169 


§  2.  Separate  Existence  of  the  Gravitational  Field 

If  we  make  no  restrictive  assumption  as  to  the  manner  in 
which  <£>  depends  on  the^v,  g*vT,  q{p),  g(p)«,  the  energy-com¬ 
ponents  cannot  be  divided  into  two  parts,  one  belonging  to 
the  gravitational  field,  the  other  to  matter.  To  ensure  this 
feature  of  the  theory,  we  make  the  following  assumption 

§  =  ©  +  m  .  .  .  .  (6) 

where  ©  is  to  depend  only  on  the  g^v,  g£v,  g£*,  and  sDt  only  on 
g^vf  q{P),  q(P)a.  Equations  (4),  (4a)  then  assume  the  form 


a  /a@*\ 

a@* 

m 

.  .  (7) 

1 

O' 

II 

'bgn*' 

a  /  \ 

m 

0 

■  •  (8) 

^Xa'^q^a' 

' 

Here  @*  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  ©  as  «£)*  to  <£). 

It  is  to  be  noted  carefully  that  equations  (8)  or  (5)  would 
have  to  give  way  to  others,  if  we  were  to  assume  sDt  or  *£)  to  be 
also  dependent  on  derivatives  of  the  q(p)  of  order  higher  than 
the  first.  Likewise  it  might  be  imaginable  that  the  q(p)  would 
have  to  be  taken,  not  as  independent  of  one  another,  but  as 
connected  by  conditional  equations.  All  this  is  of  no  im¬ 
portance  for  the  following  developments,  as  these  are  based 
solely  on  the  equations  (7),  which  have  been  found  by  vary¬ 
ing  our  integral  with  respect  to  the  g ttv. 

§  3.  Properties  of  the  Field  Equations  of  Gravitation 
Conditioned  by  the  Theory  of  Invariants 

We  now  introduce  the  assumption  that 

ds*  =  gpvdxpdxv  .  .  .  (9) 

is  an  invariant.  This  determines  the  transformational  char¬ 
acter  of  the  gpv.  As  to  the  transformational  character  of  the 
g<p),  which  describe  matter,  we  make  no  supposition.  On  the 

other  hand,  let  the  functions  H  =  ■  — — ,  as  well  as 

J  ~  9 


170 


HAMILTON’S  PRINCIPLE 


G  = 


and  M  = 


m 


be  invariants  in  relation  to  any 


J-9  J-9 

substitutions  of  space-time  co-ordinates.  From  these  assump¬ 
tions  follows  the  general  covariance  of  the  equations  (7)  and 
(8),  deduced  from  (1).  It  further  follows  that  G  (apart  from 
a  constant  factor)  must  be  equal  to  the  scalar  of  Eiemann’s 
tensor  of  curvature  ;  because  there  is  no  other  invariant  with 
the  properties  required  for  G.f  Thereby  is  also  perfectly 
determined,  and  consequently  the  left-hand  side  of  field 
equation  (7)  as  well 4 

From  the  general  postulate  of  relativity  there  follow 
certain  properties  of  the  function  ©*  which  we  shall  now  de¬ 
duce.  For  this  purpose  we  carry  through  an  infinitesimal 
transformation  of  the  co-ordinates,  by  setting 


X  y  -  %y  *{-  A(Cj/  ....  (10) 

where  the  Axv  are  arbitrary,  infinitely  small  functions  of  the 
co-ordinates,  and  x'v  are  the  co-ordinates,  in  the  new  system, 
of  the  world-point  having  the  co-ordinates  xv  in  the  original 
system.  As  for  the  co-ordinates,  so  too  for  any  other  magni¬ 
tude  i/r,  a  law  of  transformation  holds  good,  of  the  type 

=  '\p'  +  A  yfr, 

where  must  always  be  expressible  by  the  Axv.  From 
the  covariant  property  of  the  g*v  we  easily  deduce  for  the  g 

and  (fl  the  laws  of  transformation 


.  ’d(AXv)  d(A  Xu) 

kg^v  =  gfia-i - lA  _}_  gva-± - tA 

^  X  CL  ~^X(X 

A  nnv  __  d(A 9flV>)  _  n/J.vMAXa) 

9 *  'bXa  9a  ZXa  * 


(11) 

(12) 


Since  depends  only  on  the  g^v  and  g^,  it  is  possible,  with 

the  help  of  (11)  and  (12),  to  calculate  A@*.  We  thus  obtain 
the  equation 


WAx£) 

<f  ~bXv 


0<)@  7PAxa 

+  2 - a^vr — — s 

^9a  ^Xv^Xa 


f  Herein  is  to  be  found  the  reason  why  the  general  postulate  of  relativity 
leads  to  a  very  definite  theory  of  gravitation. 

X  By  performing  partial  integration  we  obtain 

f3]  {i/0,  a}  -  {nv,  a}  (aj8,  0}]. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


171 


where  for  brevity  we  have  set 


,J®4 


3@4 


a®1 


s;  =  + 


(14) 


From  these  two  equations  we  draw  two  inferences  which  are 

important  for  what  follows.  We  know  that  — is  an  in- 

V  ~  9 

variant  with  respect  to  any  substitution,  but  we  do  not  know 

this  of  — - It  is  easy  to  demonstrate,  however,  that  the 

J  ~  9 

latter  quantity  is  an  invariant  with  respect  to  any  linear 
substitutions  of  the  co-ordinates.  Hence  it  follows  that  the 

right  side  of  (13)  must  always  vanish  if  all  c — vanish. 


Consequently  ®*  must  satisfy  the  identity 

s!  =  o 


'bXv'tiXa 


(15) 


If,  further,  we  choose  the  Axv  so  that  they  differ  from 
zero  only  in  the  interior  of  a  given  domain,  but  in  infinitesimal 
proximity  to  the  boundary  they  vanish,  then,  with  the  trans¬ 
formation  in  question,  the  value  of  the  boundary  integral  oc¬ 
curring  in  equation  (2)  does  not  change.  Therefore  AF  =  0, 
and,  in  consequence,! 


®dr  =  A 


I 


®*dr. 


But  the  left-hand  side  of  the  equation  must  vanish,  since 

© 


and  s/  -  g  dr  are  invariants.  Consequently  the 


both 

V  “  9 

right-hand  side  also  vanishes.  Thus,  taking  (14),  (15),  and 
(16)  into  consideration,  we  obtain,  in  the  first  place,  the 
equation 


m^)dT  =  0 

J  'bg£T  ^XybXa 


(16) 


Transforming  this  equation  by  two  partial  integrations,  and 
having  regard  to  the  liberty  of  choice  of  the  Axa,  we  obtain 

f  By  the  introduction  of  the  quantities  ©  and  ®*  instead  of  Jr>  and  .£>*. 


172  HAMILTON’S  PRINCIPLE 


the  identity 


(17) 


From  the  two  identities  (16)  and  (17),  which  result  from 

© 

the  invariance  of  — =,  and  therefore  from  the  postulate  of 

+J -g 

general  relativity,  we  now  have  to  draw  conclusions. 

We  first  transform  the  field  equations  (7)  of  gravitation 
by  mixed  multiplication  by  g**.  We  then  obtain  (by  inter¬ 
changing  the  indices  a  and  v),  as  equivalents  of  the  field 
equations  (7),  the  equations 


3 


where  we  have  set 


(18) 


m 


9 


Hv 


(19) 


f 


( 


a@* 

*gf 


ixv  + 
a 


The  last  expression  for  is  vindicated  by  (14)  and  (15).  By 

differentiation  of  (18)  with  respect  to  xv>  and  summation  for  v> 
there  follows,  in  view  of  (17), 


.  (21) 


Equation  (21)  expresses  the  conservation  of  momentum  and 
energy.  We  call  the  components  of  the  energy  of  matter,  t  * 

the  components  of  the  energy  of  the  gravitational  field. 

Having  regard  to  (20),  there  follows  from  the  field  equations 

(7)  of  gravitation,  by  multiplication  by  and  summation 
with  respect  to  fi  and  v, 


+  i9 


HV 


Dg 


A.  EINSTEIN 


173 


or,  in  view  of  (19)  and  (21), 


<T 


+ 


(22) 


where  £M„  denotes  the  quantities  These  are  four 

equations  which  the  energy-components  of  matter  have  to 
satisfy. 

It  is  to  be  emphasized  that  the  (generally  covariant)  laws 
of  conservation  (21)  and  (22)  are  deduced  from  the  field  equa¬ 
tions  (7)  of  gravitation,  in  combination  with  the  postulate  of 
general  covariance  (relativity)  alone ,  without  using  the  field 
equations  (8)  for  material  phenomena. 


. 


COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  ON 
THE  GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 


BY 

A.  EINSTEIN 

Translated  from  “  Kosmologische  Betrachtungen  zur  allge- 
meinen  Relativitatstheorie Sitzungsberichte  der  Preus- 
sischen  Akad.  d.  Wissenschaften ,  1917. 


COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  THE 
GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 

By  A.  EINSTEIN 


IT  is  well  known  that  Poisson’s  equation 

V2</>  =  47TK/9  .  .  .  .  (1) 

in  combination  with  the  equations  of  motion  of  a  material 
point  is  not  as  yet  a  perfect  substitute  for  Newton’s  theory 
of  action  at  a  distance.  There  is  still  to  be  taken  into  account 
the  condition  that  at  spatial  infinity  the  potential  </>  tends 
toward  a  fixed  limiting  value.  There  is  an  analogous  state 
of  things  in  the  theory  of  gravitation  in  general  relativity. 
Here,  too,  we  must  supplement  the  differential  equations  by 
limiting  conditions  at  spatial  infinity,  if  we  really  have  to 
regard  the  universe  as  being  of  infinite  spatial  extent. 

In  my  treatment  of  the  planetary  problem  I  chose  these 
limiting  conditions  in  the  form  of  the  following  assumption  : 
it  is  possible  to  select  a  system  of  reference  so  that  at  spatial 
infinity  all  the  gravitational  potentials  g^v  become  constant. 
But  it  is  by  no  means  evident  a  priori  that  we  may  lay  down 
the  same  limiting  conditions  when  we  wish  to  take  larger 
portions  of  the  physical  universe  into  consideration.  In  the 
following  pages  the  reflexions  will  be  given  which,  up  to  the 
present,  I  have  made  on  this  fundamentally  important 
question. 


§  i.  The  Newtonian  Theory 

It  is  well  known  that  Newton’s  limiting  condition  of  the 
constant  limit  for  </>  at  spatial  infinity  leads  to  the  view  that 
the  density  of  matter  becomes  zero  at  infinity.  For  we 
imagine  that  there  may  be  a  place  in  universal  space  round 
about  which  the  gravitational  field  of  matter,  viewed  on  a 
large  scale,  possesses  spherical  symmetry.  It  then  follows 
from  Poisson’s  equation  that,  in  order  that  <j>  may  tend  to  a 


178  COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


limit  at  infinity,  the  mean  density  p  must  decrease  toward 
zero  more  rapidly  than  1/r2  as  the  distance  r  from  the 
centre  increases.*  In  this  sense,  therefore,  the  universe 
according  to  Newton  is  finite,  although  it  may  possess  an 
infinitely  great  total  mass. 

From  this  it  follows  in  the  first  place  that  the  radiation 
emitted  by  the  heavenly  bodies  will,  in  part,  leave  the 
Newtonian  system  of  the  universe,  passing  radially  outwards, 
to  become  ineffective  and  lost  in  the  infinite.  May  not 
entire  heavenly  bodies  fare  likewise  ?  It  is  hardly  possible 
to  give  a  negative  answer  to  this  question.  For  it  follows 
from  the  assumption  of  a  finite  limit  for  c/>  at  spatial  infinity 
that  a  heavenly  body  with  finite  kinetic  energy  is  able  to 
reach  spatial  infinity  by  overcoming  the  Newtonian  forces  of 
attraction.  By  statistical  mechanics  this  case  must  occur 
from  time  to  time,  as  long  as  the  total  energy  of  the  stellar 
system — transferred  to  one  single  star — is  great  enough  to 
send  that  star  on  its  journey  to  infinity,  whence  it  never  can 
return. 

We  might  try  to  avoid  this  peculiar  difficulty  by  assuming 
a  very  high  value  for  the  limiting  potential  at  infinity.  That 
would  be  a  possible  way,  if  the  value  of  the  gravitational 
potential  were  not  itself  necessarily  conditioned  by  the 
heavenly  bodies.  The  truth  is  that  we  are  compelled  to 
regard  the  occurrence  of  any  great  differences  of  potential  of 
the  gravitational  field  as  contradicting  the  facts.  These 
differences  must  really  be  of  so  low  an  order  of  magnitude 
that  the  stellar  velocities  generated  by  them  do  not  exceed 
the  velocities  actually  observed. 

If  we  apply  Boltzmann’s  law  of  distribution  for  gas 
molecules  to  the  stars,  by  comparing  the  stellar  system  with 
a  gas  in  thermal  equilibrium,  we  find  that  the  Newtonian 
stellar  system  cannot  exist  at  all.  For  there  is  a  finite  ratio 
of  densities  corresponding  to  the  finite  difference  of  potential 
between  the  centre  and  spatial  infinity.  A  vanishing  of  the 
density  at  infinity  thus  implies  a  vanishing  of  the  density 
at  the  centre. 

*  p  is  the  mean  density  of  matter,  calculated  for  a  region  which  is  large  as 
compared  with  the  distance  between  neighbouring  fixed  stars,  but  small  in 
comparison  with  the  dimensions  of  the  whole  stellar  system. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


179 


It  seems  hardly  possible  to  surmount  these  difficulties  on 
the  basis  of  the  Newtonian  theory.  We  may  ask  ourselves 
the  question  whether  they  can  be  removed  by  a  modification 
of  the  Newtonian  theory.  First  of  all  we  will  indicate  a 
method  which  does  not  in  itself  claim  to  be  taken  seriously ; 
it  merely  serves  as  a  foil  for  what  is  to  follow.  In  place  of 
Poisson’s  equation  we  write 

V2</>  -  =  4iTTKp  .  .  (2) 

where  X  denotes  a  universal  constant.  If  p0  be  the  uniform 
density  of  a  distribution  of  mass,  then 


47 T/C 


is  a  solution  of  equation  (2).  This  solution  would  correspond 
to  the  case  in  which  the  matter  of  the  fixed  stars  was  dis¬ 
tributed  uniformly  through  space,  if  the  density  pa  is  equal 
to  the  actual  mean  density  of  the  matter  in  the  universe. 
The  solution  then  corresponds  to  an  infinite  extension  of 
the  central  space,  filled  uniformly  with  matter.  If,  without 
making  any  change  in  the  mean  density,  we  imagine  matter 
to  be  non-uniformly  distributed  locally,  there  will  be,  over 
and  above  the  < p  with  the  constant  value  of  equation  (3),  an 
additional  (p ,  which  in  the  neighbourhood  of  denser  masses 
will  so  much  the  more  resemble  the  Newtonian  field  as  X</>  is 
smaller  in  comparison  with  47 r/cp. 

A  universe  so  constituted  would  have,  with  respect  to  its 
gravitational  field,  no  centre.  A  decrease  of  density  in  spatial 
infinity  would  not  have  to  be  assumed,  but  both  the  mean 
potential  and  mean  density  would  remain  constant  to  infinity. 
The  conflict  with  statistical  mechanics  which  we  found  in 
the  case  of  the  Newtonian  theory  is  not  repeated.  With  a 
definite  but  extremely  small  density,  matter  is  in  equilibrium, 
without  any  internal  material  forces  (pressures)  being  required 
to  maintain  equilibrium. 


§  2.  The  Boundary  Conditions  According  to  the  General 

Theory  of  Relativity 

In  the  present  paragraph  I  shall  conduct  the  reader  over 
the  road  that  I  have  myself  travelled,  rather  a  rough  and 
winding  road,  because  otherwise  I  cannot  hope  that  he  will 


180  COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


take  much  interest  in  the  result  at  the  end  of  the  journey. 
The  conclusion  I  shall  arrive  at  is  that  the  field  equations  of 
gravitation  which  I  have  championed  hitherto  still  need  a 
slight  modification,  so  that  on  the  basis  of  the  general  theory 
of  relativity  those  fundamental  difficulties  may  be  avoided 
which  have  been  set  forth  in  §  1  as  confronting  the  Newtonian 
theory.  This  modification  corresponds  perfectly  to  the  transi¬ 
tion  from  Poisson’s  equation  (1)  to  equation  (2)  of  §  1.  We 
finally  infer  that  boundary  conditions  in  spatial  infinity  fall 
away  altogether,  because  the  universal  continuum  in  respect 
of  its  spatial  dimensions  is  to  be  viewed  as  a  self-contained 
continuum  of  finite  spatial  (three-dimensional)  volume. 

The  opinion  which  I  entertained  until  recently,  as  to  the 
limiting  conditions  to  be  laid  down  in  spatial  infinity,  took 
its  stand  on  the  following  considerations.  In  a  consistent 
theory  of  relativity  there  can  be  no  inertia  relatively  to  “  space,” 
but  only  an  inertia  of  masses  relatively  to  one  another.  If, 
therefore,  I  have  a  mass  at  a  sufficient  distance  from  all  other 
masses  in  the  universe,  its  inertia  must  fall  to  zero.  We  will 
try  to  formulate  this  condition  mathematically. 

According  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity  the  negative 
momentum  is  given  by  the  first  three  components,  the  energy 
by  the  last  component  of  the  covariant  tensor  multiplied  by 

j  -  9 

i -  dxa  /  a  \ 

W  -  g  •  •  •  •  (4) 

where,  as  always,  we  set 

ds 2  =  g^dx^dxv  .  .  .  (5) 

In  the  particularly  perspicuous  case  of  the  possibility  of 
choosing  the  system  of  co-ordinates  so  that  the  gravitational 
field  at  every  point  is  spatially  isotropic,  we  have  more  simply 

ds2  =  -  A (dx\  +  dx 2  +  dx\)  +  T$dx]. 

If,  moreover,  at  the  same  time 

=  1  =  J MB 

we  obtain  from  (4),  to  a  first  approximation  for  small 
velocities', 

A  dx i  A  dx o  A  dx., 

mVB  fa?  m7B  fa?  mv/B  fa4 


A.  EINSTEIN 


181 


for  the  components  of  momentum,  and  for  the  energy  (in  the 
static  case) 

mj  B. 

From  the  expressions  for  the  momentum,  it  follows  that 
A 

plays  the  part  of  the  rest  mass.  As  m  is  a  constant 

peculiar  to  the  point  of  mass,  independently  of  its  position, 
this  expression,  if  we  retain  the  condition  ^/g  -  =  1  at 
spatial  infinity,  can  vanish  only  when  A  diminishes  to  zero, 
while  B  increases  to  infinity.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  such 
a  degeneration  of  the  co-efficients  g^v  is  required  by  the  postu¬ 
late  of  relativity  of  all  inertia.  This  requirement  implies 
that  the  potential  energy  w^/B  becomes  infinitely  great  at 
infinity.  Thus  a  point  of  mass  can  never  leave  the  system  ; 
and  a  more  detailed  investigation  shows  that  the  same  thing 
applies  to  light-rays.  A  system  of  the  universe  with  such 
behaviour  of  the  gravitational  potentials  at  infinity  would  not 
therefore  run  the  risk  of  wasting  away  which  was  mooted 
just  now  in  connexion  with  the  Newtonian  theory. 

I  wish  to  point  out  that  the  simplifying  assumptions  as 
to  the  gravitational  potentials  on  which  this  reasoning  is  based, 
have  been  introduced  merely  for  the  sake  of  lucidity.  It  is 
possible  to  find  general  formulations  for  the  behaviour  of  the 
g^v  at  infinity  which  express  the  essentials  of  the  question 
without  further  restrictive  assumptions. 

At  this  stage,  with  the  kind  assistance  of  the  mathe¬ 
matician  J.  Grommer,  I  investigated  centrally  symmetrical, 
static  gravitational  fields,  degenerating  at  infinity  in  the  way 
mentioned.  The  gravitational  potentials  g^v  were  applied,  and 
from  them  the  energy-tensor  TM„  of  matter  was  calculated  on 
the  basis  of  the  field  equations  of  gravitation.  But  here  it 
proved  that  for  the  system  of  the  fixed  stars  no  boundary  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  kind  can  come  into  question  at  all,  as  was  also 
rightly  emphasized  by  the  astronomer  de  Sitter  recently. 

For  the  contravariant  energy-tensor  TMl'  of  ponderable 
matter  is  given  by 

rr\ti.v  _  dx n  dxv 

^  ds  ds’ 


where  p  is  the  density  of  matter  in  natural  measure.  With 


182  COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


an  appropriate  choice  of  the  system  of  co-ordinates  the 
stellar  velocities  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  that  of 
light.  We  may,  therefore,  substitute  g 44  dx±  for  ds.  This 
shows  us  that  all  components  of  must  be  very  small  in 
comparison  with  the  last  component  T44.  But  it  was  quite 
impossible  to  reconcile  this  condition  with  the  chosen  boundary 
conditions.  In  the  retrospect  this  result  does  not  appear 
astonishing.  The  fact  of  the  small  velocities  of  the  stars 
allows  the  conclusion  that  wherever  there  are  fixed  stars,  the 
gravitational  potential  (in  our  case  can  never  be  much 
greater  than  here  on  earth.  This  follows  from  statistical 
reasoning,  exactly  as  in  the  case  of  the  Newtonian  theory. 
At  any  rate,  our  calculations  have  convinced  me  that  such 
conditions  of  degeneration  for  the  g^v  in  spatial  infinity  may 
not  be  postulated. 

After  the  failure  of  this  attempt,  two  possibilities  next 
present  themselves. 

(a)  We  may  require,  as  in  the  problem  of  the  planets, 
that,  with  a  suitable  choice  of  the  system  of  reference,  the  g^v 
in  spatial  infinity  approximate  to  the  values 

-  1  0  0  0 

0-1  0  0 

0  0-1  0 

0  0  0  1 

( b )  We  may  refrain  entirely  from  laying  down  boundary 
conditions  for  spatial  infinity  claiming  general  validity ;  but 
at  the  spatial  limit  of  the  domain  under  consideration  we 
have  to  give  the  g^v  separately  in  each  individual  case,  as 
hitherto  we  were  accustomed  to  give  the  initial  conditions 
for  time  separately. 

The  possibility  ( b )  holds  out  no  hope  of  solving  the  prob¬ 
lem,  but  amounts  to  giving  it  up.  This  is  an  incontestable 
position,  which  is  taken  up  at  the  present  time  by  de  Sitter.* 
But  I  must  confess  that  such  a  complete  resignation  in  this 
fundamental  question  is  for  me  a  difficult  thing.  I  should 
not  make  up  my  mind  to  it  until  every  effort  to  make  head¬ 
way  toward  a  satisfactory  view  had  proved  to  be  vain. 

Possibility  (a)  is  unsatisfactory  in  more  respects  than  one. 

*  de  Sitter,  Akad.  van  Wetensch.  te  Amsterdam,  8  Nov.,  1916. 


A.  EINSTEIN 


183 


In  the  first  place  those  boundary  conditions  pre-suppose  a 
definite  choice  of  the  system  of  reference,  which  is  contrary 
to  the  spirit  of  the  relativity  principle.  Secondly,  if  we  adopt 
this  view,  we  fail  to  comply  with  the  requirement  of  the 
relativity  of  inertia.  For  the  inertia  of  a  material  point  of 
mass  m  (in  natural  measure)  depends  upon  the  g^v ;  but 
these  differ  but  little  from  their  postulated  values,  as  given 
above,  for  spatial  infinity.  Thus  inertia  would  indeed  be 
influenced ,  but  would  not  be  conditioned  by  matter  (present 
in  finite  space).  If  only  one  single  point  of  mass  were  present, 
according  to  this  view,  it  would  possess  inertia,  and  in  fact 
an  inertia  almost  as  great  as  when  it  is  surrounded  by  the 
other  masses  of  the  actual  universe.  Finally,  those  statistical 
objections  must  be  raised  against  this  view  which  were 
mentioned  in  respect  of  the  Newtonian  theory. 

From  what  has  now  been  said  it  will  be  seen  that  I  have 
not  succeeded  in  formulating  boundary  conditions  for  spatial 
infinity.  Nevertheless,  there  is  still  a  possible  way  out, 
without  resigning  as  suggested  under  ( b ).  For  if  it  were 
possible  to  regard  the  universe  as  a  continuum  which  is 
finite  ( closed )  with  respect  to  its  spatial  dimensions ,  we  should 
have  no  need  at  all  of  any  such  boundary  conditions.  We 
shall  proceed  to  show  that  both  the  general  postulate  of 
relativity  and  the  fact  of  the  small  stellar  velocities  are  com¬ 
patible  with  the  hypothesis  of  a  spatially  finite  universe ; 
though  certainly,  in  order  to  carry  through  this  idea,  we  need 
a  generalizing  modification  of  the  field  equations  of  gravitation. 

§  3.  The  Spatially  Finite  Universe  with  a  Uniform 

Distribution  of  Matter 

According  to  the  general  theory  of  relativity  the  metrical 
character  (curvature)  of  the  four-dimensional  space-time  con¬ 
tinuum  is  defined  at  every  point  by  the  matter  at  that  point 
and  the  state  of  that  matter.  Therefore,  on  account  of  the 
lack  of  uniformity  in  the  distribution  of  matter,  the  metrical 
structure  of  this  continuum  must  necessarily  be  extremely 
complicated.  But  if  we  are  concerned  with  the  structure 
only  on  a  large  scale,  we  may  represent  matter  to  ourselves 
as  being  uniformly  distributed  over  enormous  spaces,  so  that 
its  density  of  distribution  is  a  variable  function  which  varies 


184  COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


extremely  slowly.  Thus  our  procedure  will  somewhat  re¬ 
semble  that  of  the  geodesists  who,  by  means  of  an  ellipsoid, 
approximate  to  the  shape  of  the  earth’s  surface,  which  on  a 
small  scale  is  extremely  complicated. 

The  most  important  fact  that  we  draw  from  experience 
as  to  the  distribution  of  matter  is  that  the  relative  velocities 
of  the  stars  are  very  small  as  compared  with  the  velocity  of 
light.  So  I  think  that  for  the  present  we  may  base  our 
reasoning  upon  the  following  approximative  assumption. 
There  is  a  system  of  reference  relatively  to  which  matter 
may  be  looked  upon  as  being  permanently  at  rest.  With 
respect  to  this  system,  therefore,  the  contravariant  energy- 
tensor  TM"  of  matter  is,  by  reason  of  (5),  of  the  simple  form 


0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  p 


The  scalar  p  of  the  (mean)  density  of  distribution  may  be 
a  priori  a  function  of  the  space  co-ordinates.  But  if  we 
assume  the  universe  to  be  spatially  finite,  we  are  prompted 
to  the  hypothesis  that  p  is  to  be  independent  of  locality. 
On  this  hypothesis  we  base  the  following  considerations. 

As  concerns  the  gravitational  field,  it  follows  from  the 
equation  of  motion  of  the  material  point 


d2xv 

ds'2 


+  {a fit  v] 


dxa  dxp 
ds  ds 


that  a  material  point  in  a  static  gravitational  field  can  remain 
at  rest  only  when  g 44  is  independent  of  locality.  Since,  further, 
we  presuppose  independence  of  the  time  co-ordmate  x±  for 
all  magnitudes,  we  may  demand  for  the  required  solution 
that,  for  all  xv, 

^44  =  I  •  •  •  •  (7) 

Further,  as  always  with  static  problems,  we  shall  have  to  set 

9U  =  #24  =  ?34  =  0  ‘  •  *  (8) 

It  remains  now  to  determine  those  components  of  the 
gravitational  potential  which  define  the  purely  spatial-geo¬ 
metrical  relations  of  our  continuum  ( <7n,£712 ,  .  •  •  <?33).  From 


A.  EINSTEIN 


185 


our  assumption  as  to  the  uniformity  of  distribution  of  the 
masses  generating  the  field,  it  follows  that  the  curvature  of 
the  required  space  must  be  constant.  With  this  distribution 
of  mass,  therefore,  the  required  finite  continuum  of  the 
X\,  x2,  x2y  with  constant  xv  will  be  a  spherical  space. 

We  arrive  at  such  a  space,  for  example,  in  the  following 
way.  We  start  from  a  Euclidean  space  of  four  dimensions, 
ft,  ft,  ft  ft,  with  a  linear  element  da ;  let,  therefore, 


da2  =  dg  +  dg  +  dg  +  dg  .  .  .  (9) 


In  this  space  we  consider  the  hyper-surface 


-  £  +  &  +  t,  +  & 


(10) 


where  E  denotes  a  constant.  The  points  of  this  hyper-surface 
form  a  three-dimensional  continuum,  a  spherical  space  of 
radius  of  curvature  E. 

The  four-dimensional  Euclidean  space  with  which  we 
started  serves  only  for  a  convenient  definition  of  our  hyper¬ 
surface.  Only  those  points  of  the  hyper-surface  are  of 
interest  to  us  which  have  metrical  properties  in  agreement 
with  those  of  physical  space  with  a  uniform  distribution  of 
matter.  For  the  description  of  this  three-dimensional  con¬ 
tinuum  we  may  employ  the  co-ordinates  f2,  ft  (the  pro¬ 
jection  upon  the  hyper-plane  ft  =  0)  since,  by  reason  of  (10), 
ft  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  ft,  ft,  ft-  Eliminating  ft  from 
(9),  we  obtain  for  the  linear  element  of  the  spherical  space 
the  expression 


da 2  =  7  M,dftdft 


(11) 


where  =  1,  if  =  v ;  =  0,  if /x,  =(=  v,  and  p2  =  g  +  g  +  g. 

The  co-ordinates  chosen  are  convenient  when  it  is  a  question 
of  examining  the  environment  of  one  of  the  two  points 

ft  =  ft  =  ft  =  o. 

Now  the  linear  element  of  the  required  four-dimensional 
space-time  universe  is  also  given  us.  For  the  potential 
both  indices  of  which  differ  from  4,  we  have  to  set 


X^Xy 


E2  -  (x\  + 


o 

+ 


■a 


X*) 


(12) 


9*v  = 


+ 


186  COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


which  equation,  in  combination  with  (7)  and  (8),  perfectly 
defines  the  behaviour  of  measuring-rods,  clocks,  and  light- 
rays. 


§  4.  On  an  Additional  Term  for  the  Field  Equations  of 

Gravitation 

My  proposed  field  equations  of  gravitation  for  any  chosen 
system  of  co-ordinates  run  as  follows  : — 


Gmv  =  -  /c( T), 

=  -  r—  {fjiv,  a}  +  {fxa,  (3}  {v/3,  a} 


+ 


yiog  J  -  g 

'dXfj.'dXy 


{fiv,  a} 


^  logy/"  9 

'dx* 


(13) 


The  system  of  equations  (13)  is  by  no  means  satisfied 
when  we  insert  for  the  g^v  the  values  given  in  (7),  (8),  and 
(12),  and  for  the  (contravariant)  energy-tensor  of  matter  the 
values  indicated  in  (6).  It  will  be  shown  in  the  next  para¬ 
graph  how  this  calculation  may  conveniently  be  made.  So 
that,  if  it  were  certain  that  the  field  equations  (13)  which  I 
have  hitherto  employed  were  the  only  ones  compatible  with 
the  postulate  of  general  relativity,  we  should  probably  have 
to  conclude  that  the  theory  of  relativity  does  not  admit  the 
hypothesis  of  a  spatially  finite  universe. 

However,  the  system  of  equations  (14)  allows  a  readily 
suggested  extension  which  is  compatible  with  the  relativity 
postulate,  and  is  perfectly  analogous  to  the  extension  of 
Poisson’s  equation  given  by  equation  (2).  For  on  the  left- 
hand  side  of  field  equation  (13)  we  may  add  the  fundamental 
tensor  g M„,  multiplied  by  a  universal  constant,  -  X,  at  present 
unknown,  without  destroying  the  general  covariance.  In 
place  of  field  equation  (13)  we  write 

G>„  ~\g fj_v  —  /c(T^,v  iy^T)  .  .  (13a) 

This  field  equation,  with  X  sufficiently  small,  is  in  any  case 
also  compatible  with  the  facts  of  experience  derived  from 
the  solar  system.  It  also  satisfies  laws  of  conservation  of 
momentum  and  energy,  because  we  arrive  at  (13a)  in  place 
of  (13)  by  introducing  into  Hamilton’s  principle,  instead 
of  the  scalar  of  Riemann’s  tensor,  this  scalar  increased  by  a 


A.  EINSTEIN 


187 


universal  constant ;  and  Hamilton’s  principle,  of  course, 
guarantees  the  validity  of  laws  of  conservation.  It  will  be 
shown  in  §  5  that  field  equation  (13a)  is  compatible  with 
our  conjectures  on  field  and  matter. 


§  5.  Calculation  and  Result 

Since  all  points  of  our  continuum  are  on  an  equal  footing, 
it  is  sufficient  to  carry  through  the  calculation  for  one  point, 
e.g.  for  one  of  the  two  points  with  the  co-ordinates 

aq  =  x2  =  xz  —  =  0. 

Then  for  the  g^v  in  (13a)  we  have  to  insert  the  values 

-  1  0  0  0 

0-1  0  0 

0  0-1  0 

0  0  0  1 


wherever  they  appear  differentiated  only  once  or  not  at  all. 
We  thus  obtain  in  the  first  place 


dx< 


[M»,  2]  +  3]  +  ylog  /  - 1 


'dX^X, 


From  this  we  readily  discover,  taking  (7),  (8),  and  (13)  into 
account,  that  all  equations  (13a)  are  satisfied  if  the  two 
relations 


tcp 

~2’ 


-  X  = 


Kp 

IP 


or 


(14) 


are  fulfilled. 

Thus  the  newly  introduced  universal  constant  X  defines 
both  the  mean  density  of  distribution  p  which  can  remain  in 
equilibrium  and  also  the  radius  K  and  the  volume  27t2E3  of 
spherical  space.  The  total  mass  M  of  the  universe,  accord¬ 
ing  to  our  view,  is  finite,  and  is  in  fact 


M  =  p  .  2tt2K3  =  47t2-  - 

K 


(15) 


Thus  the  theoretical  view  of  the  actual  universe,  if  it  is  in 
correspondence  with  our  reasoning,  is  the  following.  The 


188  COSMOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


curvature  of  space  is  variable  in  time  and  place,  according  to 
the  distribution  of  matter,  but  we  may  roughly  approximate 
to  it  by  means  of  a  spherical  space.  At  any  rate,  this  view  is 
logically  consistent,  and  from  the  standpoint  of  the  general 
theory  of  relativity  lies  nearest  at  hand  ;  whether,  from  the 
standpoint  of  present  astronomical  knowledge,  it  is  tenable, 
will  not  here  be  discussed.  In  order  to  arrive  at  this  con¬ 
sistent  view,  we  admittedly  had  to  introduce  an  extension  of 
the  field  equations  of  gravitation  which  is  not  justified  by  our 
actual  knowledge  of  gravitation.  It  is  to  be  emphasized, 
however,  that  a  positive  curvature  of  space  is  given  by  our 
results,  even  if  the  supplementary  term  is  not  introduced. 
That  term  is  necessary  only  for  the  purpose  of  making 
possible  a  quasi-static  distribution  of  matter,  as  required  by 
the  fact  of  the  small  velocities  of  the  stars. 


DO  GRAVITATIONAL  FIELDS  PLAY  AN 
ESSENTIAL  PART  IN  THE  STRUC¬ 
TURE  OF  THE  ELEMENTARY  PAR¬ 
TICLES  OF  MATTER? 

BY 

A.  EINSTEIN 

Translated  from  “  Spielen  Gravitations/ elder  im  Aufber  der 
materiellen  Elementarteilchen  eine  wesentliche  Rolle  V* 
Sitzungsberichte  der  Preussischen  Akad.  d.  Wissen- 
schaften ,  1919. 


' 


DO  GRAVITATIONAL  FIELDS  PLAY  AN  ESSENTIAL 
PART  IN  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  ELEMEN¬ 
TARY  PARTICLES  OF  MATTER? 

By  A.  EINSTEIN 

NEITHER  the  Newtonian  nor  the  relativistic  theory 
of  gravitation  has  so  far  led  to  any  advance  in  the 
theory  of  the  constitution  of  matter.  In  view  of  this 
fact  it  will  be  shown  in  the  following  pages  that  there  are 
reasons  for  thinking  that  the  elementary  formations  which  go 
to  make  up  the  atom  are  held  together  by  gravitational  forces. 

§  i.  Defects  of  the  Present  View 

Great  pains  have  been  taken  to  elaborate  a  theory  which 
will  account  for  the  equilibrium  of  the  electricity  constituting 
the  electron.  G.  Mie,  in  particular,  has  devoted  deep  re¬ 
searches  to  this  question.  His  theory,  which  has  found  con¬ 
siderable  support  among  theoretical  physicists,  is  based 
mainly  on  the  introduction  into  the  energy-tensor  of  sup¬ 
plementary  terms  depending  on  the  components  of  the 
electro-dynamic  potential,  in  addition  to  the  energy  terms  of 
the  Maxwell-Lorentz  theory.  These  new  terms,  which  in 
outside  space  are  unimportant,  are  nevertheless  effective  in 
the  interior  of  the  electrons  in  maintaining  equilibrium 
against  the  electric  forces  of  repulsion.  In  spite  of  the 
beauty  of  the  formal  structure  of  this  theory,  as  erected  by 
Mie,  Hilbert,  and  Weyl,  its  physical  results  have  hitherto 
been  unsatisfactory.  On  the  one  hand  the  multiplicity  of 
possibilities  is  discouraging,  and  on  the  other  hand  those 
additional  terms  have  not  as  yet  allowed  themselves  to  be 
framed  in  such  a  simple  form  that  the  solution  could  be 
satisfactory. 


191 


192 


ATOMIC  STRUCTURE 


So  far  the  general  theory  of  relativity  has  made  no  change 
in  this  state  of  the  question.  If  we  for  the  moment  disregard 
the  additional  cosmological  term,  the  field  equations  take  the 
form 

/ivG  ~  •  •  •  (1) 

where  GMV  denotes  the  contracted  Riemann  tensor  of  curva¬ 
ture,  G  the  scalar  of  curvature  formed  by  repeated  contraction, 
and  TM„  the  energy-tensor  of  “  matter.”  The  assumption 
that  the  do  not  depend  on  the  derivatives  of  the  g ^  is  in 
keeping  with  the  historical  development  of  these  equations. 
For  these  quantities  are,  of  course,  the  energy-components  in 
the  sense  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity,  in  which  variable 
g^v  do  not  occur.  The  second  term  on  the  left-hand  side 
of  the  equation  is  so  chosen  that  the  divergence  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  (1)  vanishes  identically,  so  that  taking  the 
divergence  of  (1),  we  obtain  the  equation 


^2  +  r  =  0  •  •  •  (2) 

0x„  * 


which  in  the  limiting  case  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity 
gives  the  complete  equations  of  conservation 


3Tmv 

^Xy 


Therein  lies  the  physical  foundation  for  the  second  term  of 
the  left-hand  side  of  (1).  It  is  by  no  means  settled  a  priori 
that  a  limiting  transition  of  this  kind  has  any  possible  mean¬ 
ing.  For  if  gravitational  fields  do  play  an  essential  part  in 
the  structure  of  the  particles  of  matter,  the  transition  to  the 
limiting  case  of  constant  g ^  would,  for  them,  lose  its  justifi¬ 
cation,  for  indeed,  with  constant  g^y  there  could  not  be  any 
particles  of  matter.  So  if  we  wish  to  contemplate  the  possi¬ 
bility  that  gravitation  may  take  part  in  the  structure  of  the 
fields  which  constitute  the  corpuscles,  we  cannot  regard 
equation  (1)  as  confirmed. 

Placing  in  (1)  the  Maxwell-Lorentz- energy-components  of 
the  electromagnetic  field  <£M„, 

TM„  =  Ig^tTT^*7  -  (ptur^vrg^i 


(3) 


A.  EINSTEIN 


193 

we  obtain  for  (2),  by  taking  the  divergence,  and  after  some 
reduction,* 

<pn*y  =  0  .  .  .  .  (4) 

where,  for  brevity,  we  have  set 

^rr)  =  sk  =  3^  .  .  (5) 

In  the  calculation  we  have  employed  the  second  of  Maxwell’s 
systems  of  equations 

+  ^.e  +  _  0  .  .  .  (6) 

OXp  OXp.  OXy 

We  see  from  (4)  that  the  current-density  3a  must  everywhere 
vanish.  Therefore,  by  equation  (1),  we  cannot  arrive  at  a 
theory  of  the  electron  by  restricting  ourselves  to  the  electro¬ 
magnetic  components  of  the  Maxwell-Lorentz  theory,  as  has 
long  been  known.  Thus  if  we  hold  to  (1)  we  are  driven  on 
to  the  path  of  Mie’s  theory.f 

Not  only  the  problem  of  matter,  but  the  cosmological 
problem  as  well,  leads  to  doubt  as  to  equation  (1).  As  I  have 
shown  in  the  previous  paper,  the  general  theory  of  relativity 
requires  that  the  universe  be  spatially  finite.  But  this  view 
of  the  universe  necessitated  an  extension  of  equations  (1), 
with  the  introduction  of  a  new  universal  constant  X,  standing 
in  a  fixed  relation  to  the  total  mass  of  the  universe  (or,  re¬ 
spectively,  to  the  equilibrium  density  of  matter).  This  is 
gravely  detrimental  to  the  formal  beauty  of  the  theory. 

§  2.  The  Field  Equations  Freed  of  Scalars 

The  difficulties  set  forth  above  are  removed  by  setting  in 
place  of  field  equations  (1)  the  field  equations 

Gl  p,y  \cj  nvQ  =  fcT^y  .  .  .  (la) 

where  T,*„  denotes  the  energy-tensor  of  the  electromagnetic 
field  given  by  (3). 

The  formal  justification  for  the  factor  -  \  in  the  second 

*  Cf.  e.g.  A.  Einstein,  Sitzungsber.  d.  Preuss.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.,  1916, 
pp.  187,  188. 

f  Cf.  D.  Hilbert,  Gottinger  Nachr.,  20  Nov.,  1915. 


194  ATOMIC  STRUCTURE 

term  of  this  equation  lies  in  its  causing  the  scalar  of  the  left- 
hand  side, 

-  i^G), 

to  vanish  identically,  as  the  scalar  gVfl of  the  right-hand 
side  does  by  reason  of  (3).  If  we  had  reasoned  on  the  basis 
of  equations  (1)  instead  of  (la),  we  should,  on  the  contrary, 
have  obtained  the  condition  G  =  0,  which  would  have  to 
hold  good  everywhere  for  the  g M„,  independently  of  the  electric 
field.  It  is  clear  that  the  system  of  equations  [(la),  (3)]  is 
a  consequence  of  the  system  [(1),  (3)],  but  not  conversely. 

We  might  at  first  sight  feel  doubtful  whether  (la)  together 
with  (6)  sufficiently  define  the  entire  field.  In  a  generally 
relativistic  theory  we  need  n  -  4  differential  equations,  in¬ 
dependent  of  one  another,  for  the  definition  of  n  independent 
variables,  since  in  the  solution,  on  account  of  the  liberty  of 
choice  of  the  co-ordinates,  four  quite  arbitrary  functions 
of  all  co-ordinates  must  naturally  occur.  Thus  to  define 
the  sixteen  independent  quantities  g and  we  require 
twelve  equations,  all  independent  of  one  another.  But  as  it 
happens,  nine  of  the  equations  (la),  and  three  of  the  equations 
(6)  are  independent  of  one  another. 

Forming  the  divergence  of  (la),  and  taking  into  account 
that  the  divergence  of  GM„  -  \g^v G  vanishes,  we  obtain 

^“J"  +  Ik  =  °  '  ’  '  (4a) 

From  this  we  recognize  first  of  all  that  the  scalar  of  curvature 
G  in  the  four-dimensional  domains  in  which  the  density  of 
electricity  vanishes,  is  constant.  If  we  assume  that  all  these 
parts  of  space  are  connected,  and  therefore  that  the  density 
of  electricity  differs  from  zero  only  in  separate  “  world- 
threads,”  then  the  scalar  of  curvature,  everywhere  outside 
these  world-threads,  possesses  a  constant  value  G0.  But 
equation  (4a)  also  allows  an  important  conclusion  as  to  the 
behaviour  of  G  within  the  domains  having  a  density  of  elec¬ 
tricity  other  than  zero.  If,  as  is  customary,  we  regard  elec¬ 
tricity  as  a  moving  density  of  charge,  by  setting 

T(7  _  3  djXcr 

J  -  g  ~  p  ds’ 


(V 


A.  EINSTEIN 


195 


we  obtain  from  (4a)  by  inner  multiplication  by  J",  on  account 
of  the  antisymmetry  of  the  relation 

c)Gt  dXff  /n\ 

^AT  =  0  '  •  •  •  (8) 

Thus  the  scalar  of  curvature  is  constant  on  every  world-line 
of  the  motion  of  electricity.  Equation  (4a)  can  be  interpreted 
in  a  graphic  manner  by  the  statement :  The  scalar  of  curva¬ 
ture  plays  the  part  of  a  negative  pressure  which,  outside  of 
the  electric  corpuscles,  has  a  constant  value  G0.  In  the  in¬ 
terior  of  every  corpuscle  there  subsists  a  negative  pressure 
(positive  G  -  G0)  the  fall  of  which  maintains  the  electro¬ 
dynamic  force  in  equilibrium.  The  minimum  of  pressure,  or, 
respectively,  the  maximum  of  the  scalar  of  curvature,  does 
not  change  with  time  in  the  interior  of  the  corpuscle. 

We  now  write  the  field  equations  (la)  in  the  form 

(Gm„  -  ig^G)  +  i<7M„G0  =  -  /e(^TM„  +  j^V^G  -  G0))  (9) 

On  the  other  hand,  we  transform  the  equations  supplied  with 
the  cosmological  term  as  already  given 

Gm„  Xg  ^  ~  *(TM>,  ig^T). 

Subtracting  the  scalar  equation  multiplied  by  we  next 
obtain 

(G^v  \g ^i>G)  +  g^X  =  acT^^. 

Now  in  regions  where  only  electrical  and  gravitational  fields 
are  present,  the  right-hand  side  of  this  equation  vanishes. 
For  such  regions  we  obtain,  by  forming  the  scalar, 

-  G  +  4A.  =  0. 

In  such  regions,  therefore,  the  scalar  of  curvature  is  constant, 
so  that  X  may  be  replaced  by  ^G0.  Thus  we  may  write  the 
earlier  field  equation  (1)  in  the  form 

GM„  -  ig^vG  +  i#M„G0  =  -  /cTm„  .  .  (10) 

Comparing  (9)  with  (10),  we  see  that  there  is  no  difference 
between  the  new  field  equations  and  the  earlier  ones,  except 
that  instead  of  T as  tensor  of  “  gravitating  mass  ”  there  now 


196 


ATOMIC  STRUCTURE 


occurs  g^v{Q  -  G0)  which  is  independent  of  the 

scalar  of  curvature.  But  the  new  formulation  has  this  great 
advantage,  that  the  quantity  X  appears  in  the  fundamental 
equations  as  a  constant  of  integration,  and  no  longer  as  a 
universal  constant  peculiar  to  the  fundamental  law. 


§  3.  On  the  Cosmological  Question 

The  last  result  already  permits  the  surmise  that  with  our 
new  formulation  the  universe  may  be  regarded  as  spatially 
finite,  without  any  necessity  for  an  additional  hypothesis. 
As  in  the  preceding  paper  I  shall  again  show  that  with  a 
uniform  distribution  of  matter,  a  spherical  world  is  compatible 
with  the  equations. 

In  the  first  place  we  set 

ds 2  =  -  7 ikdxidxk  +  dx\  (i,  h  =  1,  2,  3)  (11) 

Then  if  P &  and  P  are,  respectively,'  the  curvature  tensor  of 
the  second  rank  and  the  curvature  scalar  in  three-dimensional 
space,  we  have 

G a  =  P &  (i,  7c  =  1,  2,  3) 

Gq  =  G^  =  G44  =  0 
G  =  -  P 

-  9  =  7- 

It  therefore  follows  for  our  case  that 


Gi&  —  —  Pi&  —  Pyi&P  (i,  7c  —  1,  2,  3) 

G44  “  PhiG  =  -J-P. 

We  pursue  our  reflexions,  from  this  point  on,  in  two  ways. 
Firstly,  with  the  support  of  equation  (la).  Here  TMV  denotes 
the  energy-tensor  of  the  electro-magnetic  field,  arising  from 
the  electrical  particles  constituting  matter.  For  this  field 
we  have  everywhere 

+  XI  +  XI  +  X\  =  0. 

v 

The  individual  X M  are  quantities  which  vary  rapidly  with  posi¬ 
tion  ;  but  for  our  purpose  we  no  doubt  may  replace  them  by 
their  mean  values.  We  therefore  have  to  choose 


X\  =  X\  =  XI  =  -  iX\  =  const. 
X*  =  0  (for  n  =[=  v)> 


(12) 


1 


A.  EINSTEIN 


197 


and  therefore 


In  consideration  of  what  has  been  shown  hitherto,  we  obtain 
in  place  of  (la) 

Pi*  -  iyaP  =  -  iyu*^-  ■  •  •  (13) 

iP  =  -  •  .  .  (14) 

The  scalar  of  equation  (13)  agrees  with  (14).  It  is  on  this 
account  that  our  fundamental  equations  permit  the  idea  of  a 
spherical  universe.  For  from  (13)  and  (14)  follows 

Pi*  +  f  *^yik  =  0  .  .  .  (15) 

3  \fy 


and  it  is  known  *  that  this  system  is  satisfied  by  a  (three- 
dimensional)  spherical  universe. 

But  we  may  also  base  our  reflexions  on  the  equations  (9). 
On  the  right-hand  side  of  (9)  stand  those  terms  which,  from 
the  phenomenological  point  of  view,  are  to  be  replaced  by  the 
energy-tensor  of  matter ;  that  is,  they  are  to  be  replaced  by 

0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  0 

0  0  0  p 

where  p  denotes  the  mean  density  of  matter  assumed  to  be 
at  rest.  We  thus  obtain  the  equations 

P ik  -  -  iYi/feG-  o  =0  .  .  (16) 

£P  +  JGo  =  -  Kp  .  .  .  (17) 

From  the  scalar  of  equation  (16)  and  from  (17)  we  obtain 

G0  =  -  §P  =  2kP,  .  .  .  (18) 

and  consequently  from  (16) 

P ik  -  /cpryik  =  0 


*Cf.  H.  Weyl,  “Raum,  Zeit,  Materie,”  §  33. 


(19) 


198 


ATOMIC  STRUCTURE 


which  equation,  with  the  exception  of  the  expression  for  the 
co-efficient,  agrees  with  (15).  By  comparison  we  obtain 

=  W  7 . (20) 

This  equation  signifies  that  of  the  energy  constituting  matter 
three-quarters  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  electromagnetic  field, 
and  one-quarter  to  the  gravitational  field. 

§  4.  Concluding  Remarks 

The  above  reflexions  show  the  possibility  of  a  theoretical 
construction  of  matter  out  of  gravitational  field  and  electro¬ 
magnetic  field  alone,  without  the  introduction  of  hypothetical 
supplementary  terms  on  the  lines  of  Mie’s  theory.  This 
possibility  appears  particularly  promising  in  that  it  frees  us 
from  the  necessity  of  introducing  a  special  constant  X  for  the 
solution  of  the  cosmological  problem.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  a  peculiar  difficulty.  For,  if  we  specialize  (1)  for  the 
spherically  symmetrical  static  case  we  obtain  one  equation 
too  few  for  defining  the  g^v  and  with  the  result  that  any 
spherically  symmetrical  distribution  of  electricity  appears 
capable  of  remaining  in  equilibrium.  Thus  the  problem  of 
the  constitution  of  the  elementary  quanta  cannot  yet  be 
solved  on  the  immediate  basis  of  the  given  field  equations. 


GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 


BY 

H.  WEYL 

Translated  from  “  Gravitation  und  Elehtriticitat Sitzungs- 
berichte  der  Preussischen  Akad.  d.  Wissenschaftent  1918. 


' 


GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY  * 
By  H.  WEYL 


ACCORDING  to  Riemann,  f  geometry  is  based  upon 
the  following  two  facts  : — 

1.  Space  is  a  Three-dimensional  Continuum. — The 
manifold  of  its  points  may  therefore  be  consistently  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  values  of  three  co-ordinates  xlf  x2 ,  x3. 

2.  ( Pythagorean  Theorem). — The  square  of  the  distance  ds 
between  two  infinitely  proximate  points 
P  =  (xv  x2,  x3)  and  P'  =  (xY  +  dxlt  x2  +  dx2,  x3  +  dx3)  (1) 
(any  co-ordinates  being  employed)  is  a  quadratic  form  of  the 
relative  co-ordinates  dx M  : — 

ds  =  ixVdXfidxV)  (ffnv  ~  Qvf)  •  •  (2) 

MV 

The  second  of  these  facts  may  be  briefly  stated  by  saying 
that  space  is  a  metrical  continuum.  In  complete  accord  with 
the  spirit  of  the  physics  of  immediate  action  we  assume  the 
Pythagorean  theorem  to  be  strictly  valid  only  in  the  limit 
when  the  distances  are  infinitely  small. 

The  special  theory  of  relativity  led  to  the  discovery  that 
time  is  associated  as  a  fourth  co-ordinate  (#4)  on  an  equal 
footing  with  the  three  co-ordinates  of  space,  and  that  the 
scene  of  material  events,  the  world ,  is  therefore  a  four-dimen¬ 
sional,  metrical  continuum.  And  so  the  quadratic  form  (2), 
which  defines  the  metrical  properties  of  the  world,  is  not 
necessarily  positive  as  in  the  case  of  the  geometry  of  three- 
dimensional  space,  but  has  the  index  of  inertia  3.J  Riemann 

*  The  footnotes  in  square  brackets  are  later  additions  by  the  author. 

+  Math.  Werke  (2nd  ed.,  Leipzig,  1892),  No.  XII,  p.  282. 

J  That  is  to  say  that  if  the  co-ordinates  are  chosen  so  that  at  one  particular 

point  of  the  continuum  ds 2  =  +  dx1  4.  ^X2  +  dx3  ±  dx4,  then  in  every  case 

three  of  the  signs  will  be  +  and  one  -  (Trans.). 

201 


202  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 


himself  did  not  fail  to  point  out  that  this  quadratic  form  was 
to  be  regarded  as  a  physical  reality,  since  it  reveals  itself,  e.g. 
in  centrifugal  forces,  as  the  origin  of  real  effects  upon  matter, 
and  that  matter  therefore  presumably  reacts  upon  it.  Until 
then  all  geometricians  and  philosophers  had  looked  upon  the 
metrical  properties  of  space  as  pertaining  to  space  itself,  in¬ 
dependently  of  the  matter  which  it  contained.  It  is  upon  this 
idea,  which  it  was  quite  impossible  for  Riemann  in  his  day  to 
carry  through,  that  Einstein  in  our  own  time,  independently 
of  Riemann,  has  raised  the  imposing  edifice  of  his  general 
theory  of  relativity.  According  to  Einstein  the  phenomena 
of  gravitation  must  also  be  placed  to  the  account  of  geometry, 
and  the  laws  by  which  matter  affects  measurements  are  no 
other  than  the  laws  of  gravitation :  the  g^v  in  (2)  form  the 
components  of  the  gravitational  potential.  While  the  gravi¬ 
tational  potential  thus  consists  of  an  invariant  quadratic 
differential  form,  electromagnetic  phenomena  are  governed  by 
a  four-potential  of  which  the  components  together  com¬ 
pose  an  invariant  linear  differential  form  But  so 

far  the  two  classes  of  phenomena,  gravitation  and  electricity, 
stand  side  by  side,  the  one  separate  from  the  other. 

The  later  work  of  Levi-Civita,*  Hessenberg,f  and  the 
author  J  shows  quite  plainly  that  the  fundamental  conception 
on  which  the  development  of  Riemann’s  geometry  must  be 
based  if  it  is  to  be  in  agreement  with  nature,  is  that  of  the 
infinitesimal  parallel  displacement  of  a  vector.  If  P  and  P* 
are  any  two  points  connected  by  a  curve,  a  given  vector  at  P 
can  be  moved  parallel  to  itself  along  this  curve  from  P  to  P*. 
But,  generally  speaking,  this  conveyance  of  a  vector  from  P 
to  P*  is  not  integrable,  that  is  to  say,  the  vector  at  P*  at 
which  we  arrive  depends  upon  the  path  along  which  the  dis¬ 
placement  travels.  It  is  only  in  Euclidean  “  gravitationless  ” 
geometry  that  in  tegrability  obtains.  The  Riemannian  geometry 
referred  to  above  still  contains  a  residual  element  of  finite 
geometry — without  any  substantial  reason,  as  far  as  I  can  see. 


*  “  Nozione  di  parallelismo  .  .  Rend,  del  Circ.  Matem.  di  Palermo, 
Vol.  42  (1917). 

t“  Vektorielle  Begriindung  der  Differentialgeometrie,”  Math.  Ann.,  Vol. 
78  (1917). 

X  “  Space,  Time,  and  Matter  ”  (1st  ed.,  Berlin,  1918),  §  14. 


H.  WEYL 


203 


It  seems  to  be  due  to  the  accidental  origin  of  this  geometry 
in  the  theory  of  surfaces.  The  quadratic  form  (2)  enables  us 
to  compare,  with  respect  to  their  length,  not  only  two  vectors 
at  the  same  point,  but  also  the  vectors  at  any  two  points. 
But  a  truly  infinitesimal  geometry  must  recognize  only  the 
principle  of  the  transference  of  a  length  from  one  point  to 
another  point  infinitely  near  to  the  first.  This  forbids  us  to 
assume  that  the  problem  of  the  transference  of  length  from 
one  point  to  another  at  a  finite  distance  is  integrable,  more 
particularly  as  the  problem  of  the  transference  of  direction  has 
proved  to  be  non-integrable.  Such  an  assumption  being  re¬ 
cognized  as  false,  a  geometry  comes  into  being,  which,  when 
applied  to  the  world,  explains  in  a  surprising  manner  not 
only  the  phenomena  of  gravitation,  but  also  those  of  the  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  field.  According  to  the  theory  which  now  takes 
shape,  both  classes  of  phenomena  spring  from  the  same 
source,  and  in  fact  we  cannot  in  general  make  any  arbitrary 
separation  of  electricity  from  gravitation.  In  this  theory 
all  physical  quantities  have  a  meaning  in  world  geometry. 
In  particular  the  quantities  denoting  physical  effects  appear 
at  once  as  pure  numbers.  The  theory  leads  to  a  world-law 
which  in  its  essentials  is  defined  without  ambiguity.  It  even 
permits  us  in  a  certain  sense  to  comprehend  why  the  world 
has  four  dimensions.  I  shall  now  first  of  all  give  a  sketch  of 
the  structure  of  the  amended  geometry  of  Riemann  without 
any  thought  of  its  physical  interpretation.  Its  application  to 
physics  will  then  follow  of  its  own  accord. 

In  a  given  system  of  co-ordinates  the  relative  co-ordinates 
dx M  of  a  point  P'  infinitely  near  to  P — see  (1) — are  the  com¬ 
ponents  of  the  infinitesimal  displacement  PP'.  The  transition 
from  one  system  of  co-ordinates  to  another  is  expressed  by 
definite  formulae  of  transformation, 


Xfxi^x^,  x 2  .  ,  ,  y  1,  2,  .  .  .  n, 

which  determine  the  connexion  between  the  co-ordinates  of 
the  same  point  in  the  two  systems.  Then  between  the  com¬ 
ponents  dx^  and  the  components  <&r*  of  the  same  infinitesimal 

displacement  of  the  point  P  we  have  the  linear  formulae  of 
transformation 


dx„  =  2a„vdx 


(3) 


204  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 


in  which  aM„  are  the  values  of  the  derivatives  at  the  point 

P.  A  contravariant  vector  x  at  the  point  P  referred  to  either 
system  of  co-ordinates  has  n  known  numbers  £>*  for  its  com¬ 
ponents,  which  in  the  transition  to  another  system  are  trans¬ 
formed  in  exactly  the  same  way  (3)  as  the  components  of  an 
infinitesimal  displacement.  I  denote  the  totality  of  vectors 
at  the  point  P  as  the  vector-space  at  P.  It  is,  firstly,  linear 
or  affine,  i.e.  by  multiplication  of  a  vector  at  P  by  a  number,, 
and  by  addition  of  two  such  vectors,  there  always  arises  a 
vector  at  P ;  and,  secondly,  it  is  metrical,  i.e.  by  the  sym¬ 
metrical  bilinear  form  belonging  to  (2)  a  scalar  product 

x  y  =  y  x  = 

is  invariantly  assigned  to  each  pair  of  vectors  x  and  y  with 
components  rf’.  We  take  it,  however,  that  this  form  is 
determined  only  as  far  as  to  a  positive  factor  of  proportion¬ 
ality,  which  remains  arbitrary.  If  the  manifold  of  points  of 
space  is  represented  by  co-ordinates  x M,  the  g^v  are  determined 
by  the  metrical  properties  at  the  point  P  only  to  the  extent 
of  their  proportionality.  In  the  physical  sense,  too,  it  is  only 
the  ratios  of  the  g^v  that  has  an  immediate  tangible  meaning. 
For  the  equation 

Xg^dx^dxv  =  0 

is  satisfied,  when  P  is  a  given  origin,  by  those  infinitely 
proximate  world-points  which  are  reached  by  a  light  signal 
emitted  at  P.  For  the  purpose  of  analytical  presentation  we 
have  firstly  to  choose  a  definite  system  of  co-ordinates,  and 
secondly  at  each  point  P  to  determine  the  arbitrary  factor  of 
proportionality  with  which  the  g are  endowed.  Accordingly 
the  formulae  which  emerge  must  possess  a  double  property  of 
invariance :  they  must  be  invariant  with  respect  to  any  con¬ 
tinuous  transformations  of  co-ordinates,  and  they  must  remain 
unaltered  if  where  \  is  an  arbitrary  continuous  function 
of  position,  is  substituted  for  the  g^v.  The  supervention  of 
this  second  property  of  invariance  is  characteristic  of  our 
theory. 

If  P,  P*  are  any  two  points,  and  if  to  each  vector  x  at  P  a 
vector  x*  at  P*  is  assigned  in  such  a  way  that  in  general  ax 


H.  WEYL 


205 


becomes  ax *,  and  x  +  y  becomes  x*  +  y*  (a  being  any  as¬ 
signed  number),  and  the  vector  zero  at  P  is  the  only  one  to 
which  the  vector  zero  at  P*  corresponds,  we  then  have  made  an 
affine  or  linear  replica  of  the  vector-space  at  P  on  the  vector- 
space  at  P*.  This  replica  has  a  particularly  close  resemblance 
when  the  scalar  product  of  the  vectors  x*,  y*  at  P*  is  propor¬ 
tional  to  that  of  x  and  y  at  P  for  all  pairs  of  vectors  x,  y.  (In 
our  view  it  is  only  this  idea  of  a  similar  replica  that  has 
an  objective  sense ;  the  previous  theory  permitted  the  more 
definite  conception  of  a  congruent  replica.)  The  meaning  of 
the  parallel  displacement  of  a  vector  at  the  point  P  to  a 
neighbouring  point  P'  is  settled  by  the  two  axiomatic  postu¬ 
lates. 

1.  By  the  parallel  displacement  of  the  vectors  at  the  point 
P  to  the  neighbouring  point  P'  a  similar  image  of  the  vector- 
space  at  P  is  made  upon  the  vector-space  at  P'. 

2.  If  P1?  P2  are  two  points  in  the  neighbourhood  of  P,  and 
the  infinitesimal  vector  PP2  at  P  is  transformed  into  PjP12 
by  a  parallel  displacement  to  the  point  Px,  while  PPj  at  P  is 
transformed  into  P2P21  by  parallel  displacement  to  P2,  then 
P12,  P2i  coincide,  i.e.  infinitesimal  parallel  displacements  are 
commutative. 

That  part  of  postulate  1  which  says  that  the  parallel  dis¬ 
placement  is  an  affine  transposition  of  the  vector-space  from 
P  to  P',  is  expressed  analytically  as  follows  :  the  vector  ^  at 
P  =  {xlf  x2,  .  .  xn)  is  by  displacement  transformed  into  a 
vector  at  P'  =  (x1  +  dxY,  x2  +  dx2 ,  .  .  .  xn  +  dxn ) 

the  components  of  which  are  in  a  linear  relation  to  — 

de  =  -  2dy;Z'  ....  (4) 

V 

The  second  postulate  teaches  that  the  d^v  are  linear  differ¬ 
ential  forms 

dju  =  zr:PdxPi 

p 

the  coefficients  of  which  possess  the  symmetrical  property 

rM  =  rM  .  .  .  .  (5) 

If  two  vectors  ^  at  P  are  transformed  by  parallel  dis¬ 
placement  at  P'  into  +  d^y  rf"  +  d r/kt  then  the  postulate 


206  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 


of  similarity  stated  under  1  above,  which  goes  beyond  affinity, 
tells  us  that 

2(g„  +  dg^  +  d?Xv9  +  & f) 

must  be  proportional  to 

U.V 

If  we  call  the  factor  of  proportionality,  which  differs  infinit¬ 
esimally  from  1,  1  +  d(j),  and  define  the  reduction  of  an  index 
in  the  usual  way  by  the  formula 

=  %gtlva\ 

v 

we  obtain 

dg  fiv  (dyvfji  +  d'yixt,')  —  g^dcf)  .  .  (6) 

From  this  it  follows  that  dxp  is  a  linear  differential  form 

d<f>  =  Zcp^dx^  .  .  .  .  (7) 

P- 

If  this  is  known,  the  equation  (6)  or 

p  ,  p  _  ^g^v  _  * 

1  vp  ~r  1  V,  HP  —  ^  yp-v^Ppi 

together  with  the  condition  for  symmetry  (5),  gives  unequivo¬ 
cally  the  quantities  F  The  internal  metrical  connexion  of 
space  thus  depends  on  a  linear  form  (7)  besides  the  quadratic 
form  (2) — which  is  determined  except  as  to  an  arbitrary 
factor  of  proportionality.*  If  we  substitute  \g^v  for  g with- 

*  [I  have  now  modified  this  structure  in  the  following  points  (cf.  the  final 
presentation  in  ed.  4  of  “  Raum,  Zeit,  Materie,”  1921,  §§  13,  18).  (a)  In  place 

of  postulates  1  and  2,  which  the  parallel  displacement  has  to  fulfil,  there  is 
now  one  postulate  :  Let  there  be  a  system  of  co-ordinates  at  the  point  P,  by 
the  employment  of  which  the  components  of  every  vector  at  P  are  not  altered 
by  parallel  displacement  to  any  point  in  infinite  proximity  to  P.  This  postu¬ 
late  characterizes  the  essence  of  the  parallel  displacement  as  that  of  a  trans¬ 
position,  concerning  which  it  may  be  correctly  asserted  that  it  leaves  the 
vectors  “unaltered.”  ( b )  To  the  metrics  at  the  single  point  P,  according  to 

which  there  is  attached  to  every  vector  x  =  ^  at  P  a  tract  of  such  a  kind  that 
two  vectors  define  the  same  tract  when,  and  only  when,  they  possess  the  same 

measure-number  l  —  'S.g £v ,  there  must  now  be  added  the  metrical  con¬ 
nexion  of  P  with  the  points  in  its  neighbourhood  :  by  congruent  transposition 
to  the  infinitely  near  point  P'  a  tract  at  P  passes  over  into  a  definite  tract  at  P'. 
If  we  make  a  requirement  of  this  concept  of  congruent  transposition  of  tracts 
analogous  to  that  which  has  just  been  postulated,  under  (a),  of  the  concept  of 
parallel  displacement  of  vectors,  we  see  that  this  process  (in  which  the  measure- 
number  l  of  the  tract  is  increased  by  dl)  is  expressed  in  the  equations 

dl  =  ld<p  ;  d<p  =  ’Z(ptJdx(jL. 


H.  WEYL 


207 


out  changing  the  system  of  co-ordinates,  the  quantities  dy^v 

do  not  change,  dy^v  assumes  the  factor  X,  and  dg^v  becomes 
Xdg^v  +  g^dX.  Equation  (6)  then  shows  that  dp  becomes 


dp  + 


dX 

X 


=  dp  +  d  (log  X). 


What  remains  undetermined,  therefore,  in  the  linear  form 
Zp^dx^  is  not  a  factor  of  proportionality  which  would  have 
to  be  settled  by  an  arbitrary  choice  of  a  unit  of  measurement, 
but,  rather,  the  arbitrary  element  inherent  in  it  consists  in  an 
additive  total  differential.  For  the  analytical  representation 
of  geometry  the  forms 

g^dx^dxv,  p^dx^  ....  (8) 


are  on  an  equal  footing  with 

X  .g^dx^dxv  and  p^dx M  +  d  (log  X)  .  .  (9) 

where  X  is  any  positive  function  of  position.  Hence  there  is 
invariant  significance  in  the  anti-symmetrical  tensor  with  the 
components 

Tfl  _ 

^  'bXv 

i.e.  the  form 


(10) 


Fm„  dx^Sxv 


'HV 


which  depends  bilinearly  on  two  arbitrary  displacements  dx 
and  Sx  at  the  point  P — or,  rather,  depends  linearly  on  the 
surface  element  with  the  components  Ax =  dx^xv  -  dx^Sx^ 
which  is  defined  by  these  two  displacements.  The  special 
case  of  the  theory  as  hitherto  developed,  in  which  the 
arbitrarily  chosen  unit  of  length  at  the  origin  allows  itself 
to  be  transferred  by  parallel  displacement  to  all  points  of 
space  in  a  manner  which  is  independent  of  the  path  traversed 
— this  special  case  occurs  when  the  g^v  can  be  absolutely 

determined  in  such  a  way  that  the  p^  vanish.  The  are 

In  these  circumstances  the  metrics  and  the  metrical  connexion  determine  the 
“affine”  connexion  (parallel  displacement)  without  ambiguity — and  indeed, 
according  to  my  present  view  of  the  problem  of  space  this  is  the  most  funda¬ 
mental  fact  of  geometry — whereas  according  to  the  presentation  given  in  the 
text  it  is  the  linear  form  dcp  that  remains  arbitrary  in  the  given  metrics  at 
the  parallel  displacement.] 


208  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 


then  nothing  else  than  the  Christoffel  three-indices  symbols. 
The  necessary  and  sufficient  invariant  condition  for  the 
occurrence  of  this  case  consists  in  the  identical  vanishing  of 
the  tensor  FM„. 

This  naturally  suggests  interpreting  </>M  in  world-geometry 
as  the  four-potential,  and  the  tensor  F  consequently  as  electro¬ 
magnetic  field.  For  the  absence  of  an  electromagnetic  field 
is  the  necessary  condition  for  the  validity  of  Einstein’s  theory, 
which,  up  to  the  present,  accounts  for  the  phenomena  of 
gravitation  only.  If  this  view  is  accepted,  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  electric  quantities  are  of  such  a  nature  that  their  char¬ 
acterization  by  numbers  in  a  definite  system  of  co-ordinates 
does  not  depend  on  the  arbitrary  choice  of  a  unit  of  measure¬ 
ment.  In  fact,  in  the  question  of  the  unit  of  measurement 
and  of  dimension  there  must  be  a  new  orientation  of  the 
theory.  Hitherto  a  quantity  has  been  spoken  of  as,  e.g.,  a 
tensor  of  the  second  rank,  if  a  single  value  of  the  quantity 
determines  a  matrix  of  numbers  in  each  system  of  co¬ 
ordinates  after  an  arbitrary  unit  of  measurement  has  been 
selected,  these  numbers  forming  the  coefficients  of  an  in¬ 
variant  bilinear  form  of  two  arbitrary,  infinitesimal  displace¬ 
ments 

a^dx^Bxy  .  (id 

But  here  we  speak  of  a  tensor,  if,  with  a  system  of  co-ordin¬ 
ates  taken  as  a  base,  and  after  definite  selection  of  the  factor 
of  proportionality  contained  in  the  g the  components  a 
are  determined  without  ambiguity  and  in  such  a  way  that  on 
transforming  the  co-ordinates  the  form  (11)  remains  invariant, 
but  on  replacing  g by  Xg^  the  a^v  become  Xea,JLV.  We  then 
say  that  the  tensor  has  the  weight  e,  or,  ascribing  to  the  linear 
element  ds  the  dimension  “  length  =  l,”  that  it  is  of  dimension 
Z2e.  Only  those  tensors  of  weight  0  are  absolutely  invariant. 
The  field  tensor  with  the  components  FM„  is  of  this  kind.  By 
(10)  it  satisfies  the  first  system  of  the  Maxwell  equations 

SPvp  +  3EV  ,  3EV  ...  Q 

d X„  'dXp 

When  once  the  idea  of  parallel  displacement  is  clear,  geometry 
and  the  tensor  calculus  can  be  established  without  difficulty. 


H.  WEYL 


209 


(a)  Geodetic  Lines. — Given  a  point  P  and  at  that  point  a 
vector,  the  geodetic  line  from  P  in  the  direction  of  this  vector 
is  given  by  continuously  moving  the  vector  parallel  to  itself 
in  its  own  direction.  Employing  a  suitable  parameter  r  the 
differential  equation  of  the  geodetic  line  is 


+  F 


dxv  dxp 
vp~dr  dr 


(Of  course  it  cannot  be  characterized  as  the  line  of  smallest 
length,  because  the  notion  of  curve-length  has  no  meaning.) 

( b )  Tensor  Calculus. — To  deduce,  for  example,  a  tensor  field 
of  rank  2  by  differentiation  from  a  covariant  tensor  field  of 
rank  1  and  weight  0  with  components  /M,  we  call  in  the  help 
of  an  arbitrary  vector  at  the  point  P,  form  the  invariant 
and  its  infinitely  small  alteration  on  transition  from  the 
point  P  with  the  co-ordinates  x M  to  the  neighbouring  point  P' 
with  the  co-ordinates  x M  +  dx^  by  shifting  the  vector  along  a 
parallel  to  itself  during  this  transition.  For  this  alteration 
we  have 

Ifrdav  +  fj?  =  0“  -  Tlfjpdz.. 


The  quantities  in  brackets  on  the  right  are  therefore  the  com¬ 
ponents  of  a  tensor  field  of  rank  2  and  weight  0,  which  is 
formed  from  the  field  /  in  a  perfectly  invariant  manner. 

(c)  Curvature. — To  construct  the  analogue  to  Riemann’s 
tensor  of  curvature,  let  us  begin  with  the  figure  employed 
above,  of  an  infinitely  small  parallelogram,  consisting  of  the 
points  P,  Pj,  P2,  and  P12  =  P21.*  If  we  displace  a  vector 
x  =  at  P  parallel  to  itself,  to  Px  and  from  there  to  P12,  and 
a  second  time  first  to  P2  and  thence  to  P21,  then,  since  P12 
and  P21  coincide,  there  is  a  meaning  in  forming  the  difference 
Ax  of  the  two  vectors  obtained  at  this  point.  For  their  com¬ 
ponents  we  have 

Af  =  AR^  ....  (12) 


where  the  AR£  are  independent  of  the  displaced  vector  x,  but 


*  [Here  it  is  not  essential  that  opposite  sides  of  the  infinitely  small  “  paral¬ 
lelogram  ”  are  produced  by  parallel  displacement  one  from  the  other;  we  are 
concerned  only  with  the  coincidence  of  the  points  P12  and  P2r] 


l 


210  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 


on  the  other  hand  depend  linearly  on  the  surface-element 
defined  by  the  two  displacements  PPX  =  dx^,  PP2  = 

Thus 

AB^  =  B  ^dXpSxa  =  £B^p(rA  xp(r. 

The  components  of  curvature  B^p(r,  depending  solely  on  the 
place  P,  possess  the  two  properties  of  symmetry  that 
(1)  they  change  sign  on  the  interchange  of  the  last  two  indices 
p  and  a,  and  (2),  if  we  perform  the  three  cylic  interchanges 
vpcr,  and  add  up  the  appropriate  components,  the  result  is  0. 
Beducing  the  index  /x,  we  obtain  at  BM„p(r  the  components  of 
a  covariant  tensor  of  rank  4  and  weight  1.  Even  without 
calculation  we  see  that  B  divides  in  a  natural,  invariant 
manner  into  two  parts, 

R;,  =  P;.  -  (8?  -  1  if  /*  =  v,  -  0  if  p  *  v),  (13) 

of  which  the  first,  PJ  ,  is  anti-symmetrical,  not  only  in  the  in¬ 
dices  per,  but  also  in  pi  and  v.  Whereas  the  equations  FM„  =  0 
characterize  our  space  as  one  without  an  electromagnetic 
field,  i.e.  as  one  in  which  the  problem  of  the  conveyance  of 

length  is  integrable,  the  equations  P^pcr  =  0  are,  as  (13)  shows, 

the  invariant  conditions  for  the  absence  of  a  gravitational  field, 
i.e.  for  the  problem  of  the  conveyance  of  direction  to  be 
integrable.  The  Euclidean  space  alone  is  one  which  at  the 
same  time  is  free  of  electricity  and  of  gravitation. 

The  simplest  invariant  of  a  linear  copy  like  (12),  which  to 
each  vector  x  assigns  a  vector  Ax,  is  its  “  spur  ” 

-AR*. 
n  * 


For  this,  by  (13),  we  obtain  in  the  present  case  the  form 

-  padXpBXa 

which  we  have  already  encountered  above.  The  simplest  in¬ 
variant  of  a  tensor  like  -  iFp<ris  the  “  square  of  its  magni¬ 
tude  ” 

L  =  iFp<rFp"  ....  (14) 


L  is  evidently  an  invariant  of  weight  -  2,  because  the  tensor 
F  has  weight  0.  If  g  is  the  negative  determinant  of  the  g^v, 
and 

dw  =  s/gdx0dxl(^x2dxi  =  gdx 


H.  WEYL 


211 


the  volume  of  an  infinitely  small  element  of  volume,  it  is 
known  that  the  Maxwell  theory  is  governed  by  the  quantity 
of  electrical  action,  which  is  equal  to  the  integral  $L dco  of  this 
simplest  invariant,  extended  over  any  chosen  territory,  and 
indeed  is  governed  in  the  sense  that,  with  any  variations  of 
the  and  </>M,  which  vanish  at  the  limits  of  world-territory, 
we  have 

sf  L dto  =  [  (S +  T»"bg^)dm, 

where 

s„  _  J,  XJg'F") 

are  the  left-hand  sides  of  the  generalized  Maxwellian 
equations  (the  right-hand  sides  of  which  are  the  components 
of  the  four-current),  and  the  form  the  energy-momentum 
tensor  of  the  electromagnetic  field.  As  L  is  an  invariant  of 
weight  -  2,  whereas  the  volume-element  in  w-dimensional 
geometry  is  an  invariant  of  weight  the  integral  has 
significance  only  when  the  number  of  dimensions  n  =  4. 
Thus  on  our  interpretation  the  possibility  of  the  Maxwell 
theory  is  restricted  to  the  case  of  four  dimensions.  In  the 
four-dimensional  world,  however,  the  quantity  of  electro¬ 
magnetic  action  becomes  a  pure  number.  Nevertheless,  the 
magnitude  of  the  quantity  1  cannot  be  ascertained  in  the 
traditional  units  of  the  c.g.s.  system  until  a  physical  problem, 
to  be  tested  by  observation  (as  for  example  the  electron),  has 
been  calculated  on  the  basis  of  our  theory. 

Passing  now  from  geometry  to  physics,  we  have  to  assume, 
following  the  precedent  of  Mie’s  theory,*  that  all  the  laws  of 
nature  rest  upon  a  definite  integral  invariant,  the  action- 
quantity 

=  jacefe,  as  =  w^, 

in  such  a  way  that  the  real  world  is  distinguished  from  all 
other  possible  four-dimensional  metrical  spaces  by  the  char¬ 
acteristic  that  for  it  the  action-quantity  contained  in  any  part 
of  its  domain  assumes  a  stationary  value  in  relation  to  such 
variations  of  the  potentials  g^,  as  vanish  at  the  limits  of 

*  Ann.  d.  Physik,  37,  39,  40,  1912-13. 


212  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 

the  territory  in  question.  W,  the  world-density  of  the  action, 
must  be  an  invariant  of  weight  -  2.  The  action-quantity  is 
in  any  case  a  pure  number ;  thus  our  theory  at  once  accounts 
for  that  atomistic  structure  of  the  world  to  which  current 
views  attach  the  most  fundamental  importance — the  action- 
quantum.  The  simplest  and  most  natural  conjecture  which 
we  can  make  for  W,  is 

W  =  KrP<3r  =  I  R  I  2. 

For  this  we  also  have,  by  (13), 


W  =  |  P  |  2  +  4L. 

(There  could  be  no  doubt  about  anything  here  except  perhaps 
the  factor  4,  with  which  the  electric  term  L  is  added  to  the 
first.)  But  even  without  particularizing  the  action-quantity 
we  can  draw  some  general  conclusions  from  the  principle  of 
action.  For  we  shall  show  that  as,  according  to  investiga¬ 
tions  by  Hilbert,  Lorentz,  Einstein,  Klein,  and  the  author,* 
the  four  laws  of  the  conservation  of  matter  (the  energy- 
momentum  tensor)  are  connected  with  the  invariance  of  the 
action  quantity  (containing  four  arbitrary  functions)  with  re¬ 
spect  to  transformations  of  co-ordinates,  so  in  the  same  way 
the  law  of  the  conservation  of  electricity  is  connected  with 
the  “  measure-invariance  ”  [transition  from  (8)  to  (9)]  which 
here  makes  its  appearance  for  the  first  time,  introducing  a 
fifth  arbitrary  function.  The  manner  in  which  the  latter  as¬ 
sociates  itself  with  the  principles  of  energy  and  momentum 
seems  to  me  one  of  the  strongest  general  arguments  in  favour 
of  the  theory  here  set  out — so  far  as  there  can  be  any  ques¬ 
tion  at  all  of  confirmation  in  purely  speculative  matters. 

For  any  variation  which  vanishes  at  the  limits  of  the 
world-territory  under  consideration  we  have 

$$dx  =  [  +  W'SfJdx  (®“-  =  28'“')  (15) 

*  Hilbert,  “  Die  Grundlagen  der  Physik,”  Gottinger  Nachrichten,  20 
Nov.,  1915 ;  H.  A.  Lorentz  in  four  papers  in  the  Versl.  K.  Ak.  van 
Wetensch.,  Amsterdam,  1915-16;  A.  Einstein,  Berl.  Ber.,  1916,  pp.  1111-6; 
F.  Klein,  Gott.  Nachr.,  25  Jan.,  1918 ;  H.  Weyl,  Ann.  d.  Physik,  54,  1917, 
pp.  121-5. 


213 


H.  WEYL 


The  laws  of  nature  then  take  the  form 

sr  =  o,  =  o  .  .  .  (i6) 


The  former  may  be  regarded  as  the  laws  of  the  gravitational 
field,  the  latter  as  those  of  the  electromagnetic  field.  The 

quantities  W£,  w*  defined  by 

2B?  =  W*  “  s/gw* 

are  the  mixed  or,  respectively,  the  contra  variant  components 
of  a  tensor  of  rank  2  or  1  respectively,  and  of  weight  -  2. 
In  the  system  of  equations  (16)  there  are  five  which  are  re¬ 
dundant,  in  accordance  with  the  properties  of  invariance. 
This  is  expressed  in  the  following  five  invariant  identities, 
which  subsist  between  their  left-hand  sides  : — 


(17) 


S2B;  _  x*  SJB*  =  iF^  .  .  .  (18) 

The  first  results  from  the  measure-invariance.  For  if  in 
the  transition  from  (8)  to  (9)  we  assume  for  log  X  an  in¬ 
finitely  small  function  of  position  Sp,  we  obtain  the  variation 


^g  HV  9  nv&p) 


For  this  variation  (15)  must  vanish.  In  the  second  place  if 
we  utilize  the  invariance  of  the  action-quantity  with  respect 
to  transformations  of  co-ordinates  by  means  of  an  infinitely 
small  deformation  of  the  world  -  continuum,*  we  obtain  the 
identities 


2  0^ 


which  change  into  (18)  when,  by  (17)  is  replaced  by 

From  the  gravitational  laws  alone  therefore  we  already  obtain 


(19) 


*  Weyl,  Ann.  d.  Physik,  54,  1917,  pp.  121-5;  F.  Klein,  Gott.  Nachr., 
25  Jan.,  1918. 


214  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 

and  from  the  laws  of  the  electromagnetic  field  alone 

-  r“  =  0  •  •  •  (20) 

In  Maxwell’s  theory  has  the  form 


e„ 

7>xv  ’ 


s'4  =  \fgs>x 


where  denotes  the  fonr-cnrrent.  Since  the  first  part  here 
satisfies  the  equation  (19)  identically,  this  equation  gives  us 
the  law  of  conservation  of  electricity 


J_  o 

Jg  ^ 

Similarly  in  Einstein’s  theory  of  gravitation  consists  of 

two  terms,  the  first  of  which  satisfies  equation  (20)  identi¬ 
cally,  and  the  second  is  equal  to  the  mixed  components 
of  the  energy-momentum  tensor  multiplied  by  g . 

Thus  equations  (20)  lead  to  the  four  laws  of  the  conservation 
of  matter.  Quite  analogous  circumstances  hold  good  in  our 
theory  if  we  choose  the  form  (14)  for  the  action-quantity. 
The  five  principles  of  conservation  are  “  eliminants  ”  of  the 
field  laws,  i.e.  they  follow  from  them  in  a  twofold  manner, 
and  thus  demonstrate  that  among  them  there  are  five  which 
are  redundant. 

With  the  form  (14)  for  the  action-quantity  the  Maxwell 
equations  run,  for  example  : — 


and  the  current  is 


Jg  'tXv 

dR\ 
'bxj' 


(21) 


where  R  denotes  that  invariant  of  weight  -  1  which  arises 
from  R^pcr  if  we  first  contract  with  respect  to  fi,  p  and  then 

with  respect  to  v  and  a.  If  R*  denotes  Riemann’s  invariant 
of  curvature  constructed  solely  from  the  gM„,  calculation 


H.  WEYL 


215 


gives 


R  =  R*  - 


_iW#)  + 

x/0  tx* 


In  the  static  case,  where  the  space  components  of  the  electro¬ 
magnetic  potential  disappear,  and  all  quantities  are  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  time  x0,  by  (21)  we  must  have 


E  =  R*  +  =  const. 


But  in  a  world-territory  in  which  R  =f=  0  we  may  make 
R  =  const.  =  ±  1  everywhere,  by  appropriate  determination 
of  the  unit  of  length.  Only  we  have  to  expect,  under  con¬ 
ditions  which  are  variable  with  time,  surfaces  R  =  0,  which 
evidently  will  play  some  singular  part.  R  cannot  be  used  as 
density  of  action  (represented  by  R*  in  Einstein’s  theory  of 
gravitation)  because  it  has  not  the  weight  -  2.  The  conse¬ 
quence  is  that  though  our  theory  leads  to  Maxwell’s  electro¬ 
magnetic  equations,  it  does  not  lead  to  Einstein’s  gravitation 
equations.  In  their  place  appear  differential  equations  of 
order  4.  But  indeed  it  is  very  improbable  that  Einstein’s 
equations  of  gravitation  are  strictly  correct,  because,  above 
all  things,  the  gravitation  constant  occurring  in  them  is  not 
at  all  in  the  picture  with  the  other  constants  of  nature,  the 
gravitation  radius  of  the  charge  and  mass  of  an  electron,  for 
example,  being  of  an  entirely  different  order  of  magnitude 
(1020  or  1040  times  as  small)  from  that  of  the  radius  of  the 
electron  itself.* 

It  was  my  intention  here  merely  to  develop  briefly  the 
general  principles  of  the  theory,  f  The  problem  naturally 

*  Cf.  Weyl,  Ann.  d.  Physik,  54,  1917,  p.  133. 

t  [The  problem  of  defining  all  W  invariants  allowable  as  action-quantities, 
under  the  requirement  that  they  should  contain  the  derivatives  of  the  g only 

to  the  second  order  at  most,  and  those  of  the  <p  only  to  the  first  order,  was 

solved  by  R.  Weitzenbock  (Sitzungsber.  d.  Akad.  d.  Wissensch.  in  Wien, 
129,  1920 ;  130,  1921).  If  we  omit  the  invariants  W  for  which  the  variation 
S[Wc2o>  vanishes  identically,  there  remain  according  to  a  later  calculation  by 
R.  Bach  (Math.  Zeitschrift,  9,  1921,  pp.  125  and  189)  only  three  combina¬ 
tions.  The  real  W  seems  to  be  a  linear  combination  of  Maxwell’s  L  and  the 
square  of  R.  This  conjecture  has  been  tested  more  carefully  by  W.  Pauli 
(Physik.  Zeitschrift.,  20,  1919,  pp.  457-67)  and  myself ;  in  particular  we 
succeeded  in  advancing  so  far  on  this  basis  as  to  deduce  the  equations  of 


216  GRAVITATION  AND  ELECTRICITY 


presents  itself  of  deducing  the  physical  consequences  of  the 
theory  on  the  basis  of  the  special  form  for  the  action-quantity 
given  in  (14),  and  of  comparing  these  with  experience,  exam¬ 
ining  particularly  whether  the  existence  of  the  electron  and 
the  peculiarities  of  the  hitherto  unexplained  processes  in  the 
atom  can  be  deduced  from  the  theory.*  The  task  is  extra¬ 
ordinarily  complicated  from  the  mathematical  point  of  view, 
because  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  approximate  solutions  if  we 
restrict  ourselves  to  the  linear  terms ;  for  since  it  is  certainly 
not  permissible  to  neglect  terms  of  higher  order  in  the 
interior  of  the  electron,  the  linear  equations  obtained  by 
neglecting  these  may  have,  in  general,  only  the  solution  0. 
I  propose  to  return  to  all  these  matters  in  greater  detail  in 
another  place. 


motion  of  a  material  particle.  The  invariant  (14)  selected  above,  at  hazard 
in  the  first  place,  seems  on  the  contrary  to  play  no  part  in  nature.  Cf.  Raum, 
“  Zeit,  Materie,”  ed.  4,  §§  35j  36,  or  Weyl,  Physik.  Zeitschr.,  22,  1921,  pp. 
473-80.] 

*  [Meanwhile  I  have  quite  abandoned  these  hopes,  raised  by  Mie’s  theory  ; 
I  do  not  believe  that  the  problem  of  matter  is  to  be  solved  by  a  mere  field 
theory.  Cf.  on  this  subject  my  article  “  Feld  und  Materie,”  Ann.  d.  Physik, 
65,  1921,  pp.  541-63.] 


Catalogue  of  Dover 

SCIENCE  BOOKS 


DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS 

(ORDINARY  AND  PARTIAL  DIFFERENTIAL) 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS  OF  PHYSICS,  L.  Hopf.  Especially  valuable 
to  engineer  with  no  math  beyond  elementary  calculus.  Emphasizes  intuitive  rather  than 
formal  aspects  of  concepts.  Partial  contents:  Law  of  causality,  energy  theorem,  damped 
oscillations,  coupling  by  friction,  cylindrical  and  spherical  coordinates,  heat  source,  etc. 
48  figures.  160pp.  5%  x  8.  '  S120  Paperbound  $1.25 

INTRODUCTION  TO  BESSEL  FUNCTIONS,  F.  Bowman.  Rigorous,  provides  all  necessary  material 
during  development,  includes  practical  applications.  Bessel  functions  of  zero  order,  of  any 
real  order,  definite  integrals,  asymptotic  expansion,  circular  membranes,  Bessel’s  solution 
to  Kepler’s  problem,  much  more.  “Clear  .  .  .  useful  not  only  to  students  of  physics  and 
engineering,  but  to  mathematical  students  in  general,’’  Nature.  226  problems.  Short  tables 
of  Bessel  functions.  27  figures,  x  +  135pp.  5%  x  8.  S462  Paperbound  $1.35 

DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS,  F.  R.  Moulton.  Detailed,  rigorous  exposition  of  all  non-elemen- 
tary  processes  of  solving  ordinary  differential  equations.  Chapters  on  practical  problems; 
more  advanced  than  problems  usually  given  as  illustrations.  Includes  analytic  differential 
equations;  variations  of  a  parameter;  integrals  of  differential  equations;  analytic  implicit 
functions;  problems  of  elliptic  motion;  sine-amplitude  functions;  deviation  of  formal  bodies; 
Cauchy-Lipshitz  process;  linear  differential  equations  with  periodic  coefficients;  much  more. 
Historical  notes.  10  figures.  222  problems,  xv  +  395pp.  5%  x  8.  S451  Paperbound  $2.00 

PARTIAL  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS  OF  MATHEMATICAL  PHYSICS,  A.  G.  Webster.  Valuable 
sections  on  elasticity,  compression  theory,  potential  theory,  theory  of  sound,  heat  conduc¬ 
tion,  wave  propagation,  vibration  theory.  Contents  include:  deduction  of  differential  equa¬ 
tions,  vibrations,  normal  functions,  Fourier’s  series.  Cauchy’s  method,  boundary  problems, 
method  of  Riemann-Volterra,  spherical,  cylindrical,  ellipsoidal  harmonics,  applications,  etc. 
97  figures,  vii  +  440pp.  5%  x  8.  S263  Paperbound  $2.00 

ORDINARY  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS,  E.  L.  Ince.  A  most  compendious  analysis  in  real  and 
complex  domains.  Existence  and  nature  of  solutions,  continuous  transformation  groups, 
solutions  in  an  infinite  form,  definite  integrals,  algebraic  theory.  Sturmian  theory,  boundary 
problems,  existence  theorems,  1st  order,  higher  order,  etc.  “Deserves  highest  praise,  a 
notable  addition  to  mathematical  literature,”  Bulletin,  Amer.  Math.  Soc.  Historical  appendix. 
18  figures,  viii  +  558pp.  5%  x  8.  S349  Paperbound  $2.55 

ASYMPTOTIC  EXPANSIONS,  A.  ErdSlyi.  Only  modern  work  available  in  English;  unabridged 
reproduction  of  monograph  prepared  for  Office  of  Naval  Research.  Discusses  various  proce¬ 
dures  for  asymptotic  evaluation  of  integrals  containing  a  large  parameter;  solutions  of 
ordinary  linear  differential  equations,  vi  +  108pp.  5%  x  8.  S318  Paperbound  $1.35 

LECTURES  ON  CAUCHY’S  PROBLEM,  J.  Hadamard.  Based  on  lectures  given  at  Columbia,  Rome, 
discusses  work  of  Riemann,  Kirchhoff,  Volterra,  and  author’s  own  research  on  hyperbolic 
case  in  linear  partial  differential  equations.  Extends  spherical  cylindrical  waves  to  apply 
to  all  (normal)  hyperbolic  equations.  Partial  contents:  Cauchy’s  problem,  fundamental  for¬ 
mula,  equations  with  odd  number,  with  even  number  of  independent  variables;  method  of 
descent.  32  figures,  iii  +  316pp.  5%  x  8.  S105  Paperbound  $1.75 


CATALOGUE  OF 


NUMBER  THEORY 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  NUMBERS,  L.  E.  Dickson.  Thorough,  comprehensive,  witn 
adequate  coverage  of  classical  literature.  Not  beyond  beginners.  Chapters  on  divisibility, 
congruences,  quadratic  residues  and  reciprocity,  Diophantine  equations,  etc.  Full  treatment 
of  binary  quadratic  forms  without  usual  restriction  to  integral  coefficients.  Covers  infinitude 
of  primes,  Fermat’s  theorem,  Legendre’s  symbol,  automorphs,  Recent  theorems  of  Thue, 
Siegal,  much  more.  Much  material  not  readily  available  elsewhere.  239  problems.  1  figure, 
viii  +  183pp.  53/a  x  8.  S342  Paperbound  $1.65 

ELEMENTS  OF  NUMBER  THEORY,  I.  M.  Vinogradov.  Detailed  1st  course  for  persons  without 
advanced  mathematics;  95%  of  this  book  can  be  understood  by  readers  who  have  gone 
no  farther  than  high  school  algebra.  Partial  contents:  divisibility  theory,  important  number 
theoretical  functions,  congruences,  primitive  roots  and  indices,  etc.  Solutions  to  problems, 
exercises.  Tables  of  primes,  indices,  etc.  Covers  almost  every  essential  formula  in  ele¬ 
mentary  number  theory!  “Welcome  addition  .  .  .  reads  smoothly,”  Bull,  of  the  Amer.  Math. 
Soc.  233  problems.  104  exercises,  viii  +  227pp.  5%  x  8.  S259  Paperbound  $1.60 


PROBABILITY  THEORY  AND  INFORMATION  THEORY 


SELECTED  PAPERS  ON  NOISE  AND  STOCHASTIC  PROCESSES,  edited  by  Prof.  Nelson  Wax,  U.  of 
Illinois.  6  basic  papers  for  those  whose  work  involves  noise  characteristics.  Chandrasekhar, 
Uhlenback  and  Ornstein,  Uhlenbeck  and  Ming,  Rice,  Doob.  Included  is  Kac’s  Chauvenet- 
Prize  winning  “Random  Walk.”  Extensive  bibliography  lists  200  articles,  through  1953.  21 
figures.  337pp.  6V8  x  9V4.  S262  Paperbound  $2.35 

A  PHILOSOPHICAL  ESSAY  ON  PROBABILITIES,  Marquis  de  Laplace.  This  famous  essay  explains 
without  recourse  to  mathematics  the  principle  of  probability,  and  the  application  of  prob¬ 
ability  to  games  of  chance,  natural  philosophy,  astronomy,  many  other  fields.  Translated 
from  6th  French  edition  by  F.  W.  Truscott,  F.  L.  Emory.  Intro,  by  E.  T.  Bell.  204pp.  5%  x  8. 

S166  Paperbound  $1.25 

MATHEMATICAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF  INFORMATION  THEORY,  A.  I.  Khinchin.  For  mathematicians, 
statisticians,  physicists,  cyberneticists,  communications  engineers,  a  complete,  exact  intro¬ 
duction  to  relatively  new  field.  Entropy  as  a  measure  of  a  finite  scheme,  applications  to 
coding  theory,  study  of  sources,  channels  and  codes,  detailed  proofs  of  both  Shannon 
theorems  for  any  ergodic  source  and  any  stationary  channel  with  finite  memory,  much  more. 
“Presents  for  the  first  time  rigorous  proofs  of  certain  fundamental  theorems  .  .  .  quite 
complete  .  .  .  amazing  expository  ability,”  American  Math.  Monthly,  vii  4-  120pp.  53/s  x  8. 

S434  Paperbound  $1.35 


VECTOR  AND  TENSOR  ANALYSIS  AND  MATRIX  THEORY 


VECTOR  AND  TENSOR  ANALYSIS,  G.  E.  Hay.  One  of  clearest  introductions  to  increasingly 
important  subject.  Start  with  simple  definitions,  finish  with  sure  mastery  of  oriented 
Cartesian  vectors,  Christoffel  symbols,  solenoidal  tensors.  Complete  breakdown  of  plane, 
solid,  analytical,  differential  geometry.  Separate  chapters  on  application.  All  fundamental 
formulae  listed,  demonstrated.  195  problems.  66  figures,  viii  +  193pp.  5%  x  8. 

S109  Paperbound  $1.75 

APPLICATIONS  OF  TENSOR  ANALYSIS,  A.  J.  McConnell.  Excellent  text  for  applying  tensor 
methods  to  such  familiar  subjects  as  dynamics,  electricity,  elasticity,  hydrodynamics.  Ex¬ 
plains  fundamental  ideas  and  notation  of  tensor  theory,  geometrical  treatment  of  tensor 
algebra,  theory  of  differentiation  of  tensors,  and  a  wealth  of  practical  material.  “The 
variety  of  fields  treated  and  the  presence  of  extremely  numerous  examples  make  this 
volume  worth  much  more  than  its  low  price,”  Alluminio.  Formerly  titled  “Applications  of  the 
Absolute  Differential  Calculus.”  43  illustrations.  685  problems,  xii  -I-  381pp. 

S373  Paperbound  $1.85 

VECTOR  AND  TENSOR  ANALYSIS,  A.  P.  Wills.  Covers  entire  field,  from  dyads  to  non-Euclidean 
manifolds  (especially  detailed),  absolute  differentiation,  the  Riemann-Christoffel  and  Ricci- 
Einstein  tensors,  calculation  of  Gaussian  curvature  of  a  surface.  Illustrations  from  electrical 
engineering,  relativity  theory,  astro-physics,  quantum  mechanics.  Presupposes  only  working 
knowledge  of  calculus.  Intended  for  physicists,  engineers,  mathematicians.  44  diagrams. 
114  problems,  xxxii  +  285pp.  5%  x  8.  S454  Paperbound  $1.75 


2 


DOVER  SCIENCE  BOOKS 
PHYSICS,  ENGINEERING 

MECHANICS,  DYNAMICS,  THERMODYNAMICS,  ELASTICITY 


MATHEMATICAL  ANALYSIS  OF  ELECTRICAL  AND  OPTICAL  WAVE-MOTION,  H.  Bateman.  By  one 

of  century’s  most  distinguished  mathematical  physicists,  a  practical  introduction  to  develop¬ 
ments  of  Maxwell’s  electromagnetic  theory  which  directly  concern  the  solution  of  partial 
differential  equation  of  wave  motion.  Methods  of  solving  wave-equation,  polar-cylindrical 
coordinates,  diffraction,  transformation  of  coordinates,  homogeneous  solutions,  electromag¬ 
netic  fields  with  moving  singularities,  etc.  168pp.  5%  x  8.  S14  Paperbound  $1.60 

THERMODYNAMICS,  Enrico  Fermi.  Unabridged  reproduction  of  1937  edition.  Remarkable  for 
clarity,  organization;  requires  no  knowledge  of  advanced  math  beyond  calculus,  only  familiar¬ 
ity  with  fundamentals  of  thermometry,  calorimetry.  Partial  Contents:  Thermodynamic  sys¬ 
tems,  1st  and  2nd  laws,  potentials;  Entropy,  phase  rule;  Reversible  electric  cells;  Gaseous 
reactions:  Van’t  Hoff  reaction  box,  principle  of  LeChatel ier;  Thermodynamics  of  dilute 
solutions:  osmotic,  vapor  pressures;  boiling,  freezing  point;  Entropy  constant.  25  problems. 
24  illustrations,  x  +  160pp.  5%  x  8.  S361  Paperbound  $1.75 

FOUNDATIONS  OF  POTENTIAL  THEORY,  0.  D.  Kellogg.  Based  on  courses  given  at  Harvard, 
suitable  for  both  advanced  and  beginning  mathematicians,  Proofs  rigorous,  much  material 
here  not  generally  available  elsewhere.  Partial  contents:  gravity,  fields  of  force,  divergence 
theorem,  properties  of  Newtonian  potentials  at  points  of  free  space,  potentials  as  solutions 
of  LaPlace’s  equation,  harmonic  functions,  electrostatics,  electric  images,  logarithmic  po¬ 
tential,  etc.  ix  +  384pp.  5%  x  8.  S144  Paperbound  $1.98 

DIALOGUES  CONCERNING  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES,  Galileo  Galilei.  Classic  of  experimental  science, 
mechanics,  engineering,  as  enjoyable  as  it  is  important.  Characterized  by  author  as  “superior 
to  everything  else  of  mine.”  Offers  a  lively  exposition  of  dynamics,  elasticity,  sound,  .ballistics, 
strength  of  materials,  scientific  method.  Translated  by  H.  Grew,  A.  de  Salvio.  126  diagrams, 
xxi  +  288pp.  5%  x  8.  S99  Paperbound  $1.65 

THEORETICAL  MECHANICS;  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  MATHEMATICAL  PHYSICS,  J.  S.  Ames,  F.  D. 
Murnaghan.  A  mathematically  rigorous  development  for  advanced  students,  with  constant 
practical  applications.  Used  in  hundreds  of  advanced  courses.  Unusually  thorough  coverage 
of  gyroscopic  baryscopic  material,  detailed  analyses  of  Corilis  acceleration,  applications  of 
Lagrange’s  equations,  motion  of  double  pendulum,  Hamilton-Jacobi  partial  differential  equa¬ 
tions,  group  velocity,  dispersion,  etc.  Special  relativity  included.  159  problems.  44  figures, 
ix  +  462pp.  b%  x  8.  S461  Paperbound  $2.00 

STATICS  AND  THE  DYNAMICS  OF  A  PARTICLE,  W.  D.  MacMillan.  This  is  Part  One  of  “Theoret¬ 
ical  Mechanics.”  For  over  3  decades  a  self-contained,  extremely  comprehensive  advanced 
undergraduate  text  in  mathematical  physics,  physics,  astronomy,  deeper  foundations  of 
engineering.  Early  sections  require  only  a  knowledge  of  geometry;  later,  a  working  knowledge 
of  calculus.  Hundreds  of  basic  problems  including  projectiles  to  moon,  harmonic  motion, 
ballistics,  transmission  of  power,  stress  and  strain,  elasticity,  astronomical  problems.  340 
practice  problems,  many  fully  worked  out  examples.  200  figures,  xvii  4-  430pp.  5%  x  8. 

S467  Paperbound  $2.00 

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  POTENTIAL,  W.  D.  MacMillan.  This  is  Part  Two  of  “Theoretical  Mechan¬ 
ics.”  Comprehensive,  well-balanced  presentation,  serving  both  as  introduction  and  reference 
with  regard  to  specific  problems,  for  physicists  and  mathematicians.  Assumes  no  prior 
knowledge  of  integral  relations,  all  math  is  developed  as  needed.  Includes:  Attraction  of 
Finite  Bodies;  Newtonian  Potential  Function;  Vector  Fields,  Green  and  Gauss  Theorems; 
Two-la/er  Surfaces;  Spherical  Harmonics;  etc.  “The  great  number  of  particular  cases  .  .  . 
should  make  the  book  valuable  to  geo-physicists  and  others  actively  engaged  in  practical 
applications  of  the  potential  theory,”  Review  of  Scientific  Instruments,  xii  +  469pp.  5%  x  8. 

S486  Paperbound  $2.25 

DYNAMICS  OF  A  SYSTEM  OF  RIGID  BODIES  (Advanced  Section),  E.  J.  Routh.  Revised  6th  edi¬ 
tion  of  a  classic  reference  aid.  Partial  contents:  moving  axes,  relative  motion,  oscillations 
about  equilibrium,  motion.  Motion  of  a  body  under  no  forces,  any  forces.  Nature  of  motion 
given  by  linear  equations  and  conditions  of  stability.  Free,  forced  vibrations,  constants  of 
integration,  calculus  of  finite  differences,  variations,  procession  and  mutation,  motion  of 
the  moon,  motion  of  string,  chain,  membranes.  64  figures.  498pp.  5%  x  8. 

S229  Paperbound  $2.35 

THE  DYNAMICS  OF  PARTICLES  AND  OF  RIGID,  ELASTIC,  AND  FLUID  BODIES:  BEING  LECTURES 
ON  MATHEMATICAL  PHYSICS,  A.  G.  Webster.  Reissuing  of  classic  fills  need  for  comprehensive 
work  on  dynamics.  Covers  wide  range  in  unusually  great  depth,  applying  ordinary,  partial 
differential  equations.  Partial  contents:  laws  of  motion,  methods  applicable  to  systems  of 
all  sorts;  oscillation,  resonance,  cyclic  systems;  dynamics  of  rigid  bodies;  potential  theory; 
stress  and  strain;  gyrostatics;  wave,  vortex  motion;  kinematics  of  a  point;  Lagrange’s  equa¬ 
tions;  Hamilton’s  principle;  vectors;  deformable  bodies;  much  more  not  easily  found  to¬ 
gether  in  one  volume.  Unabridged  reprinting  of  2nd  edition.  20  pages  on  differential 
equations,  higher  analysis.  203  illustrations,  xi  +  588pp.  5%  x  8.  S522  Paperbound  $2.35 


3 


CATALOGUE  OF 


PRINCIPLES  OF  MECHANICS,  Heinrich  Hertz.  A  classic  of  great  interest  in  logic  of  science. 
Last  work  by  great  19th  century  physicist,  created  new  system  of  mechanics  based  upon 
space,  time,  mass;  returns  to  axiomatic  analysis,  understanding  of  formal,  structural 
aspects  of  science,  taking  into  account  logic,  observation,  a  priori  elements.  Of  great 
historical  importance  to  Poincar§,  Carnap,  Einstein,  Milne.  20  page  introduction  by  R.  S. 
Cohen,  Wesleyan  U.,  analyzes  implications  of  Hertz’s  thought  and  logic  of  science.  13  page 
introduction  by  Helmholtz,  xlii  +  274pp.  5%  x  8.  S316  Clothbound  $3.50 

S317  Paperbound  $1.75 

MATHEMATICAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF  STATISTICAL  MECHANICS,  A.  I.  Khinchin.  A  thoroughly 
up-to-date  introduction,  offering  a  precise  and  mathematically  rigorous  formulation  of  the 
problems  of  statistical  mechanics.  Provides  analytical  tools  to  replace  many  commonly 
used  cumbersome  concepts  and  devices.  Partial  contents:  Geometry,  kinematics  of  phase 
space;  ergodic  problem;  theory  of  probability;  central  limit  theorem;  ideal  monatomic  gas; 
foundation  of  thermodynamics;  dispersion,  distribution  of  sum  functions;  etc.  “Excellent 
introduction  .  .  .  clear,  concise,  rigorous,”  Quarterly  of  Applied  Mathematics,  viii  +  179pp. 
53/s  x  8.  S146  Clothbound  $2.95 

S147  Paperbound  $1.35 

MECHANICS  OF  THE  GYROSCOPE,  THE  DYNAMICS  OF  ROTATION,  R.  F.  Deimel,  Prof,  of  Me¬ 
chanical  Engineering,  Stevens  Inst,  of  Tech.  Elementary,  general  treatment  of  dynamics  of 
rotation,  with  special  application  of  gyroscopic  phenomena.  No  knowledge  of  vectors 
needed.  Velocity  of  a  moving  curve,  acceleration  to  a  point,  general  equations  of  motion, 
gyroscopic  horizon,  free  gyro,  motion  of  discs,  the  damped  gyro,  103  similar  topics.  Exer¬ 
cises.  75  figures.  208pp.  53/s  x  8.  S66  Paperbound  $1.65 

MECHANICS  VIA  THE  CALCULUS,  P.  W.  Norris,  W.  S.  Legge.  Wide  coverage,  from  linear  motion 
to  vector  analysis;  equations  determining  motion,  linear  methods,  compounding  of  simple 
harmonic  motions,  Newton’s  laws  of  motion,  Hooke’s  law,  the  simple  pendulum,  motion  of 
a  particle  in  1  plane,  centers  of  gravity,  virtual  work,  friction,  kinetic  energy  of  rotating 
bodies,  equilibrium  of  strings,  hydrostatics,  sheering  stresses,  elasticity,  etc.  Many  worked- 
out  examples.  550  problems.  3rd  revised  edition,  xii  +  367pp.  S207  Clothbound  $3.95 

A  TREATISE  ON  THE  MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY,  A.  E.  H.  Love.  An  indispensable 
reference  work  for  engineers,  mathematicians,  physicists,  the  most  complete,  authoritative 
treatment  of  classical  elasticity  in  one  volume.  Proceeds  from  elementary  notions  of  exten¬ 
sion  to  types  of  strain,  cubical  dilatation,  general  theory  of  strains.  Covers  relation  between 
mathematical  theory  of  elasticity  and  technical  mechanics;  equilibrium  of  isotropic  elastic 
solids  and  aelotropic  solid  bodies;  nature  of  force  transmission,  Volterra’s  theory  of 
dislocations;  theory  of  elastic  spheres  in  relation  to  tidal,  rotational,  gravitational  effects 
on  earth;  general  theory  of  bending;  deformation  of  curved  plates;  buckling  effects;  much 
more.  “The  standard  treatise  on  elasticity,”  American  Math.  Monthly.  4th  revised  edition. 
76  figures,  xviii  +  643pp.  6V8  x  9V4.  S174  Paperbound  $2.95 


NUCLEAR  PHYSICS,  QUANTUM  THEORY,  RELATIVITY 


MESON  PHYSICS,  R.  E.  Marshak.  Presents  basic  theory,  and  results  of  experiments  with  em¬ 
phasis  on  theoretical  significance.  Phenomena  involving  mesons  as  virtual  transitions 
avoided,  eliminating  some  of  least  satisfactory  predictions  of  meson  theory.  Includes  pro¬ 
duction  study  of  7 r  mesons  at  nonrelativistic  nucleon  energies  contracts  between  ir  and  u 
mesons,  phenomena  associated  with  nuclear  interaction  of  tt  mesons,  etc.  Presents  early 
evidence  for  new  classes  of  particles,  indicates  theoretical  difficulties  created  by  discovery 
of  heavy  mesons  and  hyperons.  viii  +  378pp.  5%  x  8.  S500  Paperbound  $1.95 

THE  FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  QUANTUM  MECHANICS,  WITH  ELEMENTARY  APPLICATIONS, 
E.  C.  Kemble.  Inductive  presentation,  for  graduate  student,  specialists  in  other  branches  of 
physics.  Apparatus  necessary  beyond  differential  equations  and  advanced  calculus  developed 
as  needed.  Though  general  exposition  of  principles,  hundreds  of  individual  problems  fully 
treated.  “Excellent  book  ...  of  great  value  to  every  student  .  .  .  rigorous  and  detailed 
mathematical  discussion  .  ..  has  succeeded  in  keeping  his  presentation  clear  and  under¬ 
standable,”  Dr.  Linus  Pauling,  J.  of  American  Chemical  Society.  Appendices:  calculus  of 
variations,  math,  notes,  etc.  611pp.  55/s  x  8%.  T472  Paperbound  $2.95 

WAVE  PROPAGATION  IN  PERIODIC  STRUCTURES,  L.  Brillouin.  General  method,  application  to 
different  problems:  pure  physics — scattering  of  X-rays  in  crystals,  thermal  vibration  in 
crystal  lattices,  electronic  motion  in  metals;  problems  in  electrical  engineering.  Partial 
contents:  elastic  waves  along  1-dimensional  lattices  of  point  masses.  Propagation  of  waves 
along  1-dimensional  lattices.  Energy  flow.  2,  3  dimensionaf  lattices.  Mathieu’s  equation. 
Matrices  and  propagation  of  waves  along  an  electric  line.  Continuous  electric  lines.  131 
illustrations,  xii  +  253pp.  5%  x  8.  S34  Paperbound  $1.85 


4 


DOVER  SCIENCE  BOOKS 


THEORY  OF  ELECTRONS  AND  ITS  APPLICATION  TO  THE  PHENOMENA  OF  LIGHT  AND  RADIANT 
HEAT,  H.  Lorentz.  Lectures  delivered  at  Columbia  Univ.,  by  Nobel  laureate.  Unabridged,  form 
historical  coverage  of  theory  of  free  electrons,  motion,  absorption  of  heat,  Zeeman  effect, 
optical  phenomena  in  moving  bodies,  etc.  109  pages  notes  explain  more  advanced  sec¬ 
tions.  9  figures.  352pp.  5%  x  8.  S173  Paperbound  $1.85 

SELECTED  PAPERS  ON  QUANTUM  ELECTRODYNAMICS,  edited  by  J.  Schwinger.  Facsimiles  of 
papers  which  established  quantum  electrodynamics;  beginning  to  present  position  as  part 
of  larger  theory.  First  book  publication  in  any  language  of  collected  papers  of  Bethe,  Bloch, 
Dirac,  Dyson,  Fermi,  Feynman,  Heisenberg,  Kusch,  Lamb,  Oppenheimer,  Pauli,  Schwinger, 
Tomonoga,  Weisskopf,  Wigner,  etc.  34  papers:  29  in  English,  1  in  French,  3  in  German, 

1  in  Italian.  Historical  commentary  by  editor,  xvii  +  423pp.  6V8  x  91/4. 

S444  Paperbound  $2.45 

FOUNDATIONS  OF  NUCLEAR  PHYSICS,  edited  by  R.  T.  Beyer.  13  of  the  most  important  papers 
on  nuclear  physics  reproduced  in  facsimile  in  the  original  languages;  the  papers  most  often 
cited  in  footnotes,  bibliographies.  Anderson,  Curie,  Joliot,  Chadwick,  Fermi,  Lawrence,  Cock- 
roft,  Hahn,  Yukawa.  Unparalleled  bibliography:  122  double  columned  pages,  over  4,000 
articles,  books,  classified.  57  figures.  288pp.  6Va  x  9V4.  S19  Paperbound  $1.75 

THE  THEORY  OF  GROUPS  AND  QUANTUM  MECHANICS,  H.  Weyl.  Schroedinger’s  wave  equation, 
de  Broglie’s  waves  of  a  particle,  Jordon-Hoelder  theorem,  Lie’s  continuous  groups  of  trans¬ 
formations,  Pauli  exclusion  principle,  quantization  of  Mawell-Dirac  field  equations,  etc. 
Unitary  geometry,  quantum  theory,  groups,  application  of  groups  to  quantum  mechanics, 
symmetry  permutation  group,  algebra  of  symmetric  transformations,  etc.  2nd  revised  edi¬ 
tion.  xxii  +  422pp.  5%  x  8.  S268  Clothbound  $4.50 

S269  Paperbound  $1.95 

PHYSICAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  QUANTUM  THEORY,  Werner  Heisenberg.  Nobel  laureate  dis¬ 
cusses  quantum  theory;  his  own  work,  Compton,  Schroedinger,  Wilson,  Einstein,  many 
others.  For  physicists,  chemists,  not  specialists  in  quantum  theory.  Only  elementary  formulae 
considered  in  text;  mathematical  appendix  for  specialists.  Profound  without  sacrificing 
clarity.  Translated  by  C.  Eckart,  F.  Hoyt.  18  figures.  192pp.  5%  x  8. 

SI  13  Paperbound  $1.25 

INVESTIGATIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  BROWNIAN  MOVEMENT,  Albert  Einstein.  Reprints 

from  rare  European  journals,  translated  into  English.  5  basic  papers,  including  Elementary 
Theory  of  the  Brownian  Movement,  written  at  request  of  Lorentz  to  provide  a  simple 

explanation.  Translated  by  A.  D.  Cowper.  Annotated,  edited  by  R.  Fiirth.  33pp.  of  notes 
elucidate,  give  history  of  previous  investigations.  62  footnotes.  124pp.  5%  x  8. 

.  S304  Paperbound  $1.25 

THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  RELATIVITY,  E.  Einstein,  H.  Lorentz,  M.  Minkowski,  H.  Weyl.  The  11  basic 
papers  that  founded  the  general  and  special  theories  of  relativity,  translated  into  English. 

2  papers  by  Lorentz  on  the  Michelson  experiment,  electromagnetic  phenomena.  Minkowski’s 

“Space  and  Time,"  and  Weyl’s  “Gravitation  and  Electricity.”  7  epoch-making  papers  by  Ein¬ 
stein:  “Electromagnetics  of  Moving  Bodies,”  “Influence  of  Gravitation  in  Propagation  of 
Light,”  “Cosmological  Considerations,”  “General  Theory,”  3  others.  7  diagrams.  Special 
notes  by  A.  Sommerfeld.  224pp.  5%  x  8.  S93  Paperbound  $1.75 


STATISTICS 


ELEMENTARY  STATISTICS,  WITH  APPLICATIONS  IN  MEDICINE  AND  THE  BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCES, 
F.  E.  Croxton.  Based  primarily  on  biological  sciences,  but  can  be  used  by  anyone  desiring 
introduction  to  statistics.  Assumes  no  prior  acquaintance,  requires  only  modest  knowledge 
of  math.  All  basic  formulas  carefully  explained,  illustrated;  all  necessary  reference  tables 
included.  From  basic  terms  and  concepts,  proceeds  to  frequency  distribution,  linear,  non¬ 
linear,  multiple  correlation,  etc.  Contains  concrete  examples  from  medicine,  biology.  101 

charts.  57  tables.  14  appendices.  Iv  +  376pp.  5%  x  8.  S506  Paperbound  $1.95 

ANALYSIS  AND  DESIGN  OF  EXPERIMENTS,  H.  B.  Mann.  Offers  method  for  grasping  analysis  of 
variance,  variance  design  quickly.  Partial  contents:  Chi-square  distribution,  analysis  of 
variance  distribution,  matrices,  quadratic  forms,  likelihood  ration  tests,  test  of  linear 

hypotheses,  power  of  analysis,  Galois  fields,  non-orthogonal  data,  interblock  estimates,  etc. 
15pp.  pf  useful  tables,  x  +  195pp.  5  x  7%.  S180  Paperbound  $1.45 

FREQUENCY  CURVES  AND  CORRELATION,  W.  P.  Elderton.  4th  revised  edition  of  standard 
work  on  classical  statistics.  Practical,  one  of  few  books  constantly  referred  to  for  clear 
presentation  of  basic  material.  Partial  contents:  Frequency  Distributions;  Pearsons  Fre¬ 

quency  Curves;  Theoretical  Distributions;  Standard  Errors;  Correlation  Ratio — Contingency; 
Corrections  for  Moments,  Beta,  Gamma  Functions;  etc.  Key  to  terms,  symbols.  25  examples. 
40  tables.  16  figures,  xi  +  272pp.  5V2  x  8V2.  Clothbound  $1.49 


5 


CATALOGUE  OF 


HYDRODYNAMICS,  ETC. 


HYDRODYNAMICS,  Horace  Lamb.  Standard  reference  work  on  dynamics  of  liquids  and  gases. 
Fundamental  theorems,  equations,  methods,  solutions,  background  for  classical  hydrody¬ 
namics.  Chapters:  Equations  of  Motion,  Integration  of  Equations  in  Special  Gases,  Vortex 
Motion,  Tidal  Waves,  Rotating  Masses  of  Liquids,  etc.  Excellently  planned,  arranged,  Clear, 
lucid  presentation.  6th  enlarged,  revised  edition.  Over  900  footnotes,  mostly  bibliograph¬ 
ical.  119  figures,  xv  +  738pp.  6Vs  x  9V4.  S256  Paperbound  $2.95 

HYDRODYNAMICS,  A  STUDY  OF  LOGIC,  FACT,  AND  SIMILITUDE,  Garrett  Birkhoff.  A  stimulating 
application  of  pure  mathematics  to  an  applied  problem.  Emphasis  is  on  correlation  of 
theory  and  deduction  with  experiment.  Examines  recently  discovered  paradoxes,  theory  of 
modelling  and  dimensional  analysis,  paradox  and  error  in  flows  and  free  boundary  theory. 
Classical  theory  of  virtual  mass  derived  from  homogenous  spaces;  group  theory  applied 
to  fluid  mechanics.  20  figures,  3  plates,  xiii  +  186pp.  5%  x  8.  S22  Paperbound  $1.85 


HYDRODYNAMICS,  H.  Dryden,  F.  Murhaghan,  H.  Bateman.  Published  by  National  Research 
Council,  1932.  Complete  coverage  of  classical  hydrodynamics,  encyclopedic  in  quality. 
Partial  contents:  physics  of  fluids,  motion,  turbulent  flow,  compressible  fluids,  motion  in 
1,  2,  3  dimensions;  laminar  motion,  resistance  of  motion  through  viscous  fluid,  eddy 
viscosity,  discharge  of  gases,  flow  past  obstacles,  etc.  Over  2900-item  bibliography.  23 
figures.  634pp.  5%  x  8.  S303  Paperbound  $2.75 


ACOUSTICS  AND  OPTICS 


PRINCIPLES  OF  PHYSICAL  OPTICS,  Ernst  Mach.  Classical  examination  of  propagation  of  light, 
color,  polarization,  etc.  Historical,  philosophical  treatment  unequalled  for  breadth  and 
readability.  Contents:  Rectilinear  propagation,  reflection,  refraction,  dioptrics,  composition 
of  light,  periodicity,  theory  of  interference,  polarization,  mathematical  representation  of 
properties,  etc,  279  illustrations.  10  portraits.  324pp.  53/a  x  8.  S170  Paperbound  $1.75 

THE  THEORY  OF  SOUND,  Lord  Rayleigh.  Written  by  Nobel  laureate,  classical  methods  here 
will  cover  most  vibrating  systems  likely  to  be  encountered  in  practice.  Complete  coverage 
of  experimental,  mathematical  aspects.  Partial  contents:  Harmonic  motions,  lateral  vibra¬ 
tions  of  bars,  curved  plates  or  shells,  applications  of  Laplace’s  functions  to  acoustical 
problems,  fluid  friction,  etc.  First  low-priced  edition  of  this  great  reference-study  work. 
Historical  introduction  by  R.  B.  Lindsay.  1040pp.  97  figures.  5%  x  8. 

S292,  S293,  Two  volume  set,  paperbound  $4.00 

THEORY  OF  VIBRATIONS,  N.  W.  McLachlan.  Based  on  exceptionally  successful  graduate 
course,  Brown  University.  Discusses  linear  systems  having  1  degree  of  freedom,  forced 
vibrations  of  simple  linear  systems,  vibration  of  flexible  strings,  transverse  vibrations  of 
bars  and  tubes,  of  circular  plate,  sound  waves  of  finite  amplitude,  etc.  99  diagrams.  160pp. 
5%  x  8.  S190  Paperbound  $1.35 

APPLIED  OPTICS  AND  OPTICAL  DESIGN,  A.  E.  Conrady.  Thorough  systematic  presentation  of 
physical  and  mathematical  aspects,  limited  mostly  to  “real  optics.”  Stresses  practical 
problem  of  maximum  aberration  permissible  without  affecting  performance.  Ordinary  ray 
tracing  methods;  complete  theory  ray  tracing  methods,  primary  aberrations;  enough  higher 
aberration  to  design  telescopes,  low  powered  microscopes,  photographic  equipment.  Covers 
fundamental  equations,  extra-axial  image  points,  transverse  chromatic  aberration,  angular 
magnification,  similar  topics.  Tables  of  functions  of  N.  Over  150  diagrams,  x  +  518pp. 
5%x  8%.  S366  Paperbound  $2.98 

RAYLEIGH’S  PRINCIPLE  AND  ITS  APPLICATIONS  TO  ENGINEERING,  G.  Temple,  W.  Bickley. 

Rayleigh’s  principle  developed  to  provide  upper,  lower  estimates  of  true  value  of  funda¬ 
mental  period  of  vibrating  system,  or  condition  of  stability  of  elastic  system.  Examples, 
rigorous  proofs.  Partial  contents:  Energy  method  of  discussing  vibrations,  stability.  Per¬ 
turbation  theory,  whirling  of  uniform  shafts.  Proof,  accuracy,  successive  approximations, 
applications  of  Rayleigh’s  theory.  Numerical,  graphical  methods.  Ritz’s  method.  22  figures, 
ix  +  156pp.  5%  x  8.  S307  Paperbound  $1.50 

OPTICKS,  Sir  Isaac  Newton.  In  its  discussion  of  light,  reflection,  color,  refraction,  theories 
of  wave  and  corpuscular  theories  of  light,  this  work  is  packed  with  scores  of  insights  and 
discoveries.  In  its  precise  and  practical  discussions  of  construction  of  optical  apparatus, 
contemporary  understanding  of  phenomena,  it  is  truly  fascinating  to  modern  scientists. 
Foreword  by  Albert  Einstein.  Preface  by  I.  B.  Cohen,  Harvard.  7  pages  of  portraits,  facsimile 

pages,  letters,  etc.  cxvi  +  414pp.  5%  x  8.  S205  Paperbound  $2.00 


6 


DOVER  SCIENCE  BOOKS 


ON  THE  SENSATIONS  OF  TONE,  Hermann  Helmholtz.  Using  acoustical  physics,  physiology, 
experiment,  history  of  music,  covers  entire  gamut  of  musical  tone:  relation  of  music 
science  to  acoustics,  physical  vs.  physiological  acoustics,  vibration,  resonance,  tonality, 
progression  of  parts,  etc.  33  appendixes  on  various  aspects  of  sound,  physics,  acoustics, 
music,  etc.  Translated  by  A.  J.  Ellis.  New  introduction  by  H.  Margenau,  Yale.  68  figures.  43 
musical  passages  analyzed.  Over  100  tables,  xix  +  576pp.  6Ve  x  9V4. 

S114  Clothbound  $4.95 


ELECTROMAGNETICS,  ENGINEERING,  TECHNOLOGY 


INTRODUCTION  TO  RELAXATION  METHODS,  F.  S.  Shaw.  Describes  almost  all  manipulative  re¬ 
sources  of  value  in  solution  of  differential  equations.  Treatment  is  mathematical  rather 
than  physical.  Extends  general  computational  process  to  include  almost  all  branches  of 
applied  math  and  physics.  Approximate  numerical  methods  are  demonstrated,  although  high 
accuracy  is  obtainable  without  undue  expenditure  of  time.  48pp.  of  tables  for  computing 
irregular  star  first  and  second  derivatives,  irregular  star  coefficients  for  second  order 
equations,  for  fourth  order  equations.  “Useful.  .  .  .  exposition  is  clear,  simple  ...  no 
previous  acquaintance  with  numerical  methods  is  assumed,”  Science  Progress.  253  dia¬ 
grams.  72  tables.  400pp.  5%  x  8.  S244  Paperbound  $2.45 

THE  ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELD,  M.  Mason,  W.,  Weaver.  Used  constantly  by  graduate  engineers. 
Vector  methods  exclusively;  detailed  treatment  of  electrostatics,  expansion  methods,  with 
tables  converting  any  quantity  into  absolute  electromagnetic,  absolute  electrostatic,  prac¬ 
tical  units.  Discrete  charges,  ponderable  bodies.  Maxwell  field  equations,  etc.  416pp. 
5%  x  8.  S185  Paperbound  $2.00 

ELASTICITY,  PLASTICITY  AND  STRUCTURE  OF  MATTER,  R.  Houwink.  Standard  treatise  on 
rheological  aspects  of  different  technically  important  solids:  crystals,  resins,  textiles,  rubber, 
clay,  etc.  Investigates  general  laws  for  deformations;  determines  divergences.  Covers  gen¬ 
eral  physical  and  mathematical  aspects  of  plasticity,  elasticity,  viscosity.  Detailed  examina¬ 
tion  of  deformations,  internal  structure  of  matter  in  relation  to  elastic,  plastic  behaviour, 
formation  of  solid  matter  from  a  fluid,  etc.  Treats  glass,  asphalt,  balata,  proteins,  baker’s 
dough,  others.  2nd  revised,  enlarged  edition.  Extensive  revised  bibliography  in  over  500 
footnotes.  214  figures,  xvii  +  368pp.  6  x  91/4.  S385  Paperbound  $2.45 

DESIGN  AND  USE  OF  INSTRUMENTS  AND  ACCURATE  MECHANISM,  T.  N.  Whitehead.  For  the 

instrument  designer,  engineer;  how  to  combine  necessary  mathematical  abstractions  with 
independent  observations  of  actual  facts.  Partial  contents:  instruments  and  their  parts, 
theory  of  errors,  systematic  errors,  probability,  short  period  errors,  erratic  errors,  design 
precision,  kinematic,  semikinematic  design,  stiffness,  planning  of  an  instrument,  human 
factor,  etc.  85  photos,  diagrams,  xii  +  288pp.  5%  x  8.  S270  Paperbound  $1.95 

APPLIED  HYDRO-  AND  AEROMECHANICS,  L.  Prandtl,  0.  G.  Tietjens.  Presents,  for  most  part, 
methods  valuable  to  engineers.  Flow  in  pipes,  boundary  layers,  airfoil  theory,  entry  condi¬ 
tions,  turbulent  flow,  boundary  layer,  determining  drag  from  pressure  and  velocity,  etc. 
“Will  be  welcomed  by  all  students  of  aerodynamics,”  Nature.  Unabridged,  unaltered.  An 
Engineering  Society  Monograph,  1934.  Index.  226  figures.  28  photographic  plates  illustrating 
flow  patterns,  xvi  +  311pp.  5%  x  8.  S375  Paperbound  $1.85 

FUNDAMENTALS  OF  HYDRO-  AND  AEROMECHANICS,  L.  Prandtl,  0.  G.  Tietjens.  Standard  work, 
based  on  Prandtl’s  lectures  at  Goettingen.  Wherever  possible  hydrodynamics  theory  is 
referred  to  practical  considerations  in  hydraulics,  unifying  theory  and  experience.  Presenta¬ 
tion  extremely  clear.  Though  primarily  physical,  proofs  are  rigorous  and  use  vector  analysis 
to  a  great  extent.  An  Engineering  Society  Monograph,  1934.  “Still  recommended  as  an 
excellent  introduction  to  this  area,”  Physikalische  Blatter.  186  figures,  xvi  +  270pp. 
53/s  x  8.  S374  Paperbound  $1.85 

GASEOUS  CONDUCTORS:  THEORY  AND  ENGINEERING  APPLICATIONS,  J.  D.  Cobine.  Indispensable 
text,  reference,  to  gaseous  conduction  phenomena,  with  engineering  viewpoint  prevailing 
throughout.  Studies  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  ionization,  emission  phenomena;  gas  breakdown, 
spark  characteristics,  glow,  discharges;  engineering  applications  in  circuit  interrupters,  recti¬ 
fiers,  etc.  Detailed  treatment  of  high  pressure  arcs  (Suits);  low  pressure  arcs  (Langmuir, 
Tonks).  Much  more.  “Well  organized,  clear,  straightforward,”  Tonks,  Review  of  Scientific 
Instruments.  83  practice  problems.  Over  600  figures.  58  tables,  xx  4-  606pp. 

53/8  x  8.  S442  Paperbound  $2.75 

PHOTOELASTICITY:  PRINCIPLES  AND  METHODS,  H.  T.  Jessop,  F.  C.  Harris.  For  engineer,  spe¬ 
cific  problems  of  stress  analysis.  Latest  time-saving  methods  of  checking  calculations  in 
2-dimensional  design  problems,  new  techniques  for  stresses  in  3  dimensions,  lucid  descrip¬ 
tion  of  optical  systems  used  in  practical  photoelectricity.  Useful  suggestions,  hints  based 
on  on-the-job  experience  included.  Partial  contents:  strain,  stress-strain  relations,  circular 
disc  under  thrust  along  diameter,  rectangular  block  with  square  hold  under  vertical  thrust, 
simply  supported  rectangular  beam  under  central  concentrated  load,  etc.  Theory  held  to 
minimum,  no  advanced  mathematical  training  needed.  164  illustrations,  viii  +  184pp. 
6Vs  x  91/4.  S137  Clothbound  $3.75 


7 


CATALOGUE  OF 


MICROWAVE  TRANSMISSION  DESIGN  DATA,  T.  Moreno.  Originally  classified,  now  rewritten, 
enlarged  (14  new  chapters)  under  auspices  of  Sperry  Corp.  Of  immediate  value  or  reference 
use  to  radio  engineers,  systems  designers,  applied  physicists,  etc.  Ordinary  transmission 
line  theory;  attenuation;  parameters  of  coaxial  lines;  flexible  cables;  tuneable  wave  guide 
impedance  transformers;  effects  of  temperature,  humidity;  much  more.  “Packed  with  informa¬ 
tion  ;  .  .  theoretical  discussions  are  directly  related  to  practical  questions,”  U.  of  Royal 
Naval  Scientific  Service.  Tables  of  dielectrics,  flexible  cable,  etc.  ix  +  248pp.  5%  x  8. 

S549  Paperbound  $1.50 

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  PROPERTIES  OF  METALS  AND  ALLOYS,  H.  F.  Mott,  H.  Jones.  Quantum 

methods  develop  mathematical  models  showing  interrelationship  of  fundamental  chemical 
phenomena  wtih  crystal  structure,  electrical,  optical  properties,  etc.  Examines  electron 
motion  in  applied  field,  cohesion,  heat  capacity,  refraction,  noble  metals,  transition  and 
di-valent  metals,  etc.  “Exposition  is  as  clear  .  .  .  mathematical  treatment  as  simple  and 
reliable  as  we  have  become  used  to  expect  of  .  .  .  Prof.  Mott,”  Nature.  138  figures,  xiii  + 
320pp.  5%  x  8.  S456  Paperbound  $1.85 

THE  MEASUREMENT  OF  POWER  SPECTRA  FROM  THE  POINT  OF  VIEW  OF  COMMUNICATIONS 
ENGINEERING,  R.  B.  Blackman,  J.  W.  Tukey.  Pathfinding  work  reprinted  from  “Bell  System 
Technical  Journal.”  Various  ways  of  getting  practically  useful  answers  in  power  spectra 
measurement,  using  results  from  both  transmission  and  statistical  estimation  theory.  Treats: 
Autocovariance,  Functions  and  Power  Spectra,  Distortion,  Heterodyne  Filtering,  Smoothing, 
Decimation  Procedures,  Transversal  Filtering,  much  more.  Appendix  reviews  fundamental 
Fourier  techniques.  Index  of  notation.  Glossary  of  terms.  24  figures.  12  tables.  192pp. 
5%  x  8%.  S507  Paperbound  $1.85 

TREATISE  ON  ELECTRICITY  AND  MAGNETISM,  James  Clerk  Maxwell.  For  more  than  80  years 
a  seemingly  inexhaustible  source  of  leads  for  physicists,  mathematicians,  engineers.  Total 
of  1082pp.  on  such  topics  as  Measurement  of  Quantities,  Electrostatics,  Elementary  Mathe¬ 
matical  Theory  of  Electricity,  Electrical  Work  and  Energy  in  a  System  of  Conductors,  Gen¬ 
eral  Theorems,  Theory  of  Electrical  Images,  Electrolysis,  Conduction,  Polarization,  Dielectrics, 
Resistance,  much  more.  “The  greatest  mathematical  physicist  since  Newton,”  Sir  James 
Jeans.  3rd  edition.  107  figures,  21  plates.  1082pp.  5%  x  8.  S186  Clothbound  $4.95 


CHEMISTRY  AND  PHYSICAL  CHEMISTRY 


THE  PHASE  RULE  AND  ITS  APPLICATIONS,  Alexander  Findlay.  Covers  chemical  phenomena  of 
1  to  4  multiple  component  systems,  the  “standard  work  on  the  subject”  (Nature).  Completely 
revised,  brought  up  to  date  by  A.  N.  Campbell,  N.  0.  Smith.  New  material  on  binary,  tertiary 
liquid  equilibria,  solid  solutions  in  ternary  systems,  quinary  systems  of  salts,  water,  etc. 
Completely  revised  to  triangular  coordinates  in  ternary  systems,  clarified  graphic  representa¬ 
tion,  solid  models,  etc.  9th  revised  edition.  236  figures.  505  footnotes,  mostly  bibliographic, 
xii  +  449pp.  5%  x  8.  S92  Paperbound  $2.45 

DYNAMICAL  THEORY  OF  GASES,  James  Jeans.  Divided  into  mathematical,  physical  chapters  for 
convenience  of  those  not  expert  in  mathematics.  Discusses  mathematical  theory  of  gas 
in  steady  state,  thermodynamics,  Bolzmann,  Maxwell,  kinetic  theory,  quantum  theory,  expo¬ 
nentials,  etc.  “One  of  the  classics  of  scientific  writing  ...  as  lucid  and  comprehensive 
an  exposition  of  the  kinetic  theory  as  has  ever  been  written,”  J.  of  Institute  of  Engineers. 
4th  enlarged  edition,  with  new  material  on  quantum  theory,  quantum  dynamics,  etc.  28  figures. 
444pp.  6V8  x  9V4.  S136  Paperbound  $2.45 

POLAR  MOLECULES,  Pieter  Debye.  Nobel  laureate  offers  complete  guide  to  fundamental 
electrostatic  field  relations,  polarizability,  molecular  structure.  Partial  contents:  electric 
intensity,  displacement,  force,  polarization  by  orientation,  molar  polarization,  molar  refrac¬ 
tion,  halogen-hydrides,  polar  liquids,  ionic  saturation,  dielectric  constant,  etc.  Special 
chapter  considers  quantum  theory.  “Clear  and  concise  .  .  .  coordination  of  experimental 
results  with  theory  will  be  readily  appreciated,”  Electronics  Industries.  172pp.  5%  x  8. 

563  Clothbound  $3.50 

564  Paperbound  $1.50 

ATOMIC  SPECTRA  AND  ATOMIC  STRUCTURE,  G.  Herzberg.  Excellent  general  survey  for  chem¬ 
ists,  physicists  specializing  in  other  fields.  Partial  contents:  simplest  line  spectra,  elements 
of  atomic  theory;  multiple  structure  of  line  spectra,  electron  spin;  building-up  principle, 
periodic  system  of  elements;  finer  details  of  atomic  spectra;  hyperfine  structure  of  spectral 
lines;  some  experimental  results  and  applications.  80  figures.  20  tables,  xiii  +  257pp. 
5%  x  8.  SI  15  Paperbound  $1.95 

TREATISE  ON  THERMODYNAMICS,  Max  Planck.  Classic  based  on  his  original  papers.  Brilliant 
concepts  of  Nobel  laureate  make  no  assumptions  regarding  nature  of  heat,  rejects  earlier 
approaches  of  Helmholtz,  Maxwell,  to  offer  uniform  point  of  view  for  entire  field.  Seminal 
work  by  founder  of  quantum  theory,  deducing  new  physical,  chemical  laws.  A  standard 
text,  an  excellent  introduction  to  field  for  students  with  knowledge  of  elementary  chemistry, 
physics,  calculus.  3rd  English  edition,  xvi  -I-  297pp.  5%  x  8.  S219  Paperbound  $1.75 


8 


DOVER  SCIENCE  BOOKS 


KINETIC  THEORY  OF  LIQUIDS,  J.  Frenkel.  Regards  kinetic  theory  of  liquids  as  generalization, 
extension  of  theory  of  solid  bodies,  covers  all  types  of  arrangements  of  solids;  thermal 
displacements  of  atoms;  interstitial  atoms,  ions;  orientational,  rotational  motion  of  mole¬ 
cules;  transition  between  states  of  matter.  Mathematical  theory  developed  close  to  physical 
subject  matter.  “Discussed  in  a  simple  yet  deeply  penetrating  fashion  .  .  .  will  serve  as 
seeds  for  a  great  many  basic  and  applied  developments  in  chemistry,”  J.  of  the  Amer. 
Chemical  Soc.  216  bibliographical  footnotes.  55  figures,  xi  +  485pp.  5%  x  8. 

594  Clothbound  $3.95 

595  Paperbound  $2.45 


ASTRONOMY 


OUT  OF  THE  SKY,  H.  H.  Nininger.  Non-technical,  comprehensive  introduction  to  “meteoritics” 
— science  concerned  with  arrival  of  matter  from  outer  space.  By  one  of  world’s  experts 
on  meteorites,  this  book  defines  meteors  and  meteorites;  studies  fireball  clusters  and 
processions,  meteorite  composition,  size,  distribution,  showers,  explosions,  origins,  much 
more,  viii  +  336pp.  53/8  x  8.  T519  Paperbound  $1.85 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  STELLAR  STRUCTURE,  S.  Chandrasekhar.  Outstanding 
treatise  on  stellar  dynamics  by  one  of  greatest  astro-physicists.  Examines  relationship  be¬ 
tween  loss  of  energy,  mass,  and  radius  of  stars  in  steady  state.  Discusses  thermodynamic 
laws  from  Caratheodory’s  axiomatic  standpoint;  adiabatic,  polytropic  laws;  work  of  Ritter, 
Emden,  Kelvin,  etc.;  Stroemgren  envelopes  as  starter  for  theory  of  gaseous  stars;  Gibbs 
statistical  mechanics  (quantum);  degenerate  stellar  configuration,  theory  of  white  dwarfs; 
etc.  “Highest  level  of  scientific  merit,”  Bulletin.  Amer.  Math.  Soc.  33  figures.  509pp. 
53/s  x  8.  S413  Paperbound  $2.75 

LES  METHODES  NOVELLES  DE  LA  MECANIQUE  CELESTE,  H.  PoincarG.  Complete  French  text 
of  one  of  Poincare’s  most  important  works.  Revolutionized  celestial  mechanics:  first  use  of 
integral  invariants,  first  major  application  of  linear  differential  equations,  study  of  periodic 
orbits,  lunar  motion  and  Jupiter’s  satellites,  three  body  problem,  and  many  other  important 
topics.  “Started  a  new  era  .  .  .  so  extremely  modern  that  even  today  few  have  mastered 
his  weapons,”  E.  T.  Bell.  3  volumes.  Total  1282pp.  6Vs  x  91/4. 

Vol.  1  S401  Paperbound  $2.75 

Vol.  2  S402  Paperbound  $2.75 

Vol.  3  S403  Paperbound  $2.75 

The  set  $7.50 

THE  REALM  OF  THE  NEBULAE,  E.  Hubble.  One  of  the  great  astronomers  of  our  time  presents 
his  concept  of  “island  universes,”  and  describes  its  effect  on  astronomy.  Covers  velocity- 
distance  relation;  classification,  nature,  distances,  general  field  of  nebulae;  cosmological 
theories;  nebulae  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Milky  way;  etc.  39  photos,  including  velocity- 
distance  relations  shown  by  spectrum  comparison.  “One  of  the  most  progressive  lines 
of  astronomical  research,”  The  Times,  London.  New  Introduction  by  A.  Sandage.  55  illustra¬ 
tions.  xxiv  +  201pp.  53/b  x  8.  S455  Paperbound  $1.50 

HOW  TO  MAKE  A  TELESCOPE,  Jean  Texereau.  Design,  build  an  f/6  or  f/8  Newtonian  type 
reflecting  telescope,  with  altazimuth  Couder  mounting,  suitable  for  planetary,  lunar,  and 
stellar  observation.  Covers  every  operation  step-by-step,  every  piece  of  equipment.  Dis¬ 
cusses  basic  principles  of  geometric  and  physical  optics  (unnecessary  to  construction), 
comparative  merits  of  reflectors,  refractors.  A  thorough  discussion  of  eyepieces,  finders, 
grinding,  installation,  testing,  etc.  241  figures,  38  photos,  show  almost  every  operation 
and  tool.  Potential  errors  are  anticipated.  Foreword  by  A.  Couder.  Sources  of  supply,  xiii 
+  191pp.  61/4  x  10.  T464  Clothbound  $3.50 


BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCES 


THE  BIOLOGY  OF  THE  AMPHIBIA,  G.  K.  Noble,  Late  Curator  of  Herpetology  at  Am.  Mus.  of 
Nat.  Hist.  Probably  most  used  text  on  amphibia,  most  comprehensive,  clear,  detailed.  19 
chapters,  85  page  supplement:  development;  heredity;  life  history;  speciation;  adaptation; 
sex,  integument,  respiratory,  circulatory,  digestive,  muscular,  nervous  systems;  instinct, 
intelligence,  habits,  economic  value  classification,  environment  relationships,  etc.  “Nothing 
comparable  to  it”  C.  H.  Pope,  curator  of  Amphibia,  Chicago  Mus.  of  Nat.  Hist.  1047  item 
bibliography.  174  illustrations.  600pp.  53/s  x  8.  S206  Paperbound  $2.98 

THE  ORIGIN  OF  LIFE,  A.  I.  Oparin.  A  classic  of  biology.  This  is  the  first  modern  statement 
of  theory  of  gradual  evolution  of  life  from  nitrocarbon  compounds.  A  brand-new  evaluation 
of  Oparin’s  theory  in  light  of  later  research,  by  Dr.  S.  Margulis,  University  of  Nebraska, 
xxv  +  270pp.  53/s  x  8.  S213  Paperbound  $1.75 


9 


CATALOGUE  OF 


THE  BIOLOGY  OF  THE  LABORATORY  MOUSE,  edited  by  G.  D.  Snell.  Prepared  in  1941  by  staff 
of  Roscoe  B.  Jackson  Memorial  Laboratory,  still  the  standard  treatise  on  the  mouse, 
assembling  enormous  amount  of  material  for  which  otherwise  you  spend  hours  of  research. 
Embryology,  reproduction,  histology,  spontaneous  neoplasms,  gene  and  chromosomes  muta¬ 
tions,  genetics  of  spontaneous  tumor  formations,  of  tumor  transplantation,  endocrine  secre¬ 
tion  and  tumor  formation,  milk  influence  and  tumor  formation,  inbred,  hybrid  animals, 
parasites,  infectious  diseases,  care  and  recording.  “A  wealth  of  information  of  vital  con¬ 

cern.  .  .  .  recommended  to  all  who  could  use  a  book  on  such  a  subject,”  Nature.  Classified 
bibliography  of  1122  items.  172  figures,  including  128  photos,  ix  +  497pp.  6Vs  x  9V4. 

S248  Clothbound  $6.00 

THE  TRAVELS  OF  WILLIAM  BARTRAM,  edited  by  Mark  Van  Doran.  Famous  source-book  of 
American  anthropology,  natural  history,  geography,  is  record  kept  by  Bartram  in  1770’s  on 
travels  through  wilderness  of  Florida,  Georgia,  Carolinas.  Containing  accurate,  beautiful 
descriptions  of  Indians,  settlers,  fauna,  flora,  it  is  one  of  finest  pieces  of  Americana 

ever  written.  13  original  illustrations.  448pp.  5%  x  8.  T13  Paperbound  $2.00 

BEHAVIOUR  AND  SOCIAL  LIFE  OF  THE  HONEYBEE,  Ronald  Ribbands.  Outstanding  scientific 

study;  a  compendium  of  practically  everything  known  of  social  life  of  honeybee.  Stresses 
behaviour  of  individual  bees  in  field,  hive.  Extends  von  Frisch’s  experiments  on  communi¬ 
cation  among  bees.  Covers  perception  of  temperature,  gravity,  distance,  vibration;  sound 
production;  glands;  structural  differences;  wax  production;  temperature  regulation;  recogni¬ 
tion,  communication;  drifting,  mating  behaviour,  other  highly  interesting  topics.  ‘‘This 
valuable  work  is  sure  of  a  cordial  reception  by  laymen,  beekeepers  and  scientists,”  Prof. 
Karl  von  Frisch,  Brit.  J.  of  Animal  Behaviour.  Bibliography  of  690  references.  127  diagrams, 
graphs,  sections  of  bee  anatomy,  fine  photographs.  352pp.  S410  Clothbound  $4.50 

ELEMENTS  OF  MATHEMATICAL  BIOLOGY,  A.  J.  Lotka.  Pioneer  classic,  1st  major  attempt  to 
apply  modern  mathematical  techniques  on  large  scale  to  phenomena  of  biology,  biochem¬ 
istry,  psychology,  ecology,  similar  life  sciences.  Partial  contents:  Statistical  meaning  of 
irreversibility;  Evolution  as  redistribution;  Equations  of  kinetics  of  evolving  systems;  Chem¬ 
ical,  inter-species  equilibrium;  parameters  of  state;  Energy  transformers  of  nature,  etc. 
Can  be  read  with  profit  by  even  those  having  no  advanced  math;  unsurpassed  as  study- 
reference.  Formerly  titled  ‘‘Elements  of  Physical  Biology.”  72  figures,  xxx  +  460pp.  5%  x  8. 

S346  Paperbound  $2.45 

TREES  OF  THE  EASTERN  AND  CENTRAL  UNITED  STATES  AND  CANADA,  W.  M.  Harlow.  Serious 
middle-level  text  covering  more  than  140  native  trees,  important  escapes,  with  informa¬ 
tion  on  general  appearance,  growth  habit,  leaf  forms,  flowers,  fruit,  bark,  commercial  use, 
distribution,  habitat,  woodlore,  etc.  Keys  within  text  enable  you  to  locate  various  species 
easily,  to  know  which  have  edible  fruit,  much  more  useful,  interesting  information.  ‘‘Well 
illustrated  to  make  identification  very  easy,”  Standard  Cat.  for  Public  Libraries.  Over  600 
photographs,  figures,  xiii  +  288pp.  5%  x  6V2.  T395  Paperbound  $1.35 

FRUIT  KEY  AND  TWIG  KEY  TO  TREES  AND  SHRUBS  (Fruit  key  to  Northeastern  Trees,  Twig  key 
to  Deciduous  Woody  Plants  of  Eastern  North  America),  W.  M.  Harlow.  Only  guides  with  photo¬ 
graphs  of  every  twig,  fruit  described.  Especially  valuable  to  novice.  Fruit  key  (both  deciduous 
trees,  evergreens)  has  introduction  on  seeding,  organs  invojved,  types,  habits.  Twig  key 
introduction  treats  growth,  morphology.  In  keys  proper,  identification  is  almost  automatic. 
Exceptional  work,  widely  used  in  university  courses,  especially  useful  for  identification  in 
winter,  or  from  fruit  or  seed  only.  Over  350  photos,  up  to  3  times  natural  size.  Index  of 
common,  scientific  names,  in  each  key.  xvii  +  125pp.  5%  x  83/s.  T511  Paperbound  $1.25 

INSECT  LIFE  AND  INSECT  NATURAL  HISTORY,  S.  W.  Frost.  Unusual  for  emphasizing  habits,  social 
life,  ecological  relations  of  insects  rather  than  more  academic  aspects  of  classification, 
morphology.  Prof.  Frost’s  enthusiasm  and  knowledge  are  everywhere  evident  as  he  discusses 
insect  associations,  specialized  habits  like  leaf-rolling,  leaf  mining,  case-making,  the  gall 
insects,  boring  insects,  etc.  Examines  matters  not  usually  covered  in  general  works:  insects 
as  human  food;  insect  music,  musicians;  insect  response  to  radio  waves;  use  of  insects  in 
art,  literature.  ‘‘Distinctly  different,  possesses  an  individuality  all  its  own,”  Journal  of 
Forestry.  Over  700  illustrations.  Extensive  bibliography,  x  +  524pp.  5%  x  8. 

T519  Paperbound  $2.49 

A  WAY  OF  LIFE,  AND  OTHER  SELECTED  WRITINGS,  Sir  William  Osier.  Physician,  humanist, 
Osier  discusses  brilliantly  Thomas  Browne,  Gui  Patin,  Robert  Burton,  Michael  Servetus, 
William  Beaumont,  Laennec.  Includes  such  favorite  writing  as  title  essay,  “The  Old  Human¬ 
ities  and  the  New  Science,”  “Books  and  Men,”  “The  Student  Life,”  6  more  of  his  best 
discussions  of  philosophy,  literature,  religion.  “The  sweep  of  his  mind  and  interests  em¬ 
braced  every  phase  of  human  activity,”  G.  L.  Keynes.  5  photographs.  Introduction  by  G.  L. 
Keynes,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  xx  +  278pp.  5%  x  8.  T488  Paperbound  $1.50 

THE  GENETICAL  THEORY  OF  NATURAL  SELECTION,  R.  A.  Fisher.  2nd  revised  edition  of  vital 
reviewing  of  Darwin’s  Selection  Theory  in  terms  of  particulate  inheritance,  by  one  of 
greatest  authorities  on  experimental,  theoretical  genetics.  Theory  stated  in  mathematical 
form.  Special  features  of  particulate  inheritance  are  examined:  evolution  of  dominance,  main¬ 
tenance  of  specific  variability,  mimicry,  sexual  selection,  etc.  5  chapters  on  man’s  special 
circumstances  as  a  social  animal.  16  photographs,  x  +  310pp.  5%  x  8. 

S466  Paperbound  $1.85 


10 


DOVER  SCIENCE  BOOKS 


THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  CHARLES  DARWIN,  AND  SELECTED  LETTERS,  edited  by  Francis 

Darwin.  Darwin’s  own  record  of  early  life;  historic  voyage  aboard  “Beagle;”  furore  surround¬ 
ing  evolution,  his  replies;  reminiscences  of  his  son.  Letters  to  Henslow,  Lyell,  Hooker, 
Huxley,  Wallace,  Kingsley,  etc.,  and  thoughts  on  religion,  vivisection.  We  see  how  he  revo¬ 
lutionized  geology  with  concepts  of  ocean  subsidence;  how  his  great  books  on  variation 
of  plants  and  animals,  primitive  man,  expression  of  emotion  among  primates,  plant  fertiliza¬ 
tion,  carnivorous  plants,  protective  coloration,  etc.,  came  into  being.  365pp.  5%  x  8. 

T479  Paperbound  $1.65 

ANIMALS  IN  MOTION,  Eadweard  Muybridge.  Largest,  most  comprehensive  selection  of  Muy¬ 
bridge’s  famous  action  photos  of  animals,  from  his  “Animal  Locomotion.”  3919  high-speed 
shots  of  34  different  animals,  birds,  in  123  types  of  action;  horses,  mules,  oxen,  pigs, 

goats,  camels,  elephants,  dogs,  cats  guanacos,  sloths,  lions,  tigers,  jaguars,  raccoons, 
baboons,  deer,  elk,  gnus,  kangaroos,  many  others,  walking,  running,  flying,  leaping.  Horse 
alone  in  over  40  ways.  Photos  taken  against  ruled  backgrounds;  most  actions  taken  from 

3  angles  at  once:  90°,  60°,  rear.  Most  plates  original  size.  Of  considerable  interest  to 
scientists  as  biology  classic,  records  of  actual  facts  of  natural  history,  physiology.  “Really 
marvelous  series  of  plates,”  Nature.  “Monumental  work,”  Waldemar  Kaempffert.  Edited  by 
L.  S.  Brown,  74  page  introduction  on  mechanics  of  motion.  340pp.  of  plates.  3919  photo¬ 

graphs.  416pp.  Deluxe  binding,  paper.  (Weight:  4V2  lbs.)  7V&  x  10%. 

T203  Clothbound  $10.00 

THE  HUMAN  FIGURE  IN  MOTION,  Eadweard  Muybridge.  New  edition  of  great  classic  in  history 
of  science  and  photography,  largest  selection  ever  made  from  original  Muybridge  photos  of 
human  action:  4789  photographs,  illustrating  163  types  of  motion:  walking,  running,  lifting, 
etc.  in  time-exposure  sequence  photos  at  speeds  up  to  l/6000th  of  a  second.  Men,  women, 
children,  mostly  undraped,  showing  bone,  muscle  positions  against  ruled  backgrounds, 

mostly  taken  at  3  angles  at  once.  Not  only  was  this  a  great  work  of  photography,  acclaimed 
by  contemporary  critics  as  work  of  genius,  but  it  was  also  a  great  19th  century  landmark 
in  biological  research.  Historical  introduction  by  Prof.  Robert  Taft,  U.  of  Kansas.  Plates 
original  size,  full  of  detail.  Over  500  action  strips.  407pp.  7 3A  x  10%.  Deluxe  edition. 

7204  Clothbound  $10.00 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE,  Claude  Bernard.  90-year  old 
classic  of  medical  science,  only  major  work  of  Bernard  available  in  English,  records  his 
efforts  to  transform  physiology  into  exact  science.  Principles  of  scientific  research  illus¬ 
trated  by  specified  case  histories  from  his  work;  roles  of  chance,  error,  preliminary  false 
conclusion,  in  leading  eventually  to  scientific  truth;  use  of  hypothesis.  Much  of  modern 
application  of  mathematics  to  biology  rests  on  foundation  set  down  here.  “The  presentation 
is  polished  .  .  .  reading  is  easy,”  Revue  des  questions  scientifiques.  New  foreword  by  Prof. 
I.  B.  Cohen,  Harvard  U.  xxv  +  266pp.  5%  x  8.  T400  Paperbound  $1.50 

STUDIES  ON  THE  STRUCTURE  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  VERTEBRATES,  E.  S.  Goodrich.  Definitive 
study  by  greatest  modern  comparative  anatomist.  Exhaustive  morphological,  phylogenetic 
expositions  of  skeleton,  fins,  limbs,  skeletal  visceral  arches,  labial  cartilages,  visceral 
clefts,  gills,  vascular,  respiratory,  excretory,  periphal  nervous  systems,  etc.,  from  fish  to 
higher  mammals.  “For  many  a  day  this  will  certainly  be  the  standard  textbook  on  Vertebrate 
Morphology  in  the  English  language,”  Journal  of  Anatomy.  754  illustrations.  69  page  bio¬ 
graphical  study  by  C.  C.  Hardy.  Bibliography  of  1186  references.  Two  volumes,  total  906pp. 
5%  x  8.  Two  vol.  set  S449,  450  Paperbound  $5.00 


EARTH  SCIENCES 


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  IGNEOUS  BOOKS,  N.  L.  Bowen.  Invaluable  serious  introduction  applies 
techniques  of  physics,  chemistry  to  explain  igneous  rock  diversity  in  terms  of  chemical 
composition,  fractional  crystallization.  Discusses  liquid  immiscibility  in  silicate  magmas, 
crystal  sorting,  liquid  lines  of  descent,  fractional  resorption  of  complex  minerals,  petrogen, 
etc.  Of  prime  importance  to  geologists,  mining  engineers;  physicists,  chemists  working  with 
high  temperature,  pressures.  “Most  important,”  Times,  London.  263  bibliographic  notes. 
82  figures,  xviii  +  334pp.  5%  x  8.  S311  Paperbound  $1.85 

GEOGRAPHICAL  ESSAYS,  M.  Davis.  Modern  geography,  geomorphology  rest  on  fundamental 
work  of  this  scientist.  26  famous  essays  present  most  important  theories,  field  researches. 
Partial  contents:  Geographical  Cycle;  Plains  of  Marine,  Subaerial  Denudation;  The  Peneplain; 
Rivers,  Valleys  of  Pennsylvania;  Outline  of  Cape  Cod;  Sculpture  of  Mountains  by  Glaciers; 
etc.  “Long  the  leader  and  guide,”  Economic  Geography.  “Part  of  the  very  texture  of  geog¬ 
raphy  .  .  .  models  of  clear  thought,”  Geographic  Review.  130  figures,  vi  4-  777pp.  5%  x  8. 

S383  Paperbound  $2.95 

URANIUM  PROSPECTING,  H.  L.  Barnes.  For  immediate  practical  use,  professional  geologist 
considers  uranium  ores,  geological  occurrences,  field  conditions,  all  aspects  of  highly 
profitable  occupation.  “Helpful  information  .  .  .  easy-to-use,  easy-to-find  style,”  Geotimes, 
x  +  117pp.  5%  x  8.  T309  Paperbound  $1.00 


11 


CATALOGUE  OF 


DE  RE  METALLICA,  Georgius  Agricola.  400  year  old  classic  translated,  annotated  by  former 
President  Herbert  Hoover.  1st  scientific  study  of  mineralogy,  mining,  for  over  200  years 
after  its  appearance  in  1556  the  standard  treatise.  12  books,  exhaustively  annotated,  discuss 
history  of  mining,  selection  of  sites,  types  of  deposits,  making  pits,  shafts,  ventilating, 
pumps,  crushing  machinery;  assaying,  smelting,  refining  metals;  also  salt  alum,  nitre,  glass 
making.  Definitive  edition,  with  all  289  16th  century  woodcuts  of  original.  Biographical, 
historical  introductions.  Bibliography,  survey  of  ancient  authors.  Indexes.  A  fascinating  book 
for  anyone  interested  in  art,  history  of  science,  geology,  etc.  Deluxe  Edition.  289  illustra¬ 
tions.  672pp.  6%  x  10.  Library  cloth.  S6  Clothbound  $10.00 

INTERNAL  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  EARTH,  edited  by  Beno  Gutenberg.  Prepared  for  National 

Research  Council,  this  is  a  complete,  thorough  coverage  of  earth  origins,  continent  forma¬ 
tion,  nature  and  behaviour  of  earth’s  core,  petrology  of  crust,  cooling  forces  in  core, 
seismic  and  earthquake  material,  gravity,  elastic  constants,  strain  characteristics,  similar 
topics.  “One  is  filled  with  admiration  ...  a  high  standard  .  .  .  there  is  no  reader  who 
will  not  learn  something  from  this  book,”  London,  Edinburgh,  Dublin,  Philosophic  Magazine. 
Largest  Bibliography  in  print:  1127  classified  items.  Table  of  constants.  43  diagrams. 
439pp.  6Vs  x  9V4.  S414  Paperbound  $2.45 

THE  BIRTH  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  GEOLOGICAL  SCIENCES,  F.  D.  Adams.  Most  thorough 
history  of  earth  sciences  ever  written.  Geological  thought  from  earliest  times  to  end  of 
19th  century,  covering  over  300  early  thinkers  and  systems;  fossils  and  their  explanation, 

vulcanists  vs.  neptunists,  figured  stones  and  paleontology,  generation  of  stones,  dozens  of 

similar  topics.  91  illustrations,  including  Medieval,  Renaissance  woodcuts,  etc.  632  footnotes, 
mostly  bibliographical.  511pp.  5%  x  8.  T5  Paperbound  $2.00 

HYDROLOGY,  edited  by  0.  E.  Meinzer,  prepared  for  the  National  Research  Council.  Detailed, 
complete  reference  library  on  precipitation,  evaporation,  snow,  snow  surveying,  glaciers, 
lakes,  infiltration,  soil  moisture,  ground  water,  runoff,  drought,  physical  changes  produced 

by  water  hydrology  of  limestone  terranes,  etc.  Practical  in  application,  especially  valuable 

for  engineers.  24  experts  have  created  “the  most  up-to-date,  most  complete  treatment  of 
the  subject,”  Am.  Assoc,  of  Petroleum  Geologists.  165  illustrations,  xi  +  712pp.  6Vs  x  9V4. 

S191  Paperbound  $2.95 


LANGUAGE  AND  TRAVEL  AIDS  FOR  SCIENTISTS 

SAY  IT  language  phrase  books 


“SAY  IT”  in  the  foreign  language  of  your  choice!  We  have  sold  over  1/2  million  copies  of 
these  popular,  useful  language  books.  They  will  not  make  you  an  expert  linguist  overnight, 
but  they  do  cover  most  practical  matters  of  everyday  life  abroad. 

Over  1000  useful  phrases,  expressions,  additional  variants,  substitutions. 

Modern!  Useful!  Hundreds  of  phrases  not  available  in  other  texts:  “Nylon,”  “air-condi¬ 
tioned,”  etc. 

The  ONLY  inexpensive  phrase  book  completely  indexed.  Everything  is  available  at  a  flip 
of  your  finger,  ready  to  use. 

Prepared  by  native  linguists,  travel  experts. 

Based  on  years  of  travel  experience  abroad. 

May  be  used  by  itself,  or  to  supplement  any  other  text  or  course.  Provides  a  living  ele¬ 
ment.  Used  by  many  colleges,  institutions:  Hunter  College;  Barnard  College;  Army  Ordinance 
School,  Aberdeen;  etc. 


Available,  1  book  per  language: 

Danish  (T818)  750 
Dutch  (T817)  750 

English  (for  German-speaking  people)  (T801)  600 

English  (for  Italian-speaking  people)  (T816)  600 

English  (for  Spanish-speaking  people)  (T802)  600 

Esperanto  (T820)  750 

French  (T803)  600 

German  (T804)  600 

Modern  Greek  (T813)  750 

Hebrew  (T805)  600 


Italian  (T806)  600 
Japanese  (T807)  750 
Norwegian  (T814)  750 
Russian  (T810)  750 
Spanish  (T811)  600 
Turkish  (T821)  750 
Yiddish  (T815)  750 
Swedish  (T812)  750 
Polish  (T808)  750 
Portuguese  (T809)  750 


12 


DOVER  SCIENCE  BOOKS 


MONEY  CONVERTER  AND  TIPPING  GUIDE  FOR  EUROPEAN  TRAVEL,  C.  Vomacka.  Purse-size  hand¬ 
book  crammed  with  information  on  currency  regulations,  tipping  for  every  European  country, 
including  Israel,  Turkey,  Czechoslovakia,  Rumania,  Egypt,  Russia,  Poland.  Telephone,  postal 
rates;  duty-free  imports,  passports,  visas,  health  certificates;  foreign  clothing  sizes;  weather 
tables.  What,  when  to  tip.  5th  year  of  publication.  128pp.  3V2  x  5V4.  T260  Paperbound  600 

NEW  RUSSIAN-ENGLISH  AND  ENGLISH-RUSSIAN  DICTIONARY,  M.  A.  O’Brien.  Unusually  com¬ 
prehensive  guide  to  reading,  speaking,  writing  Russian,  for  both  advanced,  beginning  stu¬ 
dents.  Over  70,000  entries  in  new  orthography,  full  information  on  accentuation,  grammatical 
classifications.  Shades  of  meaning,  idiomatic  uses,  colloquialisms,  tables  of  irregular  verbs 
for  both  languages.  Individual  entries  indicate  stems,  transitiveness,  perfective,  imper- 
fective  aspects,  conjugation,  sound  changes,  accent,  etc.  Includes  pronunciation  instruction. 
Used  at  Harvard,  Yale,  Cornell,  etc.  738pp.  5%  x  8.  T208  Paperbound  $  2.00 

PHRASE  AND  SENTENCE  DICTIONARY  OF  SPOKEN  RUSSIAN,  English-Russian,  Russian-English. 
Based  on  phrases,  complete  sentences,  not  isolated  words — recognized  as  one  of  best 
methods  of  learning  idiomatic  speech.  Over  11,500  entries,  indexed  by  single  words,  over 
32,000  English,  Russian  sentences,  phrases,  in  immediately  useable  form.  Shows  accent 
changes  in  conjugation,  declension;  irregular  forms  listed  both  alphabetically,  under  main 
form  of  word.  15,000  word  introduction  covers  Russian  sounds,  writing,  grammar,  syntax. 
15  page  appendix  of  geographical  names,  money,  important  signs,  given  names,  foods, 
special  Soviet  terms,  etc.  Originally  published  as  U.S.  Gov’t  Manual  TM  30-944.  iv  +  573pp. 
5%  x  8.  T496  Paperbound  $2.75 

PHRASE  AND  SENTENCE  DICTIONARY  OF  SPOKEN  SPANISH,  Spanish-English,  English-Spanish. 

Compiled  from  spoken  Spanish,  based  on  phrases,  complete  sentences  rather  than  isolated 
words — not  an  ordinary  dictionary.  Over  16,000  entries  indexed  under  single  words,  both 
Castilian,  Latin-American.  Language  in  immediately  useable  form.  25  page  introduction 
provides  rapid  survey  of  sounds,  grammar,  syntax,  full  consideration  of  irregular  verbs. 
Especially  apt  in  modern  treatment  of  phrases,  structure.  17  page  glossary  gives  translations 
of  geographical  names,  money  values,  numbers,  national  holidays,  important  street  signs, 
useful  expressions  of  high  frequency,  plus  unique  7  page  glossary  of  Spanish,  Spanish- 
American  foods.  Originally  published  as  U.S.  Gov’t  Manual  TM  30-900.  iv  +  513pp.  5%  x  8%. 

T495  Paperbound  $1.75 


SAY  IT  CORRECTLY  language  record  sets 


The  best  inexpensive  pronunciation  aids  on  the  market.  Spoken  by  native  linguists  asso¬ 
ciated  with  major  American  universities,  each  record  contains: 

14  minutes  of  speech — 12  minutes  of  normal,  relatively  slow  speech,  2  minutes  of 
normal  conversational  speed. 

120  basic  phrases,  sentences,  covering  nearly  every  aspect  of  everyday  life,  travel — 
introducing  yourself,  travel  in  autos,  buses,  taxis,  etc.,  walking,  sightseeing,  hotels, 
restaurants,  money,  shopping,  etc. 

32  page  booklet  containing  everything  on  record  plus  English  translations  easy-to-follow 
phonetic  guide. 

Clear,  high-fidelity  recordings. 

Unique  bracketing  systems,  selection  of  basic  sentences  enabling  you  to  expand  use  of 
SAY  IT  CORRECTLY  records  with  a  dictionary,  to  fit  thousands  of  additional  situations. 


Use  this  record  to  supplement  any  course  or  text.  All  sounds  in  each  language  illustrated 
perfectly — imitate  speaker  in  pause  which  follows  each  foreign  phrase  in  slow  section, 
and  be  amazed  at  increased  ease,  accuracy  of  pronounciation.  Available,  one  language  per 
record  for 


French 

Italian 

Japanese 

Polish 


Spanish 

Dutch 

Russian 

Swedish 


German 

Modern  Greek 

Portuguese 

Hebrew 


English  (for  German-speaking  people)  English  (for  Spanish-speaking  people) 


7"  (33  1/3  rpm)  record,  album,  booklet.  $1.00  each. 


SPEAK  MY  LANGUAGE:  SPANISH  FOR  YOUNG  BEGINNERS,  M.  Ahlman,  Z.  Gilbert.  Records  pro¬ 
vide  one  of  the  best,  most  entertaining  methods  of  introducing  a  foreign  language  to 
children.  Within  framework  of  train  trip  from  Portugal  to  Spain,  an  English-speaking  child 
is  introduced  to  Spanish  by  native  companion.  (Adapted  from  successful  radio  program  of 
N.Y.  State  Educational  Department.)  A  dozen  different  categories  of  expressions,,  including 
greeting,  numbers,  time,  weather,  food,  clothes,  family  members,  etc.  Drill  is  combined 
with  poetry  and  contextual  use.  Authentic  background  music.  Accompanying  book  enables 
a  reader  to  follow  records,  includes  vocabulary  of  over  350  recorded  expressions.  Two 
10"  33  1/3  records,  total  of  40  minutes.  Book.  40  illustrations.  59pp.  5V4  x  IOV2. 

T890  The  set  $4.95 


13 


CATALOGUE  OF 


LISTEN  &  LEARN  language  record  sets 


LISTEN  &  LEARN  is  the  only  extensive  language  record  course  designed  especially  to  meet 
your  travel  and  everyday  needs.  Separate  sets  for  each  language,  each  containing  three  33  1/3 
rpm  long-playing  records— 1  1/2  hours  of  recorded  speech  by  eminent  native  speakers 
who  are  professors  at  Columbia,  New  York  U..  Queens  College. 

Check  the  following  features  found  only  in  LISTEN  &  LEARN: 

Dual  language  recording.  812  selected  phrases,  sentences,  over  3200  words,  spoken  first 
in  English,  then  foreign  equivalent.  Pause  after  each  foreign  phrase  allows  time  to 
repeat  expression. 

128-page  manual  (196  page  for  Russian) — everything  on  records,  plus  simple  transcrip¬ 
tion.  Indexed  for  convenience.  Only  set  on  the  market  completely  indexed. 

Practical.  No  time  wasted  on  material  you  can  find  in  any  grammar.  No  dead  words. 
Covers  central  core  material  with  phrase  approach.  Ideal  for  person  with  limited  time. 
Living,  modern  expressions,  not  found  in  other  courses.  Hygienic  products,  modern 
equipment,  shopping,  “air-conditioned,”  etc.  Everything  is  immediately  useable. 

High-fidelity  recording,  equal  in  clarity  to  any  costing  up  to  $6  per  record. 

“Excellent  .  .  .  impress  me  as  being  among  the  very  best  on  the  market,”  Prof.  Mario 
Pei,  Dept,  of  Romance  Languages,  Columbia  U.  “Inexpensive  and  well  done  .  .  .  ideal 
present,”  Chicago  Sunday  Tribune.  “More  genuinely  helpful  than  anything  of  its  kind,” 
Sidney  Clark,  well-known  author  of  “All  the  Best”  travel  books. 

UNCONDITIONAL  GUARANTEE.  Try  LISTEN  &  LEARN,  then  return  it  within  10  days  for  full 
refund,  if  you  are  not  satisfied.  It  is  guaranteed  after  you  actually  use  it. 

6  modern  languages— FRENCH,  SPANISH,  GERMAN,  ITALIAN,  RUSSIAN,  or  JAPANESE  *— one 
language  to  each  set  of  3  records  (33  1/3  rpm).  128  page  manual.  Album. 

Spanish  the  set  $4.95  German  the  set  $4.95  Japanese*  the  set  $5.95 

French  the  set  $4.95  Italian  the  set  $4.95  Russian  the  set  $5.95 

*  Available  Oct.  1959. 


TRUBNER  COLLOQUIAL  SERIES 


These  unusual  books  are  members  of  the  famous  Triibner  series  of  colloquial  manuals.  They 
have  been  written  to  provide  adults  with  a  sound  colloquial  knowledge  of  a  foreign  lan¬ 
guage,  and  are  suited  for  either  class  use  or  self-study.  Each  book  is  a  complete  course  in 
itself,  with  progressive,  easy  to  follow  lessons.  Phonetics,  grammar,  and  syntax  are  covered, 
while  hundreds  of  phrases  and  idioms,  reading  texts,  exercises,  and  vocabulary  are  included. 
These  books  are  unusual  in  being  neither  skimpy  nor  overdetailed  in  grammatical  matters, 
and  in  presenting  up-to-date,  colloquial,  and  practical  phrase  material.  Bilingual  presentation 
is  stressed,  to  make  thorough  self-study  easier  for  the  reader. 

COLLOQUIAL  HINDUSTANI,  A.  H.  Harley,  formerly  Nizam’s  Reader  in  Urdu,  U.  of  London.  30 
pages  on  phonetics  and  scripts  (devanagari  &  Arabic-Persian)  are  followed  by  29  lessons, 
including  material  on  English  and  Arabic-Persian  influences.  Key  to  all  exercises.  Vocabufary. 
5  x  71/2.  147pp.  Clothbound  $1.75 

COLLOQUIAL  ARABIC,  DeLacy  O’Leary.  Foremost  Islamic  scholar  covers  language  of  Egypt, 
Syria,  Palestine,  &  Northern  Arabia.  Extremely  clear  coverage  of  complex  Arabic  verbs  &  noun 
plurals;  also  cultural  aspects  of  language.  Vocabulary,  xviii  +  192pp.  5  x  71/2. 

Clothbound  $1.75 

COLLOQUIAL  GERMAN,  P.  F.  Doring.  Intensive  thorough  coverage  of  grammar  in  easily-followed 
form.  Excellent  for  brush-up,  with  hundreds  of  colloquial  phrases.  34  pages  of  bilingual 
texts.  224pp.  5  x  7V2.  Clothbound  $1.75 

COLLOQUIAL  SPANISH,  W.  R.  Patterson.  Castilian  grammar  and  colloquial  language,  loaded 
with  bilingual  phrases  and  colloquialisms.  Excellent  for  review  or  self-study.  164pp.  5  x  71/2. 

Clothbound  $1.75 

COLLOQUIAL  FRENCH,  W.  R.  Patterson.  16th  revised  edition  of  this  extremely  popular  manual. 
Grammar  explained  with  model  clarity,  and  hundreds  of  useful  expressions  and  phrases; 
exercises,  reading  texts,  etc.  Appendixes  of  new  and  useful  words  and  phrases.  223pp. 
5  x  71/2.  Clothbound  $1.75 


14 


DOVER  SCIENCE  BOOKS 


COLLOQUIAL  PERSIAN,  L.  P.  Elwell-Sutton.  Best  introduction  to  modern  Persian,  with  90  page 
grammatical  section  followed  by  conversations,  35  page  vocabulary.  139pp.  Clothbound  $1.75 

COLLOQUIAL  CZECH,  J.  Schwarz,  former  headmaster  of  Lingua  Institute,  Prague.  Full  easily 
followed  coverage  of  grammar,  hundreds  of  immediately  useable  phrases,  texts.  Perhaps  the 
best  Czech  grammar  in  print.  “An  absolutely  successful  textbook,’’  JOURNAL  OF  CZECHO¬ 
SLOVAK  FORCES  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN.  252pp.  5  x  7V2.  Clothbound  $2.50 

COLLOQUIAL  RUMANIAN,  G.  Nandris,  Professor  of  University  of  London.  Extremely  thorough 
coverage  of  phonetics,  grammar,  syntax;  also  included  70  page  reader,  and  70  page  vocabulary. 
Probably  the  best  grammar  for  this  increasingly  important  language.  340pp.  5  x  71/2. 

Clothbound  $2.50 

COLLOQUIAL  ITALIAN,  A.  L.  Hayward.  Excellent  self-study  course  in  grammar,  vocabulary, 
idioms,  and  reading.  Easy  progressive  lessons  will  give  a  good  working  knowledge  of  Italian 
in  the  shortest  possible  time.  5  x  7V2.  Clothbound  $1.75 


MISCELLANEOUS 


TREASURY  OF  THE  WORLD’S  COINS,  Fred  Reinfeld.  Finest  general  introduction  to  numis¬ 
matics;  non-technical,  thorough,  always  fascinating.  Coins  of  Greece,  Rome,  modern  coun¬ 

tries  of  every  continent,  primitive  societies,  such  oddities  as  200-lb  stone  money  of  Yap, 
nail  coinage  of  New  England;  all  mirror  man’s  economy,  customs,  religion,  politics,  philos¬ 
ophy,  art.  Entertaining,  absorbing  study;  novel  view  of  history.  Over  750  illustrations. 
Table  of  value  of  coins  illustrated.  List  of  U.S.  coin  clubs.  224pp.  6V2  x  9Va. 

T433  Paperbound  $1.75 

ILLUSIONS  AND  DELUSIONS  OF  THE  SUPERNATURAL  AND  THE  OCCULT,  D.  H.  Rawcliffe.  Ra¬ 

tionally  examines  hundreds  of  persistent  delusions  including  witchcraft,  trances,  mental 
healing,  peyotl,  poltergeists,  stigmata,  lycanthropy,  live  burial,  auras,  Indian  rope  trick, 
spiritualism,  dowsing,  telepathy,  ghosts,  ESP,  etc.  Explains,  exposes  mental,  physical  de¬ 

ceptions  involved,  making  this  not  only  an  expose  of  supernatural  phenomena,  but  a  valuable 
exposition  of  characteristic  types  of  abnormal  psychology.  Originally  “The  Psychology  of 
the  Occult.”  Introduction  by  Julian  Huxley.  14  illustrations.  551pp.  5%  x  8. 

T503  Paperbound  $2.00 

HOAXES,  C.  0.  MacDougall.  Shows  how  art,  science,  history,  journalism  can  be  perverted 

for  private  purposes.  Hours  of  delightful  entertainment,  a  work  of  scholarly  value,  often 
shocking.  Examines  nonsense  news,  Cardiff  giant,  Shakespeare  forgeries,  Loch  Ness  monster, 
biblical  frauds,  political  schemes,  literary  hoaxers  like  Chatterton,  Ossian,  disumbrationist 
school  of  painting,  lady  in  black  at  Valentino’s  tomb,  over  250  others.  Will  probably  reveal 

truth  about  few  things  you’ve  believed,  will  help  you  spot  more  easily  the  editorial 

“gander”  or  planted  publicity  release.  “A  stupendous  collection  .  .  .  and  shrewd  analysis,” 
New  Yorker.  New  revised  edition.  54  photographs.  320pp.  53/e  x  8.  T465  Paperbound  $1.75 

YOGA:  A  SCIENTIFIC  EVALUATION,  Kovoor  T.  Behanan.  Book  that  for  first  time  gave  Western 
readers  a  sane,  scientific  explanation,  analysis  of  yoga.  Author  draws  on  laboratory 

experiments,  personal  records  of  year  as  disciple  of  yoga,  to  investigate  yoga  psychology, 
physiology,  “supernatural”  phenomena,  ability  to  plumb  deepest  human  powers.  In  this 
study  under  auspices  of  Yale  University  Institute  of  Human  Relations,  strictest  principles 

of  physiological,  psychological  inquiry  are  followed.  Foreword  by  W.  A.  Miles,  Yale  University. 
17  photographs,  xx  +  270pp.  5%  x  8.  T505  Paperbound  $1.65 


Write  for  free  catalogs! 

Indicate  your  field  of  interest.  Dover  publishes  books  on  physics,  earth 
sciences,  mathematics,  engineering,  chemistry,  astronomy ,  anthropol¬ 
ogy,  biology,  psychology ,  philosophy,  religion,  history,  literature,  math¬ 
ematical  recreations,  languages,  crafts,  art,  graphic  arts,  etc. 

Write  to  Dept,  catr 
Dover  Publications,  Inc. 

Science  B  180  Varick  St.,  N.  Y.  lh,  N.  Y. 


15 


MIT  LIBRARIES 


INVESTIGAT  3  9080  02428  0536  OF 

THE  BROWNIAN  MOVEMENT 

by  Albert  Einstein 

This  is  the  complete  text  of  5  papers  by  Dr.  Einstein  on  the  Brownian 
Movement.  (1)  Movements  of  Small  Particles  Suspended  in  a  Sta¬ 
tionary  Liquid  Demanded  by  the  Molecular-Kinetic  Theory  of  Heat. 
(2)  On  the  Theory  of  the  Brownian  Movement.  (3)  A  New  Determina¬ 
tion  of  Molecular  Dimensions.  (4)  Theoretical  Observations  on  the 
Brownian  Movement.  (5)  Elementary  Theory  of  the  Brownian  Move¬ 
ment. 

These  5  papers  have  been  translated  by  A.  D.  Cowper,  and  edited 
and  annotated  by  R.  Furth.  33  pages  of  notes  discuss  the  history  of 
investigation  into  the  Brownian  Movement,  provide  simple  elucida¬ 
tions  of  the  text,  and  analyze  the  significance  and  implications  of 
these  papers.  The  fifth  paper  is  of  great  value  as  a  simple  explana¬ 
tion  specially  written  for  chemists  and  physical  chemists. 

Author,  subject  indexes.  62  footnotes,  mostly  bibliographic.  Edited, 
with  notes  by  R.  Furth.  124pp.  5%  x  8.  Paperbound  $1.25 


Are  You  on  Dover’s  Mailing  List f 


almost  30,000  scientists,  science  teachers, 
and  science  students  receive  Dover’s  money¬ 
saving  catalogs  and  new-book  announce¬ 
ments  regularly.  If  you  also  want  to  be 
posted  on  these  unusual  book  bargains— all 
of  which  are  available  through  your  book- 
dealer— send  your  name  and  address  to 
Dover  Publications,  Inc.,  920  Broadway, 
New  York  10,  N.  Y.  Please  indicate  which 
of  the  following  fields  interest  you  the 
most:  Mathematics,  Physics,  Radio  Engineer¬ 
ing,  Electrical  Engineering,  Mechanical 
Engineering,  Earth  Sciences,  Aeronautical 
Engineering,  Chemistry,  and  Chemical  En¬ 
gineering. 


