[Music]
This tape is being produced for the
archives committee of the American
Association of Neurological Surgeons.
It's 6th March 1992. The interviewee is
Dr. Carl PBM who is the at the center
for brain research and
informationational sciences at Radford
University. Uh the interviewers are Dr.
Robert Keeover of the departments of
neurology and psychiatry and Dr. Howard
Kaufman of the department of
neurosurgery at West Virginia University
School of Medicine.
Dr. Pram has a disting distinguished
background uh going from most recent to
uh further back in time. He was the head
of the neurosychology laboratories at
Stanford University. Before that he was
the director of research and
laboratories of the institute of living
at Harford Connecticut. Uh prior to that
he was uh in the departments of
physiology and psychology at Yale
University. Prior to that he worked at
the Yorks laboratories of primite
primate biology orange park Florida. um
his training was in uh biological
sciences at the University of Chicago
where he received a BS and then he did
his medical degree at the University of
Chicago. He trained in neurosurgery at
St. Luke's Hospital in Chicago and was
an instructor in surgery at the
University of Tennessee. After that, he
was briefly in private practice in
Jacksonville, Florida.
Dr. PRIM. Uh obviously we have a limited
amount of time and great deal of
material we could talk about but we're
interested to learn how you got
interested in neurosurgery and in the
basic uh science research that you
carried out subsequently.
The story is uh fairly straightforward.
Um, I was interested when I uh uh well
in high school I first made a decision
between going into international
politics and biology and decide on
biology because I uh could never make a
ambassador. Didn't have enough money do
that. So I went into biological science
and biology. Uh and then the war came
along uh and uh so I got an MD instead
of a PhD. That was perfectly
straightforward. Um but um then I was
interested in the integrating systems of
uh the body and they're really basically
two major ones. one was uh the endocrine
system uh and the other the nervous
system and I felt uh that maybe I could
do something like biochemistry
uh and uh because I felt that that might
be a field to unite biological and
chemist chemical uh kinds of uh studies
then I found the university Chicago
there's a whole building devoted to it
and people had beaten me to it and they
were already studying biochemistry
uh and and things like that uh sort of
steered my of course uh uh but uh I did
still still want to go into uh uh the
chemical biological kinds of things
thinking that uh no way could I ever
master the nervous system. Uh but then I
met Ralph Gerard who taught me my
physiology and neurohysiology.
uh and he got it became so interesting
that uh uh I felt that uh at least part
of my uh life I would spend on the
brain. uh John Fulton's book came out
while I was studying uh uh physiology
and uh I gobbled it up over one weekend
and the following week we had our final
exam in physiology and I just
regurgitated that book for Gerard who
said it was the best test uh exam uh
papers he had ever seen in his life. Uh
he hadn't read the book yet. Uh so uh uh
I I really became more and more
interested. Then when I was in medicine,
uh Joe Ranshoff and I traded cases
always because uh he didn't like nurse
surgery and I did uh and I can stand gut
surgery. It smells bad and all that. So
he loved general surgery and I loved
nuros surgery. Well, uh, as fate would
have it, uh, during the war, uh, Joe was
assigned to nuros surgery and he became
a great nurse surgeon in New York, as
even his biography has been written, uh,
and and so on. So, uh, uh, he didn't get
his way, but I did get my way. Uh uh I
wasn't sure I was going to be able to
make a nurse surgeon because my hands
weren't sort of were sort of clumsy and
uh I hadn't ever thought of doing
anything much uh uh of that delicate
nature with my hands. But I had only
alternatives were neurology, psychiatry
and neurosurgery. Well, neurology in
those days before there was all this
good chemistry couldn't do anything uh
except make diagnosis.
uh uh psychiatrists. I I could never sit
still long enough to be a psychiatrist
and listen to people all day long. So
that left neurosurgery. So uh I became
Paul Buucy's first uh resident and wrote
up the residency and got credit got it
accredited
uh and u uh asked him after oh nine
months or so uh whether I meanwhile I'd
set up a woodworking shop at home
started using my hands a lot and made
tables and lamps and chairs and things
and so by the end of the year toward the
end of the year or maybe it was the
second year I forgot gotten uh I asked
him, "Do you think I can make a nurse
surgeon?" Uh and he said, "Well, uh I'll
tell you the answer in about a month."
And uh I said, "Oh." I said, "Yes, I'm
going away uh for the month uh to have a
vacation. Uh you take over my practice."
I said, "What?"
And I did. And I got through the month
and I did the nurse surgery for that
month. And then I felt secure enough to
go ahead uh and became a nurse surgeon.
What was it like to train in those days?
Well, uh, I told the story a little
while ago that, uh, uh, people, uh, like
Pel Bailey, for instance, uh, who were
apprentice to, uh, Harvey Cushing, uh,
there there was a rule for Cushing's
residents that their, uh,
their wives or or playmates or whatever
uh, had to live with farther than 300
miles away from Boston. uh in my day
wasn't quite that bad. I did have a home
and uh I was married by the time I
became a resident. Uh and uh my wife
could live out in Elwood Park while I
was training at St. Luke's Hospital. Uh
it was only about 20 minutes half an
hour away. But we were on duty 24 hours
a uh a day from day one we took the
residency till we left it. Uh with
internship and 3 years of residency.
That meant four years essentially of
living in the hospital and uh maybe
going home uh for a few hours or uh a
night occasionally if everything was
fairly quiet on the service. But it was
uh well there were some warriors
involved. And so I trained not only in
nurse surgery but also took over the
neurology and psychiatry residencies at
the same time. And so uh we were kept
busy and I remember uh neurologists work
reasonably intelligently and slowly not
like neurosurgeons who go in there say
we got to do this or we got to do that.
So I would uh go in being the uh
resident all services I'd see a brain
tumor case one afternoon I'd schedule
her in the operating room for two weeks
hence the first opening the neurologist
would you know go ahead and try to
figure out what was wrong and about two
weeks later he'd say hey that's a brain
tumor uh and I say yes I have her
scheduled for tomorrow afternoon
I didn't I wasn't very popular let me
tell with that kind of procedure. But
that is how I did manage all three. And
I used psychiatric patients for
babysitters for my children. And uh it
was it was quite a quite an interesting
time.
What were your teachers like?
Well, uh very different. Eric Oldberg
was the son of a a conductor and he uh
trained me in the operating room that
when he came in like this literally when
the downbeat came we started handing s
uh instruments to him. Uh no talking
allowed he could talk but no one else in
the op everything was done by signs. Uh
this was heists. This was scissors. I
couldn't do that right now anymore after
wash bit me. Uh but uh uh you know
everything was signs. This was a
scalpel. Very easy iconic signs but it
was all done like that. Uh Paul Buucy
was a superb nurse surgeon. He had sort
of stubby fingers. You never think of
those hands as being but the most I mean
tissue never was damaged. I mean you
really have never I mean I owe all of my
subsequent uh skill whatever to Paul. uh
because he really trained me. I mean,
just watching him, again, you can't talk
about these things. It just the way he
did things made it possible for me to uh
uh be able to do it. And we had a very
good and easy relationship. And
how did you happen to go to Tennessee
and to uh Jacksonville?
I don't think I should say this. Well,
there are two reasons. Uh, one was that
I was looking in due time to move to a
place that didn't have hay fever. So I
had to move either north to Duth or
south to Florida or someplace like that.
And so I was looking away and also Eric
Goldberg made everybody sign that they
wouldn't stay in Chicago, which I had no
intention of doing anyway. I didn't sign
and he didn't fire me, but uh uh I
didn't want to stay in Chicago. My
father had a practice in Chicago. I
could have taken over north side
hospitals but that was uh you know you
don't want to take everything from your
father you want to be independent so I
was looking for a hay fever free place
uh so I but there's another thing that I
really shouldn't say on uh but there it
was well known as uh go south to make
your mistakes was a saying in nurse
surgery uh so I went south and I'm sure
I made some mistakes but uh Uh that was
our view of the south in those days. And
uh Memphis was there was an opening with
uh our use to Sims and we used to call
useless stems and uh we had a good time.
Uh but he taught me the dandy
techniques. I was trained according to
Cushing and we fought constantly. I
mean, I learned his techniques, but
there were so many things that I felt we
were doing better than uh and and you
know, we had it out every day. Uh also,
I integrated the office, which didn't
sit very well. Uh and did things like
that, which uh I mean, I I really didn't
last very long. I was there for less
than a year, and then I moved moved on.
Uh it wasn't like Memphis today. the
hospital. I remember crunching over
cockroaches on my rounds and uh it was
really quite primitive
at that time.
And what about Jacksonville?
Jacksonville was much better, but still
I again integrated the office and that
was again looked down and I called the
uh black uh nurses miss and I was chided
at every move for what I was doing. And
uh uh this uh uh didn't sit well and uh
uh but I got along pretty well with uh
uh liarly who uh with pop and devised
the superior labbotomy approach. That's
one of the reasons I went there. The
other was uh that uh Yorky's labs were
right around the corner. So I went to
the Yorks labs on my days off Saturday
afternoon, Sunday afternoon and
Wednesday afternoon and I took over
everything on Thursdays when and Sundays
when uh Larly took off. So that's how we
worked. I was given a lobotomy ward to
do. I didn't do one piece of surgery. I
tested the subjects by that time. We got
to be good friends and they got cured uh
by just talking to them. You know, it
was like that. We had no psychiatrists
uh or neurologists in Memphis at that
time and we had one neurologist who
part-time practice of psychiatry and of
course no clinical psychology at that
time.
you have um uh you talk about being
third generation away from Harvey
Cushing and and uh being at the UK
Institute and you've had an opportunity
to see really two fields related but
sometimes not so closely related evolve
tremendously almost from their
beginnings uh to uh to the point that
they are today. Can you speak a little
bit about what you think may be some of
the most significant developments
uh in the area of uh behavioral
neurology should I say that or
physiological psychology
um some of the major differences uh the
major developments that you've seen
occur over these years
well uh I think these fields uh as you
uh point out are beginning to come
together in clinical neurosych
clinical neurosychology for the first
time. Uh you have people who listen to
each other whether whether they're
neurosurgeons, neurologists,
uh behavioral psychologists, cognitive
psychologists, psychiatrists,
uh in the talk I gave today, I mean
psychiatrists are always interested in
consciousness. That's what they deal
with. Uh and so and actually
philosophers are getting into the show
too. So uh things are coming together
and they were separated for a long time.
Uh I think the behaviorist revolution
was a very positive one in a sense that
clinical neurology dealt I mean way I
was trained I mean we asked the patient
we talked to the patient but we had no
tests no nothing quantitative of any
kind. uh even the things that Lura did
uh uh which were an attempt at least at
doing some quantum were an innovation
you know do you touch your tip of your
nose your ear right ear and then your
left uh kneecap that already was an
advance over what we did in clinical
neurology where we just did the
neurological no tests of behavior so I
think that uh is a major advance uh in
neurosurgery of course our techniques uh
I mean just the diagnostic techniques we
had to be much more invasive with uh uh
ventriculars and uh uh and sephiloggrams
and things of that kind. Uh uh the EEG
uh I when I went to Jacksonville I
bought a small EEG to carry with me. It
was about this size one channel Garco uh
thing but it was better than nothing.
And I used it especially uh when we had
things such as um uh oh uh uh uh uh uh
uh temporal lobe epilepsy and things of
that kind where you really uh have
differential diagnosis and have
difficulty in making the EG isn't all
that good either. But uh at least it was
better than nothing.
The um one of the reasons some would
claim that uh the fields of uh uh
psychiatry, psychology, uh neurology,
neurosurgery can come together at this
point is that the basic science uh that
they can now relate to uh in a common
way facilitates that um the
methodologies, some of the techniques
that you've employed um and um those
kinds of things. Can you can you point
to any particular
uh laboratory technique or procedure
that you think may have contributed most
significantly
uh to this this evolution? This opening
up of the brain in a way that uh allows
people to really consider the mind as a
manifestation of the brain.
Yeah. Don't call it the mind, it's m
minding.
Right. uh the um I think the behavioral
analysis the the experimental analysis
of behavior uh you know I think that uh
technical behaviorism as it's called I
think was a tremendous stride forward
and it took quite a long time to get now
uh the second major thing is the uh
application of computer technology to
all of this and with that comes
mathematics and bioysics and all of
that. And then the third thing which I
think is just beginning to develop
strongly last 15 20 years uh is uh
neurochemistry
but that's not there yet. I mean we
don't we can't just say because somebody
has a particular uh psychiatric
condition well you know that's your uh
adrenal or it's your uh catacle or it's
your peptide or this or that.
What uh kinds of things did you
concentrate in on in the different
places you were located? What did you do
at Yorks? At Yorkis, the first step was
to uh try to take the then silent areas
of the brain where they were silent to
experimental analysis and try to figure
out what they were doing. Lashley had
tried and found nothing happened. Other
people had found nothing happened. So I
began to do using behavioral techniques
and fairly large lesions to start with
but subal resections not just gouging
out pieces of brain but very carefully
uh anatomically deliminate delimited uh
flamocortical
the cortical part of the flamocortical
field. uh by taking that out I got very
good results within about five years I
was able to show that there were large
se sectors in the posterior part of the
so-called association area which were
not associative at all in the usual
sense of the word of associating sensory
things to each other but had to do uh
were sensory specific and I discovered
the vententral part of the temporal lobe
being visual that was always thought to
be auditory and that turned out to be
visual. Superior temporal was uh uh
auditory. The superior parietal
posterior also going over the medial
surface into the cunius that that uh
essentially was uh somatensory.
Discovered where the taste area was uh
anterior to the auditory the primary
taste area and then the more associative
or higher order taste in the temporal
pole. All of those discoveries came in
the first five uh years at Yorkis and
few first years at Yale.
Who were your colleagues at Yorks?
Uh at Yorks uh I had uh Bob and uh
Josephine Blum who were graduate
students. Uh and Lashley was of course
my it's hard to say I was a full-fledged
nurse surgeon. He wanted somebody to
help him out. Uh but he uh also
challenged all everything I'd ever
learned about localization of function.
So we we had a great time
basically challenging each other. And I
started with chimpanzees and monkeys
then uh to work out these localization
things which Lashley never believed in.
I never could really convince him on
that. But he convinced me sufficiently
so that I now say that he's right about
certain kinds of things such as a
distributed memory uh function. So
certain things are distributed in the
brain, other things are highly localized
and we got to distinguish which is
which. All of that was that first
period. And then you went from there to
Yale
and I continued that but started very
seriously to do the second step of my
program
and that that was continued there and at
at the institute of living. I I worked
at I kept teaching at Yale while I was
at the Institute of Living and I had a
laboratory at Yale. I kept that in the
subbiology
department there. Um the second stage
was given let's say we took out a piece
of the temporal lobe the inferior
portion and we got an animal who no
longer distinguished between red and
green in an instrumental fashion. It
just behaved essentially um randomly.
Does that mean he's colorb blind? Not at
all. Uh it might might not. So the
second part of program is taking all of
these behavioral techniques which were
the breakthrough allowing us to localize
function and in these parts of the brain
without damaging the primary projection
flamable cortical projection and all
that but then we didn't know what we
had. It's like a babinsky sign and I
used that term in fact I said we had the
babinsky signs but we didn't know what
they meant. And so this whole second
part which you know went on until I left
Stanford really is to try to figure out
what the tests meant by taking the tests
to their extreme and showing where their
limitations were and trying to figure
out uh and I didn't have to do this
alone. Other people and all my students
kept doing this uh like the blind sight
studies that I talked about a little
while ago uh with vice crayons. What do
the tests mean? what what do they really
indicate about brain function and about
mental function and that went on and
then when I went to Stanford for the
third stage what I then did was to start
looking at the parts of the brain that
we'd found how did they do what it was
that we were testing how does the
inferior part of the temporal lobe
function what are its connections and we
still have some problems there uh Mort
Michigan one of my students for instance
is very very much into the idea that
things go from the primary visual cortex
over to the paristrite par visual cortex
and then in steps down to the infate
temporal cord but I've taken out all
that intermediate cortex in radical
disconnection so that not a cell is left
and and of course to do that properly
they do invade the radiations and all
that but these animals can do all the
discriminations that infratempal cortex
leion animals can't do after they so it
can't be a transcortical kind of
stepwise thing. It's got to go down into
the pulvinar up and or into the basal
ganglion up or whatever pathways but
it's not cortical cortical and back in
54 I suggested that in fact this part of
brain may work downstream
as a place where it just has to be
triggered from some kind of oh this is
visual okay now you work downstream to
organize what is coming in and that we
spent 20 years showing that in In fact,
from this so-called association cortex
which is sensory specific, however, you
do get uh things operating down into the
primary projection areas changing what's
going on at the lateral tunic and even
as far down as brain stem and retina.
So, when I'm thinking something that has
to do with vision, I'm actually changing
what's going on in the retina.
You talked about
I talked about that in at least one
paper that I uh remember reading. You
were describing the uh the relationship
between perception uh uh emotive
behavior uh uh motivation and emotion
and talked about the fact that um uh
simply by perceiving because of
reciprocal relationships you there was a
reflexive as I understood it uh emotive
uh portion to that uh that allows one to
essentially
um what's the word I wanted is
consciousness uh
yeah to experience something uh even
feelingwise and vice versa when I have
certain feelings if uh someone you're in
love with touches you it feels very
different from the same stimulus given
let's say uh with a uh uh a mechanical
stimulus or even a friend of yours who
touches you that way I mean we do uh
these parts of the brain are very highly
interconnected. And one of our jobs was
to show the connections not only
anatomically where you can show almost
anything's connected with anything but
functionally connected using
electrphysiological
stimuli and doing things like doing
recovery cycles and showing changes in
the recovery functions and so on so
forth. It it it was almost uh as if you
turned things completely around that the
sense organs
uh were in a way the end organ. They
were the uh the afferent end of things
and as a result of that um people
modified their reality based on their
own experience of it. Yes, I got a
citation from the I think this was the
one from the uh uh society for
biological psychiatry for showing that
the basal ganglia actually are not only
the readiness mechanism for our muscles,
the pro the postural set, but they
change our sensory set.
They really change what's going on out
in the sensor and the cortex of course
does too through the basal gang.
Neurosurgeons might not be familiar with
the Institute of Living. Can you
describe what that is?
It's a mental house. It's the old
Hartford Retreat. A man by the name of
Berling Game decided to make it into a
uh uh a wellness place instead of a just
a retreat. Uh and so he called it the
Institute of Living and then he built a
building uh which uh he wanted to be a
research building and he put me in
charge. and then he died. Uh, and then
we got uh Frank Braceland in there and
Frank Braceland said uh the day he got
there he said uh I don't like your kind
of work. I've voted against it in
Washington all my life. Uh uh uh I don't
think you should be operating on monkeys
and that's not going to tell us anything
about people anyway. Goodbye. And I said
I'm not leaving. Uh I said I won't cost
you anything. I'll do this all on grants
but I I'm not leaving. I got I built the
lab myself essentially. Put the cages
and painted the walls myself, you know.
Uh I'd spent a year and a half by that
time setting up and getting Michigan and
Wise CR and all these people working
with me. Uh uh and I said uh uh besides
you can't fire me. I said you can't
afford to. The institute had bad enough
reputation as it is for firing people.
Uh especially in science. You'll never
recover. So he looked at me. He says,
"Hm." And I stayed and uh we hit it off
on that basis sort of. But uh he taught
me a lot too. I did learn a lot from
Frank Graceland.
And you work with Fulton.
But Fulton at Yale. He got me to Yale.
That's a story too. U the lobotomy
procedure was based on two chimpanzees
that Fulton had operated on.
and uh uh but he presented this at the
international physiological congress uh
I think it was in Portugal actually and
Agos Monise heard him and devised the
lobotomy procedure for humans. Well,
while I was at Herky's lab, I took off
frontal loes carefully and uh didn't
find what Fton found.
So when the topecttomy procedure was
going, I had to be in on that. Fred
Metler. I'd corresponded with him,
invited me up to the first presentation
of Columbia University of the Topctomy
where they did careful removal. Larry P
did all of those uh and I got acquainted
with Larry at that point and Fred Metler
uh and had a wonderful time. Then I
hopped over to Yale and I tackled John
Folton. I said, "I don't get what you
get, snotty little guy that I was, you
know." says, "Well," he said, "what do
you think it is?" I said, "I have no
idea. What did you do?" Uh, and he gave
me his protocols. He says, "Go into the
library and find out. I'll be back for
take you to lunch." So, he came back,
asked me politely, as did you enjoy
reading the protocols? I said, "Very
much, sir. Uh, uh, do you know what what
the difference is between what I did and
what you'd?" I said, "Yes, I didn't get
any brain abscesses."
He had a brain abscess on one of them.
The other chimpanzeee did exactly what
my chimpanzees did. One of them, the
other one had a brain abscess. Becky
Lucy was okay. Was just like mine. Becky
was the one who showed the emotional
changes and all of the other things and
dramatic form.
As I say, I was a snotty kid. Uh I
learned later from Loria something that
uh I said the same thing to Lur. How can
you find anything about the frontal loes
when there's big tumor is doing all
these other things? You got increased
incraanial pressure. He says if you're
careful and you know what the other
parts of brain do to some extent you
will find in caricature what the frontal
loes do because
the other parts of brain can't
compensate. You got to be careful.
you've got to be wise. So this it really
turned out that the Becky did teach us a
lot about frontal lobe function but I
wasn't going to take you know dirty old
operation. What happened was Fulton was
showing off and he had Harvey Kushing
few other people there while he did the
surgery was showing everything and then
the chimpanzeee got a brain abscess
later but it recovered but then on
autopsy they found a beautiful
encapsulated brain abscess.
So he said, "Do you want to work here?"
I said, "Sure, I want to work here."
Paul Buucy told me, "If I ever want to
do any physiology, your laboratory is
the one to come to. Besides, it's your
book that gave me an A+ in Gerard's
course. I, you know, there's nothing I'd
rather do than come here." uh and uh uh
Fulton then saw my bibliography of one
paper which I'd done with Buucy which
showed that the cortex controlled the
autonomic nervous system little oligo
dendroma that we took out that I talked
about earlier and uh Fton says oh you
believe in uh cortex regulating the
autonomic nervous system yes sir well I
got the job I took him about six months
to four months to get uh money and I
went to Yale, closed down my practice
and gave a talk at I had scheduled at
the Duvall County Medical Association. I
said, "I'm going to Yale. I have to give
it a month earlier. Do you mind?" Gave
that. Closed up my practice and up to
Yale.
What was Fulton like?
Uh I didn't see all that much of Fulton.
He uh was parapathetic,
a defender of the faith. I mean really a
an intuitive person who had the right
intuitions. Uh somewhat sloppy on the
detail like brain abscess, who cares?
Like uh if you read the book carefully,
you see all kinds of uh contradictions
on same page and so on. So but he had
the overall view and beautiful. Two days
after I got there, when in fact I had to
go a little early because he said he's
leaving for England
and I got a letter, I sent him a
progress report on the project every
month. And he wrote back about how his
diabetes was going. He said, "I have a
new cure for diabetes. It works like
magic. Champagne and caviar."
And I mean, this is John Fulton. I mean
he's just a most delightful wonderful
uh colleague father figure and
everything rolled into one. When we
first discover did the electrical
stimulations and showed limbic control
over the autonomic nervous system. Uh we
had a terrible time uh getting that
published. Uh even no originating
dura and I knew damn well we weren't.
stimulating amydala and perry
amiggdaloid cortex and singulate gyrus
and all that and uh John Fulton defended
us right down he published the things
and got them into the literature.
How did you happen to move to Stanford?
Uh I tried to stay at Yale uh and I
became director of the Urkey's
laboratory following Fulton uh following
Lashley. So I became director there. uh
the president of Yale University sold
the Yorks lab to Emmery University and I
didn't want a job at Emory. I tried to
get the lab moved to Yale or Harvard.
Lashley had a professor at Harvard.
Well, all of that mess during the 50s
finally fell through and I had my choice
to go to Emory or to stay at Yale where
I had sort of an ambiguous I had a
lecturesship but not a tenure
professorship. So I started looking for
a job uh and uh to make a long story
short uh I got an invitation to go to
the center for advanced studies at uh
Stanford. I had a a fellowship uh uh uh
what are what are they called fullbrite
fellowship to go to Cambridge at the
same time so I don't make a choice. I
went to California and they offered me a
job at the end of the year and I stayed.
Who were you working with there? Uh uh
the people who got me the job were John
Jack Kilgard
uh and Bob Sears in psychology but they
put me in the medical school and I got
tenure in psychology. So I had tenure
and uh but I my lab was over in
psychiatry
and Tom Gandh whose father I knew and
whose mother uh knew me when I was four
years old uh and so on so forth uh was
temporary head of the department at the
time and so they snuck me in.
When did you start working on
consciousness? Oh,
that really the first published paper
where I said we have to uh uh take all
of this into consideration was uh the
book l uh plans of structure of behavior
and then 62 I make a very strong case
for this uh in the uh uh sigman coach's
uh book uh series a book called uh
psychology study of a science he had a
whole series in which all of us wrote
chapters.
1971
uh when you right around that time when
you began to talk about the holographic
theory of
well actually 66 is my first published
paper on it. 71 is when my book came out
languages of the brain which one of the
languages uh is a holographic
language. Can you talk a little bit
about uh what led you to uh uh to expand
on on your findings in the laboratory,
the findings of others as well to put
this together as a as a theory or an
overall description of what you were
seeing?
Well, uh interestingly enough, it had
nothing to do with the laboratory.
Uh the laboratory findings have always
gone independently until quite recently.
Now uh the theory is far enough along
and one of the slides I showed earlier
shows how really you can show the theory
if I can use that word u mathematical
modeling
uh as a theoretical frame can generate
experiments in the laboratory.
But most of my life I was just poking in
there uh the way uh Claude Bernard did.
ask nature questions. And I do not
really approve of the way psychologists
go about uh studying their science,
which is not the way Skinner or the
behaviorist did, but of uh hypothetical
deductor that you make hypotheses and
tests them and then it either confirms
or disisconfirms the hypothesis. Nobody
ever looks at the thesis out of which
the hypothesis came and so on so forth.
No, we really everything was generated
directly from the findings in the
laboratory. I'm made the large removals
trying to find out what agnosas were
about essentially or frontal lobe
lesions, lobotoies were all about and
found something and then I pursued the
findings and the holographic thing comes
really out of the clinical studies that
showed that memories aren't individual
memories aren't lost and we then found
that also with smaller lesions in the
brain that individual engram grams or
memory traces are not lost. That means
it's distributed. And so Lashley and I
had this problem essentially we talked
about over the years with Valer Carl
Lashley Paul Weiss how does the nervous
system operate in the non-localistic
way. Sure we know their connections but
that's not the whole story. There are
what Kaylor called field effects or what
Lashley called interference patterns.
And it wasn't until Ta Helgard one time
asked me what I thought about the new
ideas and perception about everything
being made up of spots and then lines
what I now call the Uklitian approach
which Hugle Dave Hubel and and Tarson
Weasel got their Nobel Prize for. I said
it won't work. uh when I look at you, I
see your face immediately and I can see
it in this angle and this angle and so
on and so forth. There is no way you can
put all this together from spots and
lines and surfaces and that even if you
do get things like grandfather cells uh
they essentially uh are nodes in a
network because they respond to other
things as well. They don't respond just
to face. The hand cell, the famous hand
cell responds to high low spatial
frequency. And I trained one of those
cells to to uh respond best to green
hands, you know, and green space. I
mean, these are not uh the way it was
stated wasn't right. Well, so Hilgard
having to write introductory textbooks
said to me immediately, he said, "All
right, you can have that luxury of not
believing you've disproved Ker, which I
had done with my aluminum hydroxide
cream studies. You don't believe hubil
and weasel. What do you believe in?" I
said, "Nothing. I don't know." And I
took it back to my lab and talked to
people about it. And then I said, "You
know what we could do here?
We could think about Lashley's idea of
interference patterns. We know Kaylor is
wrong. We don't think I mean the texture
problem for instance is impossible for
the uh line detector notion. I mean if I
have to scan every line on your hair
even if I do it in parallel I mean you
know that whole thing the whole business
of texture won't satisfy it. So, let's
look into Lashley's idea of interference
patterns
because at least we don't know that it's
wrong. We haven't a clue as to what he
meant.
Lashley didn't have a clue. I've tal I
talked to him for, you know, months
about this stuff. And he finally wrote a
retractor says, "I don't know what I
mean by interference pattern." Uh well
within a week
an article came out and well first
Nikico Spanelli found an article of John
Eckles because one of the problems was
what is a wavefront
in the cortex like what's it caused by
what would that mean an interference
pattern has to be interference among
wavefront found an article of John
Eckles on neurophysiology of
imagination.
And in it, he says, you know, we do
study synaptic potentials and all of
that at the end of axons, but we only
study one at a time. When an axon comes
down to dendritic field, it splits and
you have a lot of these preinaptic
potential occurring at one time.
That can be thought of as a wavefront.
And I said, "How stupid." For 10, 15
years, we've been trying to figure out
how a wavefront could be created in the
brain. And it isn't the kind of thing
was talking about what's left. And
Eckles had it right on. It's not, you
don't have to even think of it as a
wavefront if you don't want to, but you
can. It's a lot of presinaptic
potentials, and they set up postsaptic
potentials. They are graded potential
changes
and they can interfere. One axon comes
in this way or another, you got to
interfere. So within a few days, we had
an idea of what Lashley might have been
talking about.
He got the idea from Jacqu Lurb uh and
other people early in around 1900 who
said uh that like embryogenesis
you have these force fields that are
being created which have lines force
lines that's what he was talking about
well anyway so that was the first step
and within a week my uh current issue
then current issue of this is about 64
of um uh of scientific American came and
in it was uh le's stuff on holograms
set of interference patterns from which
you can reconstruct a perception an
image
and it's distributed it solved the
distributed memory problem it solved the
problem of these things being relatively
fluid in the brain so that I can move
around and still see do and it solved
the problem uh uh the distributive
problem the fluidity problem and that
you could get back a perception from the
interference patterns which Lashley
never had. So in one stroke
it all made sense that it's something
like that going on as a metaphor it was
perfect. So I began to study holograms.
I had to learn interference patterns. I
learned a math. I had to learn I met
Gabbor in 1968 and we talked about it. I
talked about for transforms with him
says the brain doesn't work on a for
transform. It's not that's the basis of
it. That's not the whole thing. But the
guy never told me that he'd invented a
better way. I had to find that out for
myself.
And he was that kind of a person. I
heard uh from somebody at Virginia Tech
a few years back that who was a friend
of Gabbor's uh that Gabbor once said if
anybody's going to figure out how the
brain works Carl Perram I felt just
wonderful but you know what that man put
me through he and and and also uh our
friend uh Don Mai I would talk about
furry transforms and holograms and they
said too simple it isn't going to work
never did he tell me that he had figured
out in 1946 before he did the hologram
that of these gabbor functions that the
brain can work in terms of quanta of
information.
That's what but he never told me but I I
did find out and uh one of my students
found out even before me and published a
paper after he left. He went to
University Tennessee in fact and I
didn't know what the hell he was talking
about. It was all math and it took me
another five years to learn the math and
understand. I got a mathematician Eloise
Carlton working with me and that's that
other paper you have. Uh we finally got
published. We couldn't get it published
here so we got published in Europe. Um
and uh then the book. So it works. It
works. And some of the things I mean the
interesting stuff I found out for
instance the step after imaging which is
holographic like you have to come up
with objects you know it's the same
object not even the fact that it's a
book but just that it's and all of these
different images how do you get them
together into an object
well it turns out at the end of the 19th
century poor Helmholtz and a man by the
name of Lee had a set of correspondence
starts out Helmholt saying I'm
interested in objects
poor the mathematician saying oh objects
are relations
why don't you figure out how to do make
objects out of relations like group
theory or something like that Holtz
writes a paper group theory
Lee lights point writes poare saying you
put this guy Helmholtz to something on
group theory, but it's not the right
groups. He's got discontinuous groups.
Perception doesn't work that way. It's
not discontinuous. I've invented uh
continuous group theory and that works.
This is 1885, 1890, somewhere in there.
All that correspondence.
One man, Casir philosopher, remembered
that until Will Hoffman dug it all up.
and I had invited Will to a congress
international congress of psychology in
uh Paris and we met there but he didn't
have it quite straight either he had
group theory coming not out of the
holographic things he I use group theory
in the transform in the spectral domain
and that works so simply you get centers
of symmetry around which all of this
works I mean the whole thing just falls
out very very easily
uh will at least had the group theory
part straight and uh so and he came to
my lab worked for four months with us
and all that. So putting all of these
pieces together, what do you get? 1885
hell halts por and and Lee already and
Lee groups are used everywhere in
engineering. They're used in physics,
they're used in thermodynamic. I mean,
you know, everybody uses, but never in
psychology, never in neurohysiology.
What he invented it for?
What are you doing at Radford?
Well, I've set up a lab. The building
was completed about a year ago and uh
assembled a group of people each of
which ought to go see a fellow
psychiatrist here and probably me too
trying to keep a group of innovative and
creative people together. I mean, you
know, I mean, it's just uh and you can't
tell them like in Syria that you're a
resident, you know, you do you hold the
goddamn retractor.
So, uh, it's it's fun. It's really fun.
Uh, but I have to, uh, be in there with
each one of them. And it's, uh, each one
is tremendously creative in their own
right. Uh, and we've got computers, uh,
imaging computers, not imaging
techniques for the brain yet. That's too
expensive. We can't afford it. Uh, but,
uh, good people. And we're doing
electrophysiology to start with. I
haven't got monkeys yet that I have to
go through enough committees, find the
monkeys. I think I will get them from
Bowman Gray and so on so forth. I tried
tech, they wouldn't do it for me. And
so, you know, it's setting up a lab
which is like setting up a department or
setting up a new hospital. All of these
things are involved. We But we are
recording from rats. We're getting
better records than I got back at
Stanford in the last five years already
with electrodes that I brought from
Stanford. Now I have to be sure that
Fred Hair who made the electrodes can
make more of them and so on so forth. So
step by step we're looking. Now the
thing that we need to know is how the
this there's a lot of math here in the
appendices that has to be put on
computers to see if it really works the
way the math says.
Also we can take a few steps further uh
in that uh we can do nonlinear
mathematics. This is all linear. There
little details that need to be worked
out. uh the thing I showed you uh at the
meeting uh at the lecture were two
dimensional gobbar functions. We've
already developed not I but a
mathematician computer scientist at
University of Tennessee in Knoxville,
Bruce Mclennon has developed a
three-dimensional one which we need
badly or we won't have time and movement
into into the whole thing. So he's done
that. We're writing a paper uh saying
that the way people do the parallel
distributed processing things make
certain assumptions which don't fit with
the brain. We're writing a paper
together. We're trying to straighten
that out. So there are a lot of loose
ends that need to be and then the fourth
part of my program is to tie this to
human back to you know where I started.
I'm not I really you know it's nice to
work with monkeys but I'm really
interested in human consciousness how we
think how we feel pain mechanisms in
humans trying to figure out uh under
hypnosis
uh where in evoked potential in the
which uh particular segment of the
evoked potential which uh component is
involved uh in hypnosis and we pushed it
back to the end about 200 milliseconds
all particle but is it 200 100
millisecond? If so, where do those
components originate?
We've and uh so on that some of that is
in the 10th chapter here. So uh but it's
hard. I for 10 years applied for grants
to find out about components evoked
response components on animals. I never
got the money. Everybody says, "Yes,
this is terribly important. You got to
do it." But you got a little glitch
here, maybe in the way you wrote it up
or this and then comes back a pink sheet
saying, "Well, you know, you 68 or 70 or
whatever I was at the time." And we got
to give young people a chance. I said,
"Who the hell's working in my lab except
young people, you know, uh, and so on."
So you've got all these hurdles to
overcome which you I'm sure well know uh
we have in every field but uh I'm been
given a a long-term appointment so I can
stay and I couldn't do that if I had an
appointment which I was offered several
for a year at a time maybe two years if
you're a good boy kind of thing. I mean
that just doesn't work.
One last question. What do you think
about the new tools MR PET scanning? You
think that they are going to enable us
uh to make breakthroughs
you see you see things in the future
from them.
We're always wedded to our technology. I
mean micro electrodes what we do today.
I mean the EEG as I said there were uh
two EGs one at Northwestern one at
University Chicago when I started out
you know and at University of Illinois
where I was going to get a fellowship
with Persian we didn't have one and he
went overseas because we couldn't get
one nobody knew how to build one I used
the first uh commercially available
oscilloscope we had a room half this
size to run a 3-in scope before that and
Gruntfest de developed the first uh uh
Dumont put out the first uh commercially
available. I got the secfest got the
first, I got the second. And we did
evoke potential studies and showed that
this business of reverberator circuits
between phalamus and cortex was all
nonsense that they wandered all over the
place if you could, you know, could
measure them simultaneously by splitting
a beam. And I mean, they're just
innumerable things like that. We're
always dependent on our technology. And
the beauty of my current setup is I have
three people who come out of physics and
engineering. One of whom they're all
from China. One of whom was also in
medicine. Uh and uh uh and Peter Kougler
who's a psychologist and uh but he got
his degree in physics and he runs all of
that the analysis end of things. And I
mean these people are incredibly good.
Uh so we hope to have uh that kind of
technology is already better at our
place than it ever was at Stanford and I
mean Yale is you know but Lashley and I
once talked about automating
uh testing
we couldn't figure out a way to do it
then Skinner came along Skinnerbox I
immediately developed that into what I
call a data machine discriminate
discrimination apparatus for discrete
trial analysis which I've been using
since 1968. 8 uh 58 I mean 1958 I've not
permitted an EG machine in my lab it's
computerized subject is sitting there
solving problems and not just if you
want to know what's going on in the
heart you put a load on right you don't
just do it at rest you put a load why
shouldn't we do our EEGs
at rest yes but also with a load a
cognitive load I've been trying to get
somebody build machines like this so
that can get on the market for 15 20
years. I mean all the programs are
written, everything's been done for
years. Uh so uh my lab's been
computerized since I went to Stanford in
1959.
Yes. I wish I could afford some imaging
would help me not have to sacrifice the
animal each time. I know where my
electrode was by just putting uh
magnetic resonance in, you know, and
looking at it.
I don't know what that would do to their
brain, but uh you know because it is
metal, but I don't think it'd do as much
damage as chopping off their heads.
Well, thank you very much. We've really
enjoyed speaking with you today.
Well, it's been a long and wonderful
time for me. I mean, uh the discoveries
that have been I mean, I used to read
about uh uh Admiral Bird going to South
Pole and Ammonson to the North Pole.
That was what I would have liked to have
been during the ages of discovery you
know and now it's all in here but it's
discovering and what we have learned
there's still so much to learn
especially on the neurochemistry side of
course and on the uh you know on the uh
uh physics side as well but uh what we
didn't know and what we now can
formulate the way we can formulate true
in the 19 you know 1885 already they
knew who in outlined terms, Freud's
project for scientific psychology
already had the outlines. William James
already had the outlines. They did that
in the 19th century. But now with the
new technology, we can spell out things
in such prec with such precision that
we'll go to a whole new level of
understanding and that's due to
technology.
Thank you.
You're welcome. It's been fun.
[Music]