MALE SPEAKER: Welcome everybody to one more "Talks at Google"
event.
Today our guest is Sean Carroll.
It is my distinct honor to welcome him today.
He is one of the greatest humanist thinkers
of this generation.
His new book is titled "The Big Picture-- On the Origins
of Life, Meaning, and the University Itself."
It's available in your fine bookstores.
Alan Lightman, author of "The Accidental Universe"
and "Einstein's Dreams," said the following,
"Sean Caroll is a leading theoretical cosmologist
with the added ability to write about his subject
with unusual clarity, flare, and wit."
Sean Caroll is a theoretical physicist at Caltech.
He received his PhD from Harvard.
He has worked on the foundations of quantum mechanics,
the error of time, and the emergence of complexity.
He has appeared on "The Colbert Report," PBS's
"NOVA" and "Through the Wormhole,"
and has been interviewed by NPR, "Scientific American," "Wired,"
"The New York Times," and Google.
Please welcome option Sean too.
SEAN CARROLL: Thank you very much.
Let's see.
So thanks very much for having me here.
It's good to be back at Google.
And I appreciate whenever people come out
for a talk on this completely crazy title, "The Big Picture--
On the Origins of Life, Meaning, and the Universe Itself."
Usually a response I get when people first
see the title is who do you think you are?
How presumptuous must you be to think that you
can talk about these things?
So I want to get the disclaimer right on the board
right away, which is that I do not know
what the origin of life is.
I do not know what the origin of the universe is.
I do not know the meaning of life.
What I do think is that we have a way
of talking about these things now
that is sort of better than we had before,
if before I means 500 years ago.
And so this is not so much a set of answers
to difficult questions as it is encouragement
to continue the conversation within a particular framework.
And I'd like to start by telling you the story of Lucia de Berk.
She was a Dutch nurse.
In 2004, she was convicted to a sentence of life imprisonment
for murdering several infants under her care.
Now this is a sad story.
But if you look into it, there is an interesting thing
about the legal proceedings, which
is there essentially wasn't any evidence she had done it.
And you might ask, how is it possible
that someone gets convicted of basically being a mass murder
without any direct evidence?
There were no eyewitnesses that saw
her do anything, no poison in her handbag
or anything like that.
And the answer is mathematics.
The prosecution asked statisticians
to estimate the likelihood that this number of children
would die when a certain nurse was on duty.
And they said oh, it's one in a million chance
or hundreds of millions of chance.
That was the primary reason why she was convicted.
Now later, other mathematicians looked at it
and realize that it had been bad mathematics.
The argument was it was more like a one in 25 or one
in 100 chance that something like that would happen,
which as I'm sure you all know, those chances happen
all the time.
In fact someone pointed out that the total death
rate for children in this hospital-- I mean,
it's a pediatric care hospital, there's sick children there--
the death rate went down after she was hired,
which is not the effect you would
expect as the hiring of a serial killer to really have.
But the other question is, besides the bad mathematics,
why were the people on the jury so easily swayed,
even though there was no direct evidence that she had actually
done it?
And I'd like to point to the possibility
that really it was part of our very human desire
to blame something when something happens.
Rather than to think that just things happen and there's
a little bit of irrationality and randomness in the world,
we like to think there's a reason why things happen.
So when a whole bunch of children die,
more than we might expect, we want someone to blame.
And once that starts, we convince ourselves
that we are on the right track, finding
this reason for this happening.
The picture on the left is what Lucia de Berk actually
looks like.
The picture on the right is the courtroom sketch
of what she looks like.
Once you decide that this person is the evil one who
was responsible for this, then you look at her
in a slightly different way.
Fortunately the bad math went away.
The good math took over and she was released,
she was exonerated, and found innocent later on.
But the idea that we find reasons why things happen
is not necessarily a bad one.
It's an ancient one and it goes back
to some of the greatest thinkers in history.
Aristotle very famously had what he
called the four causes for things
happening, which we might really think
of as four kinds of explanation why things occur.
And one of them was the final cause for something.
The final cause for Aristotle is the reason for which something
exists, the goal for which it is created in the first place.
The final cause of a seed is to grow into a tree, for example.
And this kind of reasoning, this kind of metaphysical view
that the world at its deepest levels
is a story of causes and effects,
went through to these guys.
This is Spinoza and Leibniz, Baruch Spinoza
and Gottfried Leibniz.
And they promulgated something we call the principle
of sufficient reason.
They also promulgated a principle
that philosophers' hair gets better and better over time,
as you see.
I think Leibniz got artificial help.
But overall, there's certainly a progress in nature
that we can observe here.
The principal of sufficient reason
is simply the statement that everything
happens for a reason.
You can find this on bumper stickers and greeting cards,
but Leibniz in particular raised it
to the level of a metaphysical principle.
For everything that happens, there is a cause or reason why.
And again it's not crazy.
In our everyday experience, that is kind of what we see.
Things do not just happen.
The book is not going to see just fly off into air.
There seems to be reasons why things happen.
If the book moves, it's because I moved it.
And for Aristotle and for many other people,
this metaphysical claim that things that happen
do so because something causes them to happen,
influenced their ideas about physics.
So for Aristotle, if things are moving,
it implies that something is moving them.
There is a reason why things are moving.
And his reasoning is quite straightforward.
If I start pushing on the book, it will move.
And if I stop, it stops.
There you go.
That's the basis for a way of thinking about physics,
that if you see things moving in the world,
you need to explain that.
You need to find the reason why, what the mover is.
And this extends from individual objects like books
to everything in the universe.
The universe is full of motions.
But to Aristotle, the natural state of being
was for things to stay stationary.
So the existence of all these motions and transformations
of all sorts implies that there's
something behind the scenes causing those kinds of motions.
That is not how we think about fundamental physics today.
Over the course of improved explanation and experimentation
and theorizing, we have a very, very different way
of thinking about how the world works
at its most fundamental level.
But it's not a way that we make a big deal of.
There's many things that popularization of science
will talk about over and over again.
You can't go faster than the speed of light.
You can't know your position and velocity at the same time.
But we don't talk about the fact that the whole principle
of cause and effect as a fundamental organizing
principle for the universe is no longer part of our best
theories of physics.
Some people talked about it.
Bertrand Russell liked to emphasize it.
He was primarily a philosopher, but a mathematical philosopher
who knew a lot of physics.
And he said, "The law of causality I believe,
like much that passes muster among philosophers,
is a relic of a bygone age, surviving, like the monarchy--"
he just had to get that in there.
He couldn't stick to just the philosophy and science--
"only because it is erroneously supposed to do no harm."
So this should be, I hope, in your minds,
quite an extraordinary claim.
The law of causality, that you have a cause for every effect,
that the cause precedes the effect, that's
not part of our understanding of the world anymore.
What is going on?
Well it's not that anything could happen.
It's not that because there's no cause and effect
at the deep level, the book can in fact just fly
all over the place.
The point is that we've replaced the principal that
causes precede effects with a principle
that the world is governed by patterns.
And this happened slowly.
Here's one example, sort of the tipping point,
if you will, from one way of thinking
about the world to another one, was the principal we
call conservation of momentum.
If any of you in the room have taken physics classes,
you have been tortured by the principle of conservation
of momentum to sort of find the solution when
different balls bump into each other and so forth.
But in fact this principle is part
of a whole new way of thinking about how
reality works at a deep level.
It took hundreds of years and many, many smart people
to think of it.
One of the primary people was Ibn Sina,
who was a Persian polymath.
To a modern physicist like me, Ibn Sina
is extremely annoying, because he wasn't even a physicist,
primarily.
He was a doctor.
He was a medical doctor.
He wrote a lot about the human body and anatomy.
He did physics in his spare time,
and he invented conservation of momentum.
This is very annoying to me.
But he wouldn't have said conservation of momentum.
Again, it took hundreds of years to get it right.
The basic idea that Ibn Sina put his finger on
is that if you could remove friction,
if you could remove dissipation, if you imagine something
moving through the vacuum, it would keep moving forever.
This was the invention of that other device
that physics teachers like to use to torture people,
the frictionless surface.
If you imagine something moving in the complete absence
of friction, it would not slow down
or require a cause to keep moving,
it would just keep moving.
And this principle was improved upon by people like Galileo who
did experiments, and finally Christiaan Huygens
was the one who actually formulated
our modern mathematical notion of conservation of momentum.
So why is conservation of momentum such a big deal,
over and above the fact that it's
a tool for physicists to use?
Because it implies that there's a different way
that the world naturally is.
If you're Aristotle, the natural way for things to be
is to kind of sit there in their happy place,
and you need to do something to get them moving.
In a world with conservation of momentum,
the natural thing for the world is to move and change,
and implies you don't need to explain why things are moving.
Things just naturally move.
And this was developed over time and probably reached
the pinnacle with Pierre-Simon Laplace, a French mathematician
and physicist around the year 1800.
He did not invent classical mechanics.
It was Newton, as we all know, who really put the finishing
touches on classical mechanics.
But you can make the argument that Laplace
was the first person to really internalize what it meant,
the deep implications of this Newtonian clockwork universe
worldview.
So you know that if you do a physics problem,
and again you ignore friction and dissipation
and so forth, you play physics billiards,
physicist billiards where balls just bump into each other
and so forth, you can solve the problem of these two balls
are moving with certain velocities.
They scatter and they go off in another direction.
What is the direction and the speed
at which the balls are going to go?
Laplace was the first to point out
that that process is reversible.
That if you started up here saying
that the balls are moving apart, what
were they doing in the past?
And Newton's laws make an absolutely clear prediction
for what they were doing in this world
where you can ignore friction and dissipation.
If you made a movie of this whole process
and played it backward, it would look completely plausible.
So Laplace invented what we now call Laplace's demon,
or what he called a vast intellect.
Laplace's demon is something that
has the ability-- what we'd now really call
it is a really good computer.
Maybe you have a Laplace's demon in one of the other buildings.
If Laplace's demon knew everything
about the state of the universe at one moment in time,
the position and the momentum of every particle moving
in the universe, then Laplace says
that vast intellect would know the future and past just
as surely as the present.
If that vast intellect knew all the laws of physics
and was able to calculate what would happen,
there would be nothing that would
be uncertain to that intellect about what
would happen in the future, what had happened in the past.
So this is, even though it's a subtle difference,
a crucially different way of thinking about the world.
It's not that this configuration of stuff causes this one
and therefore causes that.
All of them are related by a pattern
called the laws of physics.
Just like the integers 0, 1, 2, 3, minus 1, minus 2, minus 3,
the number two happens after the number one
and before the number three, but we
don't say that the number one is the cause of number two,
or two is the cause of three.
We just say that every number is one bigger or less
than the numbers next to it.
It's just a pattern that follows,
and you can go forward or backward equally well.
And Laplace says that is what the world is
like at a deep level.
Now these things we know better than Newtonian mechanics.
We've had quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics,
general relativity, and so forth.
But the basic Laplacian principle remains the same.
It's just the actual laws that we have are different.
So one of the claims that I make in the book
that I would like to defend is that this audacious
sounding idea, that the laws of physics
underlying everyday life are completely known.
Now when I say this, people like to stop
listening when I say underlying everyday life, so I
want to emphasize that.
I'm not saying the laws of physics are completely known.
I'm not also saying that everyday life
is completely known.
There's plenty of things about everyday life
that I don't know about, plenty of things about physics
we don't know about-- dark matter, dark energy,
black holes, the Big Bang, plenty of physics that is not
about the underlying laws that we don't know--
high temperature, superconductivity,
turbulence, and so forth.
I'm making quite a specific claim, that you and I
and all this stuff right in front of us,
literally the stuff we can touch and see in our everyday lives,
these are made of things-- atoms, electrons, protons,
neutrons.
Those protons and neutrons are made of quarks.
And all these particles interact in a certain way.
And we know both what those particles are
and how they interact.
When I say we know, not only do we have a good idea,
but a thousand years from now or a million years from now
this idea will still be right.
Hopefully we will learn more-- I mean, maybe
the quarks and electrons and so forth
are made of even tinier things.
That's great.
But there won't stop being quarks and electrons,
and we won't be wrong about how they interact.
And there are deep reasons for believing this is true.
Let me just tell you what the ingredients are.
This is an atom, right?
This a neutron and a proton, an electron,
so it's a deuterium isotope of hydrogen.
The electron is held together to the nucleus
by electromagnetism.
The individual protons and neutrons
are made of quarks, up and down quarks, which are held together
with the strong nuclear force.
Occasionally an up quark or a down quark
can convert into the other one by the weak nuclear force
and give up a neutrino in the process.
Everything is pulled towards everything else by gravity.
And everything's swims in the background of the Higgs field.
The Higgs boson particle is something
we discovered just in 2012, the Large Hadron Collider.
The particle is what happens when
you start this field vibrating, but the field
itself, the Higgs field pervades all of space,
affects the properties of the other particles
that we're made up.
There are more particles than this.
These matter particles, the electron, the quarks,
neutrinos, they all have heavier cousins.
But they decay away very, very quickly
if you try to make them.
They do not affect our everyday lives.
We know them.
We can complete them in the theory.
But you don't actually need to know them to know
what you and I are made out of.
So that's it, as far as our everyday world is concerned.
The point is that there's no new particle, no new field,
no new force that we will ever discover
that will have an impact on our literal every day biology
or environment, like what holds this table up.
We hope to discover a lot more physics.
It will not affect you or what you're made out of.
So I know this is a-- I keep being
told this is a technically inclined audience.
So you don't like the picture.
The picture makes you nervous.
You want an equation.
So here it is.
This is what Nobel laureate Frank Wilczek
has called the Core Theory.
And he invented the name to emphasize that we usually
distinguish between the standard model of particle physics
and general relativity, our best theory of gravity.
And the reason we do that is because general relativity is
a classical theory, not a quantum theory.
We don't have a full and complete theory
of quantum gravity yet.
What gets lost in that true statement
is that we have a pretty good every day
theory of quantum gravity.
We know quantum gravity in the regime where fields are weak.
We know quantum gravity perfectly well
if you want to use it to calculate the Moon orbiting
around the Earth, for example.
So if you're literally only interested
in the regime of everyday life, this is it, including gravity.
This is basically the Feynman path integral, the probability
to go from one amplitude in a field theory to another one.
I'm not going to go through all the details,
but basically you see how all of the different pieces
of modern physics get involved.
There's quantum mechanics, space time, gravity,
this is Einstein's general relativity right there,
all the other forces, electromagnetism
and the nuclear forces, the matter particles
of which we are made, and the Higgs in the background.
If you want know more about the details,
I did manage to squeeze it into the book.
But I was told it should be put into an appendix,
and the font size is very small in the appendix.
But nevertheless, every term here is explained, briefly.
It takes a year long quantum field theory course
in graduate school to get the details,
but at least say what every term means,
including the i for example and including
the k less than lambda.
What you don't see are causes, purposes, or reasons why.
It's just Laplacian calculation over and over again.
This is the modern version of what
you need to program into Laplace's demon
so that starting from the position and configuration
of the world at one point, it can find out what will happen
next or what happened before.
The final criterion you need for this
to be a good, successful theory is that it
should fit on a T-shirt.
So we did the experiment.
There it is.
It totally fits on the T-shirt.
You can buy them on my website.
I don't make any money off them, but you can buy the T-shirt.
So I want to do at least one minute of justification
for this grandiose claim.
I mean, it's one thing to have a theory.
We have lots of theories.
Our theories are never complete.
Our theories are never things we should have 100% credence in.
We should always, as scientists, be
willing to improve upon our theories.
So what gives me the right to say that
a million years from now, this is still
going to be the theory underlying
the particles and forces of which you and I are made.
The answer is something called crossing
symmetry, which is a feature of quantum field theory.
I mention fields.
Fields are in fact what you and I are made out of.
You might have taken a physics course and been asked,
is light a particle or a wave, or is an electron a particle
or a wave?
Probably you were not told the answer.
It's a wave.
That's what it is.
According to quantum mechanics, the world is made of waves.
The world looks like particles when we look closely enough.
But really the way that we talk about the world
in modern physics is through quantum field theory.
And quantum field theory uses these little pictures
called Feynman diagrams.
My personal claim to fame in the world of physics
is that the desk I have in my office at Caltech
used to be owned by Richard Feynman.
So I sit at Feynman's old desk.
I leave blank pieces of paper in there hoping some diagrams will
appear, but it never happens.
So what Feynman did is to invent a way of talking about
what happens in particle physics and quantum field theory,
and also how likely it is to happen.
So if we have a particle we know about, like a proton,
and we imagine there's a new particle.
Maybe there's a new particle that
really does affect how you choose your food
or how plants photosynthesize or how you think,
well then there must be a Feynman diagram that
says that that particle can interact
with a proton via some new interaction.
And Feynman's rules say how you can use this diagram
to calculate how likely that is to happen,
the amplitude or the probability of that process.
And then crossing symmetry says--
this is a diagram that time evolves from left to right.
So X comes in, P comes in.
They just scatter off of each other.
Crossing symmetry says that if this diagram exists,
I can rotate it clockwise by 90 degrees
and get another diagram that exists.
So I'm glossing over the difference between particles
and antiparticles here.
Really if this is a proton, this is still a proton.
This diagram talks about a proton and an antiproton coming
together to produce an X particle
and an anti-X particle.
And what crossing symmetry says is
if you know how big this diagram is,
if you know how likely that process is,
you know how likely this process is.
So if this new X particle interacts with protons
or with neutrons or quarks or neutrinos
or whatever, strongly enough to affect your everyday life,
then we could make it by smashing together the particles
out of which we are created.
And the punchline is we have looked.
We have smashed together all the particles.
We've smashed together protons and protons.
That's what the LHC is doing.
We've done protons and antiprotons, electrons
and electrons, electrons and positrons on down the line.
We would have loved to find a new particle like this,
and we have not done so yet.
There are no particles like this.
The closest we have is a tiny little bit
of a hint at the Large Hadron Collider,
as of May, 2016, that there might
be a new particle that is 800 times the mass of the proton.
It may or may not be true.
There's a little bump.
Maybe it's there.
We're still looking.
But even if it is, it decays away in less than a
zeptosecond.
It is not something that affects your everyday life in any way.
So in terms of the particles that actually matter to you
and me that make us up, we know the complete collection.
So the question is, the big question ahead of us
today is, if that's true, why does the manifest world
of our everyday experience seem so different
than the underlying laws of quantum mechanics and quantum
field theory and particle physics?
And the answer is this tricky idea called emergence.
You can have an underlying layer of
microscopic fundamental physics made of particles, forces,
and differential Equations.
It can do what Laplace said.
Information is conserved from moment to moment over time.
The rules of physics are patterns written down
in differential equations.
And yet, when you collect together
many of these particles, there can be collective behavior
that is implicit but not at all obvious,
in this microscopic rules.
This collective behavior could emerge into wholly new concepts
and vocabularies.
So the idea that there are tables and chairs and people
and planets, that's nowhere obvious
in this underlying description.
But the two levels can be compatible with each other.
This is the world of cause and effect, reasons why,
dissipation, and most importantly the arrow of time,
the difference between past and future.
So our task today is to see how this one level can be
compatible with the other one.
Why can we think that there are reasons why causes and effects,
and for that matter right and wrong
and truth and beauty in the world,
even though at some level, deep down, it's
just stuff happening according to that equation
that I showed you.
So the arrow of time, one of my favorite topics,
is simply the fact that the past and future
are different from each other.
This is not a surprising fact if you're Aristotle.
Motion through time, the evolution of the universe
is obviously something profound.
The past is different from the future
because the past already happened.
But according to Laplace or to modern physics,
there's no difference between moving toward the past
and moving toward the future at the microscopic level.
Only macroscopically is there a difference,
and there are many differences.
You can remember the past, but you can't remember the future.
We were all younger in the past and will be older
in the future.
Sorry to break that to you.
Most importantly or most fundamentally,
entropy increases over time.
Entropy is the way that we have of talking
about the disorderliness, the randomness,
the disorganization of stuff over time.
And there's a general principle that organized things
like unbroken eggs can easily evolve into disorganized things
like broken eggs, but never backward the other way,
or at least very, very rarely, or at least
you need to do a lot of work to make it happen.
If you live in a room or you have an office and it's clean,
it will naturally happen that it becomes messy over time.
If your office or room is messy, it will never
clean itself up all by itself.
You need to do work.
That's because entropy is increasing.
If you'd like to think of it as the working out of a great law
of physics, be my guest.
And the reason why this is true is
because there are more ways to be high entropy
than to be low entropy.
There are more arrangements of stuff
that are messy than are organized.
This was the brilliant insight of Ludwig Boltzmann,
the 19th century physicist.
And so therefore if you start in a configuration of low entropy,
entropy naturally increases.
The problem was, therefore, why isn't
entropy at its maximum value?
There are many, many more ways for entropy
to be high than for entropy to be low.
Why is it true that entropy was ever low?
So Boltzmann, in other words, explains
why, given the entropy of the universe today,
it will be higher tomorrow.
There are more ways to be high entropy than to be low entropy.
But he does not explain why it was lower yesterday.
I'm here to tell you the answer.
The reason the entropy of the universe
was lower yesterday than today is because it was even lower
the day before yesterday.
And the reason why that's true too
is because it was even lower the day before that.
And this reasoning goes back 13.7 billion years
to the Big Bang.
The reason why the universe has had a low entropy all along
is because it started that way.
Nobody knows why.
This is a profound question for modern cosmology.
But once you give me that, I can explain all the differences
between the past and the future.
So one way of thinking about it is, we all agree
that there's no arrow of space.
If you're out there in a space suit,
there would be no difference between up and down,
left, right, forward, backward.
But here in this room there is.
If I drop the laser pointer, I know it's going to go down.
There's an arrow of space pointing down.
Nobody thinks that this is some profound consequence
of the fundamental laws of physics.
It's because we live in the vicinity of a very influential
object, namely the Earth.
The point of this discussion is that time is like that.
There is no intrinsic arrow of time in the laws of physics,
but we think that there is in our observable universe
because we live in the aftermath of a very influential event,
the Big Bang.
I'm not going to explain why the Big Bang was low
entropy, because nobody knows.
Don't believe anyone who comes in here and tells you
they know.
It's a good topic for conversation.
But given that, we can try to explain other features
of the arrow of time.
For existence, the existence of memories and causes, right?
Memories are something where we know something now.
It implies something about the past.
The cause is something that we do something now,
it implies something will happen in the future.
Where does this asymmetry come from?
So here's a memory.
Here's a picture of a record of an event.
This is an egg that was broken.
You're walking down the street, you
see a broken egg on the sidewalk.
Ask yourself, what does the future hold for this egg?
I don't know why you're asking yourself this.
You're in a reflective mood.
What is the future of this poor egg going to hold?
You don't know.
I mean, there's many different possibilities.
It could just sit there for a long time.
It could wash away in a rainstorm.
Someone could clean it up.
But if you ask yourself what does the past of the egg
probably experience, what are things like for the egg
recently, with overwhelming probability
that egg used to be unbroken, and someone dropped it.
Why is it that this single record-- this
isn't even moving, right?
The macroscopic information is not changing in time.
The egg is just sitting there stationary.
Why are you able to draw such different conclusions
about its past than its future?
The answer is because secretly you
know that the Big Bang had a low entropy.
You don't use that in your everyday life, but that's why.
If all you knew is physics and the macroscopic information
about the egg, the number of things
that could happen in the future would
be exactly equal to the number of things
that happened in the past.
But the extra thing you know is that the universe
started with low entropy.
That ties the possible histories in the past.
And what that means is that you know something
about the past condition of the egg.
Unbroken eggs lead to broken eggs,
because that's the easiest way to get
to broken eggs given the low entropy past of the universe.
And causes and effects work the same way.
Just like an egg is something-- a memory
is something that if it were a little bit different now,
it would imply something different about the past.
Think about what a cause does.
If I say I move my hand and the book moves,
if I move my hand a little bit differently,
like I missed the book, then it wouldn't have moved, right?
So if my hand moving is the cause of the book moving,
that's because if my hand had done something very different,
it would have implied something different about what
comes next.
If I'm waving my hand over here, I
could wave in a slightly different way
and it doesn't imply anything different about the book.
And therefore this hand moving is not the cause of the book.
It's the thing that came right next to it that is
the cause of the book moving.
The idea that causes proceed effects
emerges in our macroscopic world because of the arrow of time.
So that is the first little baby step
towards reconciling our everyday world
with this impersonal, calculational underlying
laws of physics.
The next step is if the universe is just
a story of stuff becoming more and more
disorderly and entropic over time, why are we here?
Why is anything complex and intricate and organized exist
in the universe?
This is another good question to which
we don't know the complete answer,
but it's interesting that there's
a big part of the answer which is that simplicity
versus complexity is a whole different axis on which
to think about the world than low entropy
versus high entropy.
If you think about the classic example of entropy increasing,
mixing cream together with coffee.
You know that in this picture, this picture, this picture,
time moves left to right.
It's easy to mix things.
It's hard to unmix them.
This is low entropy.
That's high entropy.
But this low entropy configuration
with the cream on top, coffee on the bottom is also very simple.
Cream's on the top, coffee's on the bottom.
Towards computer thinking people,
it's algorithmically compressible.
A small file sizes necessary to tell you
what happens microscopically in that picture.
But the same thing is true over here.
It's high entropy.
It's all mixed up, but still simple.
It's all mixed up.
That's all you need to know.
The file size is also small here.
It's in the middle where the cream and coffee are beginning
to get mixed together, where the tendrils of cream and coffee
are reaching into each other and a fractal pattern develops,
that's where it's complex.
This file size to show you that picture is bigger
than the one on the left, the one on the right.
So while entropy in the universe just increases monotonically,
complexity first increases and then goes away.
When entropy is very, very small,
it's impossible to be complex because there's not
that many possible arrangements you can be.
But when entropy is very, very large
it's impossible to be complex, because everything
is smooth and homogeneous.
It's only in between that complexity is possible.
And therefore it's not only compatible with the increase
of entropy to see complex forms arise in the universe.
It's because entropy is increasing
that it can possibly happen.
And this behavior, complexity going up and going down,
is not just cream and coffee.
The universe is the same way.
The universe started very simple and low
entropy, hot dense expanding universe near the Big Bang.
It will end very simple and high entropy.
Eventually all the stars will burn out.
All the black holes will evaporate
and we'll have nothing but empty space.
We'll once again be very, very simple but high entropy.
The last black hole will evaporate 10 to the 100 years
from now.
Yes, that's right, one google years from now.
Before you guys stole the word from us, this was a google.
The entropy of the universe increases monotonically
through its history, but the complexity comes and goes.
The universe became more and more complex
up to the present day, and will start
becoming less and less complex as those stars stop shining.
The stars stop shining about 1 quadrillion years
after the Big Bang.
So it's today when gravity has pulled things together,
made the universal lumpy, brought into existence planets
and stars and galaxies, biospheres and people
that the universe is interesting and complex.
As small as we are compared to the vastness of the cosmos,
we live in the interesting part of the history of the universe
for exactly that reason.
And this kind of reasoning can help
us explain even questions like why life itself exists.
So I like to tell the story, I was once on a plane flight
going to a conference to give a talk.
And as often happens, if you're a physicist or a cosmologist,
people find that out and they want
to tell you their theories.
Everyone it seems has a theory about the universe.
I was reading some papers about statistical mechanics
and the origin of life.
The guy sitting next to me on the airplane
says, oh yes, I've read those papers.
So I'm a little bit skeptical.
But he says in fact I can tell you the purpose of life.
And I'm very skeptical.
But he says the purpose of life is to hydrogenation
carbon dioxide.
This is not the response I was expecting to get.
It turns out that I was seated next to Dr Michael Russell, one
of the world's experts in abiogenesis,
the origin of life.
He works at JPL, just down the street from Caltech.
And he writes papers with graphs like this.
And he was very serious about the hydrogenation business.
What he means-- and again, we don't know whether this is true
or not.
We don't know how life begins.
This is one of the theories people are advancing.
But you can see in all these theories,
you can sort of see the hints of how
a really, really difficult problem suddenly
seems to be a lot more soluble.
So what Russell's pointing out, that there
are many environments in the early Earth
where there's a lot of carbon dioxide and a lot of hydrogen.
And that is a low entropy configuration.
And that's what we call high free energy.
So this is free energy versus different compound structures.
If you took that carbon, removed the oxygen,
and palled them all up with a bunch of hydrogen atoms,
the carbon would now be in methane,
and the entropy would be much higher.
In some sense, the carbon dioxide
wants to become methane.
The problem is that there's a barrier,
that all the ways to get from CO2 to CH4
involve going through even lower entropy configurations--
higher free energy configurations.
And that can't happen all by itself.
It's not like lighting a match on a candle.
But what Russell points out is that it
can happen if there's a complicated network of chemical
reactions brought together in just the right way
with the right catalysts and so forth.
And that kind of network in the right conditions
could be the precursor of the metabolism of modern life.
So in the 1980s on the basis of this kind of reasoning,
Russell predicted the existence of a certain kind
of underwater geological formation, what
we call warm alkaline hydrothermal vents.
And after he made the prediction, they found one.
This is the lost city configuration, lost city--
I don't know what it is.
It's a bunch of stuff happening under the mid-Atlantic Ocean.
And it has exactly the properties
that you would need to get this kind of reaction starting.
There might be many of them underneath the ocean.
This is something that we think will probably
last there for tens of thousands of years before it washes away.
And you make new ones.
So we don't know how life began.
But this way of thinking about it
is interesting because rather than looking at it as life
exists, how did it possibly start, this point of view
is saying we have a puzzle, how to increase
the entropy of the early Earth, and life
is the solution to that puzzle.
Of course you need to get it together
with other things like cell walls and replication and RNA
and so forth.
Putting all those pieces of the puzzle
together is full employment for abiogenesis researchers
for the next hundred years probably.
But then once that gets started, once you have life,
then things get interesting.
What is life anyway?
Nobody knows that either.
I like the definition given by the physicist Erwin
Schrodinger.
Schrodinger said that life is something
that keeps moving long after it should've stopped.
What does he mean by that?
He means if you put a dead thing in a bowl of water,
it will just sit there.
It won't do anything.
If you put a living thing like a goldfish, in my experience
it will also just die and then it will float
to the bottom of the thing.
But if you give it food, the living thing
can last for a long time.
What is food?
Food is energy in a low entropy form.
That's exactly what we get from the sun.
The sun gives us energy, and you might
think that's what's important.
The sun gives us energy.
But if the whole sky were the temperature of the sun,
none of us would be here talking about it.
You would come to thermal equilibrium.
What the sun gives us is low entropy energy.
For every one photon of light we get from the sun,
we give back 20 photons back to the universe.
But we get visible light.
We radiate infrared.
We radiate photons with 1/20 of the energy each.
So we get back the same energy we get, but only
after increasing its entropy by a factor of 20,
by photosynthesizing, chewing our cud,
having meetings, writing software, et cetera.
Then we radiate back into the universe
having increased its disorder by a considerable fraction.
And that explains how an individual organism can persist
and survive and sustain itself.
But of course the great thing about life
is that it reproduces and there are mutations.
And therefore evolution gets off the ground.
So if our goal is to understand how
ideas like cause and effect and even purposes can arise,
evolution is a wonderful mechanism
for making that happen.
Why do giraffes have long necks?
Well one answer is because of the state of the universe
and the laws of physics.
That's not a very helpful answer, is it?
Another answer is to reach these leaves up there in the tree.
Evolution can be thought of as a search strategy
for this different genetic information,
for the genome that passes down to try
to maximize the chances of reproductive success
in this particular environment.
And given that strategy, it's perfectly OK to say the reason
why the giraffe has a long neck is to reach those leaves.
You can also see something like this in simple computer
examples.
This is a cellular automaton invented by computer scientist
Melanie Mitchell.
She calls it Robby the Robot.
Robby had a party last night.
There are beer cans scattered all over his house.
What's the best algorithm to pick up the beer cans?
Many of you are probably familiar
with genetic algorithms.
You just pick some random strategies, let them evolve.
That is to say, find out which ones are most successful,
cull them.
Randomly mutate them.
Find out which ones of those are most successful.
Repeat this.
And in a very few generations, Robbie
finds a better strategy than its human designers ever found.
And once it has that strategy, are you
allowed to say Robbie is quote, unquote,
trying its best to pick up the cans?
Sure, that's what I'm trying to say.
There's no such thing as a real true purpose that
goes above and beyond a way of talking about what
happens in the physical world.
Evolution, laws of physics, and the arrow of time
make it perfectly sensible that such ways of talking
would become convenient and useful as complicated organisms
adapt and go on.
And that even counts for thinking,
for consciousness itself.
We again do not know how consciousness arose either.
We don't even know what consciousness is
or how it works.
But we can see little steps that might
have happened along the way.
So Malcolm MacIver, who's an engineer at Northwestern,
likes to talk about the first fish to flap up onto land.
The evolutionary pressures on land
are very, very different than those under the water.
If you're under the water, you can't see very far.
The attenuation length of the photons is a few meters.
So you're swimming around at a few meters per second,
you need to be able to instantly react to what you see.
But then you climb up onto land, and now you
can see for kilometers.
So there's a whole new evolutionary pressure which
is to make a smart decision.
You had the time to think about what to do.
And what that means is that developing the capacity
to contemplate different hypothetical futures
becomes a smart thing to do.
And we can look back.
We can do the neuroscience and look in your brain.
What are you doing when you're contemplating
hypothetical futures, when you're really
sort of consciously imagining different things?
It's not a whole new module of your brain.
You're using the same part of your brain
that gets used when you recall a memory.
This is exactly what evolution likes to do,
to repurpose all parts of the functional organism
to do new tasks.
Imagining the future is one part of being conscious.
It's not the whole thing obviously.
But again you could see how it would happen.
We don't need to invoke anything beyond the particles
and fields of the Core Theory to explain our consciousness.
Here is a picture of my head.
It's not to scale.
But this was a map made in the laboratory
of David Poeppel at NYU.
It's evidence that I actually have
a brain inside my skull, which I was happy to see.
When you have a thought, in your neurons
there are literally charged particles jumping
from one neuron to another.
Any physicists will tell you, following the Core Theory,
that charged particles in motion create magnetic fields.
So this is an MEG, a magnetoencephalograph.
It is literally an image of the tiny magnetic fields
that stick outside of my skull while I was hearing some sounds
and my neurons were going ah yes, you
were hearing some sounds.
Now this isn't evidence of anything very strong,
just a reminder of the obvious fact
that your thoughts and your dreams
and your aspirations and your emotions
are correlated with physical goings on inside your brain.
We don't need to go beyond that to explain
what is it that is happening when you are thinking.
This is again an ancient argument.
It goes back to these folks.
This is Renee Descartes, famous physicist, famous mathematician
also.
And this is Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia,
considerably less famous.
But they became friends and they carried on a long conversation,
basically because Descartes was always
looking for a potential patron.
And even an exiled royal family like Princess Elizabeth's was
is better than no royal family at all.
Unfortunately she did not become his patron,
and she didn't give him a hard time about his ideas.
One of Descartes' favorite ideas was mind body dualism.
He felt that the mind or the soul
was something immaterial and separate from the body.
And Elizabeth pressed him on how in the world
could something immaterial and without any location
could possibly influence the physical reality of our body.
So he had a theory.
This is the pineal gland in your brain.
It's the one part of your brain that
is not broken into two, two different hemispheres.
So Descartes drew this picture and literally proposed
that the soul communicated through your pineal gland
with your body.
Nobody ever bought this explanation.
But the point is that if Elizabeth were alive today,
she would point at the equation for the Core Theory
and say if you want to believe in something
over and above the physical world,
how does that change the behavior of the particles
in your brain as it is predicted by that Core Theory equation?
It's not enough to say, well there's
things we don't understand.
If you don't think that the brain is simply
the workings out of physical matter at some level,
then you're saying that equation is wrong.
And saying how that equation is wrong
is a daunting obstacle to overcome
if you think that the world is more
than just the physical stuff.
And you don't need to think that.
Even if you think the world is just physical stuff,
it's perfectly OK to talk about things
that we like to talk about when we
discuss human beings like choice and responsibility
and morality, for exactly the same reason it's
OK to talk about temperature and density and pressure in a fluid
even though we know it's really made of atoms.
These are emergent features of the world.
If you're Laplace's demon, you can predict the future.
That is true.
There's no such thing as free will in the world
of Laplace's demon.
But we're not in that world.
None of us has that ability.
None of us knows the requisite information.
Therefore, the best way we have to model
the behavior of real human beings, real agents
in the world, is as creatures who are able to make decisions.
The problem only arises when you mix up the vocabularies.
There are different vocabularies that can both be true,
people making choices and atoms obeying the laws of physics.
But you have to pick one or the other.
You walk up to your closet and say,
am I going to wear the red shirt or the blue shirt?
Oh, I'll just do whatever my atoms say the laws of physics
are going to tell them to do.
That does not make sense.
You can talk about what your atoms do
or what you're going to do.
You can't talk about both at once.
So this picture of the world as just governed
by the laws of physics isn't as bad
as you might think in terms of recovering the human scale
world of meaning and mattering and so forth.
But there is a downside, namely that you're going to die.
If you're made of the stuff of the Core Theory,
if you're made out of the atoms and particles, then when you
die there's no place for the information
that was in your brain to go.
There's no known forces or particles
that could carry that away if your atoms are actually still
there in your brain.
So one way of driving that home is
to look at this plot that was made.
There's some complexity theorists
who like to study scaling laws in biology.
It turns out that for mammals, there's
a scaling law that relates your heartbeat to your mass,
and also your life expectancy to your mass.
And they cancel out.
So everywhere along this curve, the total number
of heartbeats in the lifespan of a mammal is about the same.
It's about 1.5 billion heartbeats.
Now humans are the exception.
Because we invented medicine, Obamacare, and now
we live for about twice as long as you
would have predicted on the basis of this scaling relation.
But then again before we had modern medicine,
we lived for 30 or 40 years, right on the line.
So that means that we get about 3 billion heartbeats
in our lives.
There's no law of physics that says this.
Biological progress can certainly extend our lifespan
way, way longer than this.
But we're not there yet.
And if you believe that you are a bunch of particles that
are interacting under that equation,
this is the span of your life.
You do not continue on after that.
And the 3 billion is kind of a big number.
3 billion is pretty big, but it's not
limitless by any stretch of the imagination.
To me, claims like well, if I'm just stuff
obeying the laws of physics removes all the meaning
and mattering from my life don't hold water,
because to me the fact that I only
have this small period of time makes
every little bit of that period much more precious.
Every one of your heartbeats should be used to good effect.
One way I like to drive this home
is the last slide is the pale blue dot image of the Earth.
So the "Voyager" spacecraft, one of the first spacecraft that
left the solar system, when it was 4 billion miles away,
Carl Sagan and his team convinced NASA
to turn it around and take a parting
shot, a photograph of the Earth and the rest of the planets
in the solar system.
So that little dot is us.
That's the Earth, the pale blue dot.
Every human being who has ever lived is in that picture,
or at least their atoms are in that picture.
So on the one hand, it makes you feel
very small to think that all of us are just in that little bit.
And this is not anywhere near the whole universe
that we're looking at right now.
On the other hand, we did take the picture.
That's pretty good.
It's a selfie for the whole Earth.
"Voyager's" just an elaborate selfie
stick out there letting us take a picture of ourselves.
But you know what, the ability to take a selfie
shouldn't be underestimated.
It is a reflection of the fact that even though we
are very tiny compared to the universe,
both in space and in time, we are in that complex phase.
We are part of the universe that has gained the ability
to think about ourselves, to be self aware, to make choices
for ourselves on the basis of rational reflection,
to create technological marvels that
can help us look at ourselves and think about what to do next
rather than just moving from moment to moment.
That's both the world we live in, which is true,
and it's a world that we can try to work towards making
the best we can, which is good.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
AUDIENCE: So you connected the Big Bang
to the arrow of time and the fact
that the past seems different from the future.
Can you also sort of use it to give
an explanation for why it seems impossible to go back in time?
SEAN CARROLL: Well, yes and no.
So this is a good question.
The question is, there's an arrow of time
that we attribute to low entropy of the Big Bang.
What about going backward in time?
Mostly the fact that we can't go back in time
is because time is only one dimensional.
That's the real reason.
We can go around in space because space
is three dimensional.
If time were two dimensional, there'd
be no trouble to go back to the past.
Basically the fact that time is one dimensional and the fact
that the world happens once at every moment in time
means there's just no way to get there from here.
It is actually not in any direct way
related to what we call the arrow of time.
Now that's complicated by the fact that
in Einstein's theory of general relativity, space and time
are flexible.
And you can imagine building a wormhole or something like that
would get into the past.
And remember I said just a few slides ago
that our impression that there is free will and choice
is ultimately because entropy is increasing toward the future.
So if you were able to hop in a wormhole like an "Interstellar"
and go into the past, then your personal future
would be the past of the universe.
And which one wins?
And that's a very good question to which
no one has the right answer.
Probably the simple answer is you can't do it,
you can't go backward in time.
AUDIENCE: The emergent properties
that come out of atoms or of us, do
you think they're determined?
You said they're implicit.
Do they have to happen, or could there
be other emerging properties from the same particles?
SEAN CARROLL: Well this is a good question too.
Are the emergent properties determined in some way
from the underlying stuff?
Yes and no.
I mean ultimately the answer is yes in the sense
that if you believe everything I've said,
then given that Core Theory equation,
you could put it on a computer and uniquely find out what
would happen in the future.
So in that sense everything is determined.
There's the one very large footnote
to that, which is of course quantum mechanics
introduces some uncertainty of the game.
As I personally am an advocate of the many worlds
interpretation where everything's still
is 100% deterministic, but not everyone
agrees with me about that.
So that doesn't give you any help whatsoever in the emergent
properties business.
It's still a rule.
It's just a boring rule for probabilities
rather than some deterministic rule.
So on the one hand, if you knew everything
and had Laplacian demon level intelligence
about the underlying stuff, the future is determined.
The emergent properties are determined.
That's the whole story.
On the other hand, you do gain new knowledge
by figuring out what those emergent properties are.
You have a way of talking about the system that
is extremely algorithmically compressed
compared to the microscopic way of talking about it.
So even though the behavior is determined,
you do learn something new by figuring out what the higher
level laws really are.
And the higher level laws could be true even
with different underlying stuff.
The underlying stuff determines the higher level laws,
but not vice versa.
The way to become a successful biologist or psychologists
is not to study particle physics.
That's the fundamental rule here.
AUDIENCE: So you said that the Core Theory sort of explains
like-- and it will remain true for forever basically.
So at different moments in our history
we've had this sort of view of physics
or mechanics or whatever.
What makes this moment in human history different,
like whatever we know will never change?
SEAN CARROLL: Well again, it's not that whatever we know
will never change.
It's that very particular way of talking about the universe
will remain accurate.
Like Newtonian gravity was well established.
Of course now we know that the vocabulary
used by Newtonian gravity is not the best vocabulary to use.
Einstein's theory of general relativity came along,
gave us a very good, better way of talking.
And the whole vocabulary is different.
Einstein talks about curved space time and energy momentum.
Newton talks about absolute space and time and forces
and so forth.
But it remains true that if you want
to get a rocket from the Earth to the Moon,
you put Newton's equations into the computer.
So there is a certain level of establishedness
that a scientific theory has passed
which it might be improved upon, but it will not be discarded.
If you're thinking about things like the phlogiston
model of combustion or the plum pudding model of the atom,
those were never accepted as correct.
The Core Theory is just as likely
to remain true as this statement that this table is made
of atoms is likely to be true.
You might have a better understanding
of what atoms are, but the table's
not going to stop being made of atoms.
AUDIENCE: What are you working on these days?
SEAN CARROLL: What am I working on these days?
I'm working on doing exactly this thing, which
is making a better version of the underlying laws of physics.
We do have this problem that quantum mechanics and gravity
do not play well together in extreme conditions,
near the Big Bang, near the black holes and so forth.
So there are some of us who think
that space and time themselves are not fundamental,
that we need to do better at a quantum mechanical level
of figuring out how space and time themselves are
emergent from a deeper level of description.
So I actually am ambivalent about time.
Time may or may not be fundamental.
I'm 99% convinced that space is not fundamental,
and it's somehow a good approximation
just like the fluid description of the air this room is
a good approximation, even though it's ultimately
made of atoms.
AUDIENCE: To a lay person, you say
that the evolution of particles is pretty well described
by the Core Theory.
But the process of statistical mechanics
seems a little bit more hand wavy.
It seems as though the way you enumerate states of the world
and group them into categories really
determines the predictions of your theories to a wild extent.
Where do we stand on the evolution
of statistical mechanics then?
SEAN CARROLL: You point our a very important point.
It's actually related to the earlier question.
Statistical mechanics speaks a language of core screening
and macroscopic states.
So if you have a bunch of air in this room
like we have right now and it's made of air atoms
and molecules, you want to describe it in a course grained
way as a fluid with a temperature
and a pressure and a density.
Well that's one way of describing it.
That's one sort of macroscopic description.
But there are many ways.
For example when we really coarse grain,
we really take a little region of space,
like one cubic millimeter in size.
We take the average number of particles
and the average motion of those particles
and we relate them to macroscopic features
of temperature and density and pressure and so forth.
But who says that's what you can do?
You could imagine taking a little tiny cube in momentum
space rather than physical space.
You could coarse grain that way.
You could reduce your number of variables that way.
What you would end up getting is a horrendous mess.
And that's because given the actual configuration of stuff
in the world and the laws of physics,
there's some reductions from many,
many particles to much smaller macroscopic descriptions that
work nicely, and some that don't.
So even though it in principle sounds very arbitrary,
in practice this gain in knowledge and understanding
that you get from moving to the macro level
is highly, highly constrained.
We don't know all the details of how it should work in general.
It's usually something where we know it when we see it,
which is not nearly satisfying enough.
We want to do better.
But there does not seem to be multiple incompatible
macroscopic descriptions of the same realistic underlying
stuff.
There might be in special circumstances,
but in the real world that doesn't seem to be a problem.
So I think there's an interesting issue
at the intersection of philosophy and physics
here about why that is the case, but in practice that really
does seem to be the case.
AUDIENCE: You spoke a little bit earlier about the Higgs field,
and when you excite it you get the Higgs boson.
And then you also mentioned that there might even
be a new particle on the horizon as we
add more and more energy to the systems
or simulate our collisions.
Do you foresee that we'll just keep
discovering that there's an infinite number of particles?
And actually I have an even more fundamental question,
which is what is the meaning of these particles that
exist almost for less than an instant?
SEAN CARROLL: Right.
And although these are good questions,
I don't think there are an infinite number of varieties
of particles.
This is just my guess.
What do I know?
We don't know is the only correct and humble thing
to say.
But I think that given the existence of gravity,
you can't have particles that are infinitely heavy.
They become black holes at some point.
So there's probably some finiteness
to a list of all the different kinds of particles
we can imagine having.
Sorry, what was the other question?
AUDIENCE: What was the point of those?
SEAN CARROLL: Oh, what's the point of them?
Oh, they're not a point.
They're just there.
Not everything needs to have a point.
Things can just be.
AUDIENCE: And how can you be so sure
that those pointless particles don't
have a point in our everyday existence?
SEAN CARROLL: Well, that's a good question.
In the six hour version of this talk
or in the book that you can buy right now, I explain why.
Basically there's different ways that other particles
could exist.
They could be so heavy that you need a $10 billion
particle accelerator to make them.
They could be so short lived that even if you bring them
into existence, they disappear almost instantly.
Or they could be so weakly interacting
that even if they were there, they would go right
through your body.
All these are ways that particles could have avoided
detection, but in every case, they
will not be interesting or useful in your everyday life.
They would not have a point.
AUDIENCE: But would they have a point to any important feature
or fact about the universe?
SEAN CARROLL: Yeah, they might play a role
in sort of understanding how the different forces of nature
unify at high energies or something like that.
But again, the idea that things have points
is not part of the fundamental nature of reality.
This level of meaning and purpose and causality
is a higher level emergent thing.
It's not something we have the right
to demand from the fundamental architecture of reality.
AUDIENCE: You mentioned that you were somewhat certain
that space was not a fundamental.
What gave you that certainty or what gave you that evidence?
SEAN CARROLL: So why do I think that space is more likely to be
nonfundamental than time?
For one thing, quantum mechanics intrinsically
treats time and space very differently.
The fundamental equation of quantum mechanics,
Schrodinger's equation, has time in it,
but it doesn't have space, in general.
So there's a chance that time really is fundamental just
for that reason.
The Schrodinger equation might not
be right, might not be the right description,
so that's why we are still not certain.
But there's at least a fighting chance.
Whereas space is just obviously not fundamental.
Space is something where, when you go from classical mechanics
to quantum mechanics, space more or less disappears.
In classical mechanics, what do you
have-- some particles moving through space
with some velocity.
In quantum mechanics, you have a wave function
of all those particles.
And that wave function, we tend to talk a language
that the wave function is a function of all the particles
in their locations in space.
But we don't have to talk that language.
We can use what is called the momentum space description.
We can completely describe the particles
by how fast they're moving instead of where
they are in the universe.
And for that matter, we don't need
to use any description at all.
We can just use these quantum mechanical states
in their own right, with no reference to space whatsoever.
So the kind of thing I'm doing right now
is trying to figure out ways to answer the question, someone
hands you a wave function, the quantum mechanical state.
Can you figure out what it is describing
at the classical level, how many particles moving,
what kind of dimensional space, et cetera?
So everything we know about quantum mechanics, quantum
gravity, et cetera, denigrates space
into something that is just a good approximation
of low energies.
Thank you.
[INAUDIBLE]