[music]
Brett McKay here and welcome to
[music] Brett McKay here and welcome to
another edition of the Art of Manliness
podcast. Even if you're not very into
jazz, you probably know Kind of Blue,
the jazz album that [music] sold more
copies than any other and is widely
considered one of the greatest albums
ever in any [music] genre. Among the sex
tet of musicians who played on the
album, three stand out as true jazz
geniuses. Miles Davis, Bill Evans, and
John [music] Col Train. Today on the
show, James Kaplan, author of Three
Shades of Blue, Miles Davis, John
[music] Col Train, Bill Evans, and the
Lost Empire of Cool, unpacks the stories
behind these towering [music] figures.
We discuss their background, their
demons, their passion for musical
greatness, and what they contributed
[music] to the evolving world of jazz.
And we discuss why when they got
together to record Kind of Blue, the
result was the most timeless and beloved
jazz album in history. After the show's
over, check out our show [music] notes
at aim.blue.
All right, James Kaplan, welcome back to
the show.
&gt;&gt; Brent, I am thrilled to be here. Thank
you for having me.
&gt;&gt; So, we had you on a few years ago to
talk about your biography of Frank
Sinatra. You got a new musical biography
out and it's about the artist who
created one of the most influential,
most popular jazz albums of all time and
that is Kind of Blue, headed up by Miles
Davis. What led you to take a deep dive
into the artist behind this album?
&gt;&gt; Well, truth be told, I had lunch with my
editor a few years back and we were
talking about what book I might do. I
had had a suggestion for a book idea
which went nowhere. I won't tell you
what it is, but he had he had a comeback
and his idea was uh what about a book
about Kind of Blue? And I loved Kind of
Blue and I had kind of blue and like so
many other people was crazy about the
album. But there is a wonderful jazz
writer named Ashley Khan who wrote the
definitive book about that album. But
it's it's more of a technical book and
more of a jazz book, strictly a jazz
book. And what occurred to me when my
editor Scott Moyers proposed this idea
was tickling around in the back of my
mind uh was this amazing amazing thing
that I had in my pocket Brett which was
that in 1989 when I was a young pup of a
reporter I snagged an incredible
assignment from Vanity Fair to go and
interview Miles Davis and this was on
the occasion of his about to be
publication of his new memoir then new
memoir called Miles. And I I wangled my
way into this uh interview. Actually, my
my brother helped me do it. My brother,
the late uh the late newspaper editor,
Peter W. Kaplan, editor, great editor of
the New York Observer, was talking to
this editor at Vanity Fair who was
looking around for a writer for Miles
Davis profile. And my brother, my
wonderful brother said, "Uh, well, my
brother Jimmy knows everything there is
to know about jazz." Uh, which was an
exaggeration to put it very mildly. I
knew nothing whatsoever. I had maybe
three jazz albums at that point. But
Vanity Fair sent me and with my knees
knocking and my heart thumping, I rode
up the elevator to the 17th floor of the
Essex House, Central Park South, New
York City, and walked into the apartment
of Miles Davis. And I was terrified
because his reputation preceded him. But
he turned out to be a total pussycat.
And despite the fact that I knew
absolutely nothing, I managed to get
through an hour talking with him and
then he asked me to come back. And so I
had the piece I did for Vanity Fair and
these years ago recordings I did with
the great Miles Davis. And I thought
when Scott, my editor, proposed this
book about Kind of Blue, I thought,
well, that's interesting, but what about
what about a book about the three
geniuses of Kind of Blue? There were six
musicians, but three of them arguably
geniuses,
Miles and John Cold Train and Bill
Evans. What about those three guys
before, during, and after the recording
of that great album? What about writing
about them as not only as musicians, but
as men? And Scott heard that, he loved
it. And we are off to the races.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I'm glad you went down that route
of doing a biography of these men
because I love reading biographies of
great musicians because I find it
incredibly inspiring. I know you did a
biography of Irving Berlin. Yeah. Yeah.
And Irving Berlin, the thing that
inspired me about him was how much of a
workhorse this guy was. He was just
cranking stuff out
&gt;&gt; all the time. And that was a big
takeaway for me. You know, a lot of
success in life, if you're a creative,
whether you're a writer, a musician,
it's just putting out a lot of stuff.
&gt;&gt; It's not just putting out a lot of
stuff, but it is having the courage to
fail. Irving Berlin wrote 1,500 songs,
and he liked to say, "I wrote more bad
songs than anyone." And it's true. He
wrote a lot of bad songs. And uh you
know John Lennon Paul McCartney wrote
bad songs and Miles Davis made bad
recordings. All these guys had sort of
artistic skeletons in their closet but
they all were incredibly hard workers.
Miles and Colin and Evans practiced and
practiced and practiced until their
fingers practically bled.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I I've been reading a biography of
Bach. That was another workhorse. That
guy was just constantly putting out
stuff and like you said he failed a lot.
We don't know about all his bad stuff
that he wrote, but he wrote a lot of bad
stuff, but we remember the good stuff.
&gt;&gt; His disco period, it's it's little note.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; All right. So, I think to understand
what makes Kind of Blue so singular, we
have to do a bit of jazz history. And
we're going to have to condense this.
It's going to be hard to do because jazz
is a very multiaceted art form, but I
think the short story is before the
1940s, jazz was primarily dance music.
you went to a jazz band so you could
dance to it, whether it was the
Charleston or the Lindy Hop or whatever.
&gt;&gt; But after World War II, you started to
see this shift away from jazz as dance
music to jazz as more of just an art in
and of itself. Who were the musicians
leading this shift away from jazz as
dance music? And what innovations did
they introduce?
&gt;&gt; Right. And the thing I really want to do
here, Brad, is I want to avoid any I
don't want to put anybody to sleep. I
don't want to talk about the snoozy
history of this or of that. What I would
like anybody listening to imagine is uh
I'd like them to think about the the
greatest rock musicians, the greatest
rap musicians they can think of. I want
you to think about young in this case uh
almost all young men. There were
certainly women in jazz but few. But I
want you to think about young guys,
primarily young black guys back in the
1930s. And this happened actually before
World War II and during World War II.
This new music called Bbop sprang up.
There was a recording ban uh for various
reasons. There was a strike during World
War II. And uh and so the origins of
Bbop didn't get recorded. But I'd like
you to think about these amazing young
black guys, brilliantly gifted guys like
uh the guitarist Charlie Christian, the
saxoponist Illinois jacket, Lionel
Hampton, the vibroonist, and in
particular trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie and
alto saxoponist Charlie Parker. Those
two guys, young men, really young, and
they're really like rock musicians. They
are full of juice and they're full of
innovations and they're coming up with
this new m music that's moving in a way
that's different to the way the jazz had
moved before. Different rhythms,
different harmonies, wild and kind of
angular. And these guys all played in
conventional big bands, swing bands
before the war. And they would get in a
certain amount of trouble with the band
leaders because they really wanted to
play this new style music. and the band
leaders were making their money off of
people dancing. So, there began to be
this kind of clash between these uh
young Turks and the old guard band
leaders. And what happened during World
War II was the big bands, the swing
bands, uh got phased out. A lot of it
had to do with wartime scarcity, no
gasoline, the bands couldn't afford to
tour, there wasn't enough money, the big
bands uh began to go out of business,
and suddenly there were the small bands
of these young Turks playing this crazy
new m music called Bbop.
&gt;&gt; I think that's an interesting point
about the impacts. We often don't think
about this when it comes to art. We just
think that, oh, an artist is just
they're alone in their head and they're
coming up with this stuff, but they're
being shaped by macro factors, right?
And the economic factors of the of the
depression and World War II that was
driving that I mean, if it weren't for
World War II and the depression, we
might not have had these innovations.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But we also need to think about
these musicians struck by genius as
though they had been actually hit by
pitchfork bolts of lightning. John Col
Train, Dizzy Gillespie, Charlie Parker,
Miles Davis, and Bill Evans. All guys
born in the 1920s coming up as young men
and loving the music, the jazz that
existed already, but full of their own
kind of weird ideas about where they
could take the music.
&gt;&gt; For those who aren't familiar with Bbop,
how would you describe it? How is it
different from, say, you know, a swing
song like In the Mood? How would you
describe that?
Uh well I would say that Bbop is to big
band swing music as cubism is to
impressionism maybe where you look at a
cubist you look at cubist paintings
great paintings of Picasso and Brock and
you're seeing something in the early n
very early 1900s something totally
different from anything that had ever
been done before you're seeing this
angular crazy looking stuff on canvases
and uh at the time people reacted
violently against it they just thought
it was nonsense and almost almost
sinful. It was so terrible looking to so
many people. It wasn't beautiful. A lot
of people had the a similar reaction to
Bbop when it came in. You had this new
music that was moving fast, that was
moving in a crazy way, that was being
played faster than jazz had ever been
played before that you couldn't dance
to, right? It had a beat, but you
couldn't dance to it. Yeah. Uh but but a
lot of young people and the people who
who weren't absolutely set on dancing
began to be fascinated by this new
music. They would stand and they would
listen in awe as Diz and Bird Charlie
Parker were playing these new Bbop songs
and it be Yeah. began to turn into art
music. began to turn into music that you
could, as Dizzy Gillespie said, you
don't necessarily have to dance to a
song to really feel it. Sometimes you
can hear a groove so strong it'll make
your back crack is what Dizzy said.
&gt;&gt; And yeah, Bbop heavy on the
improvisation, you know, swing, not so
much. You'd have a little bit, but it
was pretty much set. Bbop, a lot of
improvisation.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, Bbop was by definition improvised.
It was what they called head
arrangements. arrangements uh memorized
by the musicians and improvised on the
stand. And it was very small groups. It
was quartets, quintets, sex tets at at
the most, playing in these little tiny
clubs on 52nd Street, the street as it
was known. All these brownstones in the
one block between Fifth and Sixth Avenue
used to be speak easys turned into jazz
clubs in the 1940s.
And with these little tiny smoky clubs,
little tiny groups playing this wild new
music, you had you had a scene that had
never been seen before and never been
seen since. Bbop was really synonymous
with New York City and synonymous with
the street with 52nd Street.
&gt;&gt; And as you said, I think it's important
to to point out these guys, they're very
they're very driven. They're very
ambitious. And what's interesting about
jazz music, particularly Bbop, it is
collaborative, right? You're you're
you're working with the group, but at
the same time, it's almost it's almost
competitive, too. It was in it was
actually extremely competitive. These
guys were always trying to
&gt;&gt; Oh, outdo each other.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And a lot of that
began in Harlem at the great clubs, at
the Seavoy, at Mittens Playhouse with
Theonius Monk and Dizzy and and Bird and
Miles played up there and so many other
great musicians. And yes, absolutely.
There was this tradition called cutting.
And one musician is is playing up there
on the band stand. Another musician
would just jump up on there with the
same instrument a guy had been playing
and and play his own solo and try and
try and better him. And you could put
the other guy to shame if you played
better than he did. It was an accepted
tradition. And it was not battle of the
bands. It was battle of the players. And
it was Darwinistic. It determined who
was going to come out on top.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Sometimes those musical beefs
turned physical. They'd actually get
there'd be fist fights sometimes with
these guys.
&gt;&gt; It was all really physical. It was all
about sweat. It was about thrill. It was
about excitement. It was about this
music that nobody had ever heard before.
And it was powerful. It was sexy. It was
it was vital. It was brand new.
&gt;&gt; All right. So this period uh of the
development of Bbop jazz, this was the
period where Miles Davis and these other
musicians who eventually were on Kind of
Blue, this is when they came of age.
This is when they were this was the stew
they were in when they were in their
early 20s, right? When they're the
formative years.
&gt;&gt; Um
&gt;&gt; so I think we start exploring these
individual members of Kind of Blue.
Let's start with Miles Davis first. He's
the coolest of the cool when it comes to
jazz musicians. What's interesting
though is that his upbringing was more
affluent and conventional than a lot of
people might think.
&gt;&gt; Miles Miles was well off and there's no
two ways about it. Miles's father, uh,
Miles 2, Miles Davis that we know was
actually Miles 3, Miles Dwey Davis III.
Miles's father was a dentist and as such
he was a professional man, wellresected,
successful, made money, had a horse
farm. Miles uh Miles grew up as a young
prince. He rode horses at his father's
farm. He had beautiful clothes. He was a
handsome young kid and his his musical
genius was recognized early. Miles had a
kind of unique upbringing in that it was
so privileged, but at the same time,
Miles knew that he possessed this
strange and powerful gift of musical
genius, and he knew he had to take it
someplace. And the place he knew he had
to take it was New York City. He had to
get there somehow.
&gt;&gt; The way he got there, I think maybe this
is how he convinced his parents to get
him there as he was a student at the
famous Giuliard School of Music. He got
to Giuliard which is very about formal
music development. How did he go from
there to becoming this jazz musician
that we know today that just added all
these innovations to jazz? Miles's
father was very traditionalist and he
wanted to his son to succeed in a tra
traditional way, maybe even become a
classical musician. And so Miles came up
with this great strategy. The strategy
was, let me go to New York and enroll at
Giuliard and I will develop myself and
become an educated musician. Well, there
was a [laughter] there was a certain
amount of deception in this strategy.
What Miles really wanted was to get to
New York City and to hook up with to
connect with Dizzy and Bird. He had met
Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker in
St. Louis, Miles's hometown, when Bird
and Dizz came through playing with a
band, and he wanted to get back with
them, get to New York. So, he enrolls at
Giuliard. He goes to New York City in
1944. He's 18 years old. And after a
couple of months at Giuliard, everybody
around him is white. All the other
students are white. All the teachers are
white. And there was one day in
particular in a classroom when uh woman
who was teaching a class started talking
holding forth about the blues and saying
that black people sang and played the
blues because they picked cotton and
they were miserable and they were
downtrodden and they had been slaves.
And Miles finally couldn't stand it
anymore. and he stood up and he said,
"Listen, I play the blues. I'm not
downtrodden. I don't play the blues
because I'm downtrodden and this stuff
is all ridiculous." Miles felt that he
was learning from white people about
white music. And to a certain extent,
those lessons meant something to him. He
was studying the great modernists like
Stravinski and Shastikovich and
Rakmanov.
But Giuliard turned him off and he got
together with uh with Dizzy and Bird as
quickly as possible and very quickly got
hired by Charlie Parker to join his
band. An incredible thing. Here is this
young kid out of the Midwest who
everybody thought couldn't play that
well, but Bird heard something in Miles
and hires him and before long Miles is
playing great. Well, going back to this
idea of the ambition of these men, Miles
Davis, he was super ambitious. And the
way he got with Charlie Bird, like he
had to go look for him. He was
constantly he was on the prowl. He was
hitting the pavement trying to get in
touch with Charlie Bird Parker, which
just reminds me now when you when a lot
of young men are young, they're willing
to just go and just relentlessly pursue,
pursue, pursue, pursue, pursue until
they get what they want.
&gt;&gt; That's exactly right. I mean, there was
no no internet, no Google, no Google
Maps in those days. I mean, Charlie
Parker, who was a major heroin addict
and a major hedenist, was at large in
Manhattan, uh, uh, doing heroin,
drinking, having sex with many, many,
many women all over the place, there one
night, here another night, sleeping
wherever he felt like it. So, he wasn't
that easy to track down. and Miles
searched all over Midtown, searched the
street, went up to Harlem, searched all
over Harlem, couldn't find Bird. Then
one night, uh, he's he's standing
outside a jazz club and he hears a voice
in back of him and he said, "Hey, Miles,
you've been looking for me?" And it was
Bird. [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Did Miles Davis drop out of Giuliard?
&gt;&gt; He dropped out of Giuliard after Yeah.
Really? After one year, that was it for
Miles and and formal education. But but
he really did keep on educating himself
and he took some of the lessons from
Giuliard again listening to these great
modernists of western classical music
and the new harmonies uh they were
bringing to the music. Miles thought a
lot about that, listened to a lot of it.
So no more formal education but for
Miles from then on it was the education
of the band stand.
&gt;&gt; How did his father take him dropping?
Well, listen, another thing happened,
which was that after World War II, Miles
went to Europe, went to France to play
jazz, and found there a welcome that he
had never found in the United States.
Found white people who weren't seeing
him as a black man, but just as another
human being. Fell in love with this
great singer, Juliet Greco, but then had
to come back to the States and back to
being a secondass citizen. so depressed
by coming back to having to be a black
man in in the America of of 19 the late
1940s that he fell into a heroin
addiction and uh
[sighs and gasps] Miles and his father
Miles went back home uh more than once
more than twice actually to try and kick
heroin. His father helped him with this
and but eventually Miles had to do it
himself. Miles's father was
disappointed that he dropped out of
Giuliard. At the same time, Miles's
father understood that his son was a
great musician and a troubled young man.
He did his best to help Miles, but
again, in the end, Miles had to do it
himself.
&gt;&gt; Going back to Miles Davis's heroin
addiction, heroin is a character that
keeps reoccurring, reappearing in your
your history. What was going on? Why was
heroin such a heavily used drug amongst
jazz musician during this time period?
&gt;&gt; Before World War II, the drugs of choice
among jazz musicians had been two. They
had been marijuana and a lot of songs
about reefer in jazz prior to World War
II and alcohol of course and a lot of
musicians suffered from alcoholism and
even died from alcoholism. During World
War II and especially immediately
thereafter a lot of heroin came into the
United States. A lot of this had to do
with organized crime. Suddenly there
were pushers pushing heroin on jazz
musicians.
And then there was Charlie Parker. And
Charlie Parker was the biggest heroin
addict uh of of all of jazz music. He
was also a transcendent musical genius.
And this awful myth arose that among
musicians, among young, black, and some
white jazz musicians, that if you wanted
to play like bird, you had to do like
bird. In other words, if you used
heroin, maybe you could achieve that
transcendent high of musicianship that
Charlie Parker achieved. And it was a
myth. It was this terrible falsehood and
a lot of a lot of guys died. But uh
heroin addiction became widespread in
jazz uh right after World War II and
stayed for about the next 15 years.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. the way you described it, the the
use I mean with Charlie Bird, he would
sometimes just be like passed out on the
stand and then when it was his turn to
do his solo, he'd just get up and just
crank it out like nothing was wrong and
then just
&gt;&gt; he was a phenomenon. He was an absolute
absolute phenomenon. He was a big strong
guy. He had the constitution of a horse.
But even in the end, Charlie Parker uh
couldn't overcome heroin. He didn't die
of overdose, but he really died of
overuse of heroin. He died in 1955
at age 34. And when the coroner came uh
to examine his corpse, he estimated
Charlie Parker's age as the mid50s. 34
years old.
&gt;&gt; Wow. So with Miles's heroin addiction,
he goes from making it, becoming part of
Charlie Bird's band, he becomes a
success. Then he starts heroin and goes
to being totally unreliable, nodding off
on the stand when he was playing. when
he did show up, his hair would just and
clothes would just be a mess. And that
was a big change because before that, he
took a lot of pride in his appearance.
And sometimes he just didn't even show
up to gigs. I mean, he pretty much
basically almost flushed his career down
the toilet. But he did finally go cold
turkey on heroin, though he did continue
to use cocaine and alcohol throughout
his life. And and that was partly, you
know, I think partly to deal with some
of the pain he had because he had um
cickle cell anemia. And he's also just
really brooding throughout his life. You
know, people called him the prince of
darkness. But when he put heroin behind
him, he he became a more reliable
artist.
We're going to take a quick break before
words from our sponsors.
And now back to the show. So when Davis
finally kicked her, this is when he
started making a lot of the innovations
to jazz that he's famous for. during
this time of the 50s when he starts
developing what's been called cool jazz.
How would you describe cool jazz and
then how did the jazz community
initially receive these innovations?
&gt;&gt; Miles knew a guy named Gil Evans, this
brilliant arranger and conductor from
Canada who Miles met on the street on
52nd Street. And in Gil Evans, he found
a kind of uh a musical co-equal, a guy
who loved the same kind of jazz and the
same kind of modern western classical
that Miles loved. And Miles loved this
guy. And they formed this very tight
bond of friendship and musical
friendship. And Miles and Gil Evans
started to create this music together.
Gil Evans was arranging this music. A
lot of people were writing arrangements,
were writing songs for for a new kind of
jazz that involved a lot of a lot of
musicians, sometimes as many as eight or
nine or 10 or more orchestras, but
charts, written arrangements, and a kind
of jazz that was something similar to
what came to be known as third stream.
It was almost a marriage of western
classical and jazz written down on
charts. And the initial recordings that
would later come to be called the birth
of the cool were done by Miles in
conjunction with Gil Evans and were
received early on. There's no other word
but but to say coolly. They were not met
with warm affection by jazz m musicians
or by the public. The records didn't
sell at first. They weren't even called
the birth of the cool at first. And in
particular, Dizzy Gillespie was kind of
scathing about this new arranged
classical sounding jazz. He said that
jazz was really meant to make you sweat.
I don't know if I can say this. I'll say
it anyway. Jazz was supposed to make you
sweat in your balls. And this music
didn't make you sweat in your balls.
Dizzy wanted a music that was improvised
and not written down on charts or if it
was written down on charts, something
that really had the power to, as he said
earlier, to to make your back crack to
to be a strong groove. These were not
strong grooves. They were smoother. They
were cooler. And so it was a different
branch of jazz, and it was an important
branch of jazz, but not received warmly
at first. Did it eventually get warmly
received?
&gt;&gt; It eventually became called the birth of
the cool and cool jazz and it was much
admired by West Coast musicians Jerry
Mulligan, Chad Baker went out to the
west coast uh became West Coast Jazz and
uh which became uh very very popular.
Dave Breubck out there. Cool jazz
achieved its own success during the
1950s and especially after the fading of
Bbop which really happened with the
death of Charlie Parker in 1955.
&gt;&gt; How did Miles Davis handle the cool
reception to his innovation? Like you
know Dizzy Glepsy and these all the
other guys like he admired them when he
was a young man. How do you feel like oh
I got this new thing and everyone's like
this is not good.
&gt;&gt; Well he was playing both sides of the
street. He was playing the cool jazz and
he was playing his own his own quintet
and sex jazz, coming up with these great
new innovations in jazz. As Bbop was
starting to eb, a new kind of jazz was
rising up and Miles not only was
creating cool jazz, but he was one of
the innovators of what came to be called
hard bop. Now hard bop in a certain way
means absolutely nothing. What's hard
about it? What's bop about it? It was a
new kind of jazz that was much more
soulful, much more based on uh on
gospel, on blues. People like Horus
Silver, for example, came up. Art Blakey
and the jazz messengers. It was a jazz
that was
unlike Bbop, which was like cubism. This
was more deeply felt. It was more
emotional. It was more bluesy. It was
kind of a return to swinging and maybe
you could even dance to a lot of it. So
Miles was innovating both ways. And when
you ask what his reaction was, Miles
never particularly gave a about
what anybody's reaction was to his
music, Miles went his own way at all
times, constantly innovating. And what
was his work ethic like? Was he just
constantly performing as much as he
could? Is that how he approached these
innovations? like did the innovations
come in practice or did they really come
out when he performed live?
&gt;&gt; Miles was a guy I'll tell you I'll tell
you a little story about Miles. Miles
once was uh on the road with his quintet
and he heard late at night in the hotel.
He heard one of his musicians practicing
be behind behind the door of his hotel
room. Miles bangs on the door and barges
into this guy's room and he says to this
guy, "I pay you to practice on the band
stand, not in your room." Miles wanted
spontaneity. Now, this may sound
paradoxical. He worked with Gil Evans on
these arranged charts that were the
birth of the cool, but in the music that
he played with his groups, with his
small groups on the band stand, he
wanted everybody to be finding new ways
right on the band stand. So he had
perfected his technique through playing
thousands upon thousands of hours. Miles
wasn't one to woodshed as much as Bill
Evans for example or as John Cold Train.
John Cold Train was an insane incessant
practicer, but Miles treasured
spontaneity above all things.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So, another artist that played on
Kind of Blue was the pianist Bill Evans.
Another one of my favorite musicians. I
got his album Portrait in Jazz. I I love
listening to it. What was his background
as a musician?
Bill Evans was a glassesswearing white
guy from New Jersey who could have been
and maybe should have been in some ways
a great classical pianist. He studied
classical piano. He loved classical
piano. He had amazing technique. But
something else happened when he was a
teenager. He fell head over heels in
love with jazz. And this is uh in the
1940s. Bill Evans is hearing all this
all these great new sounds in jazz,
falls in love with them. He goes to
college to study classical music, but at
the same time he has also even before he
goes to college, he has turned himself
into the fastest boogie woogie player in
New Jersey. He keeps up this romance
with jazz. He keeps playing jazz even as
he is studying classical music in
college. and finally when he is in his
mid20s
uh decides to go to New York and he's
going to make it in jazz or he is going
to die trying. If he doesn't make it,
he's just going to have to go home. He
plays a lot of dances and weddings, bar
mitzvah the way all jazz musicians have
to do to make a dime when they're coming
up. And one night, Bill Evans had a gig
at the Village Vanguard, great jazz club
in Greenwich Village. There was a famous
group at the time called the modern jazz
quartet who were playing the vanguard
and Bill Evans was the in between
player. When the modern jazz quartet
were taking a break, Bill Evans would
would play piano in between. When the
modern jazz quartet were playing, the
the the whole club would go dead silent,
reverent, listening to modern jazz
quartet. When Bill Evans would start
playing in between, everybody started
eating and drinking and clinking glasses
and plates. Anyway, one night Bill Evans
is playing his in between piano and he
looks down at the end of the grand piano
and there is the penetrating gaze of
Miles Davis staring at him. Miles is
looking at Evans. He's listening. He's
taking it in. He's hearing things he had
never heard before in jazz piano. And a
few months later, Miles hires Evans.
&gt;&gt; What did Davis see in Evans? What was
Evans doing that caught his attention?
Evans, despite the fact that he looked
like this nerd from New Jersey, was
bringing harmonies and textures out of
modern western classical, out of
Stravinsky, out of Shastikovich, out of
Rakmanov
that nobody had brought to jazz before.
Miles had genius ears and he was hearing
in Evans a kind of jazz piano that Miles
felt he that was brand new and Miles
really wanted to bring into his group.
&gt;&gt; Evans talked about how he really wanted
to bring feeling into his piano. Like he
wanted you to feel something when he
played and the way he played he'd just
kind of like hunch over his head down.
You could tell he was really trying to
bring in the emotion to the piano.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Evans deeply felt all that he
played. He deeply loved the western
classical that had informed his jazz
playing and he wouldn't he couldn't
perform unless he was in a kind of
emotional revery. Unfortunately, the
thing that happened as soon as Evans
joined Miles band, there was a huge
backlash. Suddenly, in the biggest small
jazz group in the United States, in the
most successful small jazz group in the
United States, there was a white guy
among black players and among black
audiences and among black jazz
musicians, a great backlash against
Evans. It was psychically
extremely damaging to Evans. He was he
was a highly sensitive guy. Miles
reassured him, but at the same time,
Miles had a way of continuing to to haze
Bill Evans. Miles Miles had a sense of
humor. Somebody once asked Miles what
his hobby was, and Miles said, "Making
fun of white people on TV." Miles liked
to make fun of Evans, too. Sometimes
when Evans would hazard a musical
opinion, Miles would say, "We don't want
no white opinions here." But Miles also
deeply respected Evans as as a musician.
And Miles used to say he didn't care
what color his musicians were. So Evans
had these conflicting forces working. He
was accepted uh by Miles unbelievably by
the great Miles Davis.
And Evans set about as soon as he joined
Miles's band. Evans set about turning
himself into the biggest junkie in
Miles's band. And even though Miles
wasn't using heroin anymore, some of his
other musicians were. and Evans joined
them and then surpassed them as a heroin
user. And this had unfortunately a huge
effect on Evans's music, on his life, on
his career, and it shortened his life.
He died at age uh at age 51 in 1980.
&gt;&gt; So, was Evans using heroin as a way to I
don't know, kind of be accepted? Was
that what he maybe was thinking?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I mean, it was sort of a corollary
of the of the bird rule, right? to to to
play like bird, you have to do like
bird. It was this ridiculously
conformist idea that Evans picked up on.
If you're going to be a hip jazz
musician, you got to do heroin. And it
was insane. It was crazy. But it got him
a kind of acceptance among musicians
that he had never had when he was the
nerd wearing glasses from New Jersey.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. That maybe it's a lesson even
amongst groups who consider themselves
iconoclast or non-conformist. There
still is going to be a sense of
conformity that you have to be aware of.
Okay. Another musician that played on
kind of blue was John Colrin. We've been
talking about him a little bit
throughout this conversation. What made
him such an amazing saxophone player?
&gt;&gt; Well, again, it's that bolt of
lightning. It's the same thing with
Sinatra walking around Hoboken at age 12
and hearing the music of the spheres.
There's young John Cold Train growing up
in North Carolina. and then uh and then
Philadelphia walking around and sensing
some kind of genius in himself that he
was too shy. He was a deeply shy, deeply
reserved uh very very modest human
being. So he was conflicted. He was
conflicted. He had a terribly sad uh
childhood, boyhood and early and young
manhood. He lost his father when he was
very young, which was terribly painful
to him and some other important male
relatives. And so he became sad. He
became withdrawn. He went within
himself. He knew he had this musical
talent. He wasn't sure exactly what to
do with it. The thing he mainly did was
practiced and practiced and practiced.
He would play his saxophone. Everybody
said, everybody who knew him as a kid,
as a teenager, as a young man would talk
about, they would hear him practicing
behind closed doors at all hours. And if
anybody complained, Col Train would sit
on his bed and practice the fingering of
his saxophone. So an insane
overpracticer,
but he was also so modest that he began
to play in bands that were beneath him
really playing R&amp;B, walking the bar. And
he didn't really come out of himself,
emerges as himself until he was
recognized, until he was seen and heard
by Miles Davis.
&gt;&gt; And Col Train, he made a lot of
innovations to jazz. as soon as he was a
as soon as Cold Train was able to to rid
himself of the need to imitate Charlie
Parker. And there was a whole
generation, dozens upon dozens of
saxoponists
who needed to rid themselves of the
towering mountainlike influence of
Charlie Park. As soon as soon as Col
Train was able to find his own voice, he
found a way of playing saxophone again,
as Miles said, louder and faster than
anybody else. And then beginning to
explore chords, beginning to explore
music in a way nobody had, even Charlie
Parker had never explored before.
playing tunes in a way that uh that
didn't necessarily go with the way
people had heard these songs before.
When you listen to Charlie Parker play,
when you listen to a great saxoponist
like Dexter Gordon play, they were so
wonderful, so beautiful. Sunonny Rollins
too, they would often quote from uh from
popular songs of the day or other jazz
songs. One thing I say about Col Train
was that Col Train only quoted from God.
He heard things and played things nobody
had played before.
&gt;&gt; All right. So in 1959 all these guys
synced up along with Cannonball Adlay to
&gt;&gt; and and Cannonball I just want to
interject.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So on Kind of Blue you had not just
these three geniuses Miles and Train and
Evans but you had three other great
players. You had Cannonball Atly and you
had Paul Chambers great basist who died
tragically young. I think 36 years old
again heroin. You had Jimmy Cobb, great
drummer. Cannon Boladderly was a
terrific musician, terrific alto
saxophone player who was soulful in a
way that Col Train was the great
experimenter. And Cannonball was the
great soul player. And Cannonball was
itching to go out on his own and and
lead his own band. And very soon after
Kind of Blue would do exactly that. Uh
you may remember the the terrific jazz
standard Mercy Mercy Mercy. That was
Cannonball's song and that that's a clue
of what Cannonball brought to the music.
But six great musicians on the album.
&gt;&gt; So they all came together and they
produced kind of blue. It's considered a
day to be, you know, modal jazz the way
they describe it. How would you describe
modal jazz and what kind of blue is?
&gt;&gt; Well, again, I don't want anybody to to
snooze on us. Don't want anybody to go
to sleep. Modal jazz sounds
mathematical. It sounds academic. It
sounds I don't know. What Miles wanted
to do was something nobody had done in
jazz before. Jazz from the time of its
formation at the turn of the 19th into
the 20th century all the way up to 1959.
Jazz had been full of chords. It had
been uh blues chords or it had been
based on songs of the American song
book, standard tunes, T for two and
stuff like that. And what you had was
music that was based on a lot of chords
and it was beautiful. But Miles was
restless. He was a restless artist. He
was restless his whole life. He was
always throwing off styles. He was
throwing off friends. He was throwing
off lovers. Always changing. And Miles
wanted to create something brand new and
very very simple. And so he wanted to
throw out all these chords. and he had
gone to a performance of le ballet
African African ballet where they were
playing all these African instruments
and he was he was enchanted by it and he
was enchanted by the music too a lot of
which was calima African finger piano
and so it was a whole different style of
music a whole different sound of music
and it wasn't based on chords it was
based on just a couple of chords and so
Miles had this idea of creating an album
that would be more about just a chord or
two. Sometimes just one chord for bar
upon bar of the music with people
improvising over that single chord or
maybe just two chords as in the great
lynchpin of kind of blue. The greatest,
arguably one of the greatest jazz tunes
ever recorded. So what So what is just
two chords? Listen to it. one chord,
then another chord, and you have these
amazing improvisations, including
Miles's, over just these two chords.
Miles wanted something that was quieter
and simpler.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. In the back of Kind of Blue, the
jacket, Bill Evans wrote this thing
called improvisation in jazz. And he
talks about the making of Kind of Blue.
And he said that basically Miles David
had this had this basic framework that
he wanted to to have, but he conceived
of these settings only hours before the
recording dates and arrived with
sketches which indicated to the group
what was to be played. And then he says,
Bill Evans says, "Therefore, you will
hear something close to pure spontaneity
in these performances." And and an
amazing thing about Kind of Blue and and
it's hard to wrap your head around, but
every full take on Kind of Blue was a
first take. And I'm going to say that
again. Every full take on the album was
a first take. So totally spontaneous and
yeah, built on these tiny little
sketches. Miles would bring in a piece
of paper, not even staff paper, not even
music paper, but just a piece of regular
white paper with a few notes drawn on it
and show it to the guys. And these,
again, Miles was somebody who really
needed anybody who played with him to be
able to instantly get it and to
improvise beautifully right on the band
stand. And somehow, you know, Bill Evans
later said, "Every musician uh has
recorded dozens of times. You never
know. You go into a recording studio on
a Wednesday morning and you never know
what's going to come out of it.
Something good, something bad, something
great. Maybe nobody knew walking into
this these two sessions for Kind of Blue
that greatness would result. Somehow or
other, lightning struck and these six
guys all came together, all got in this
incredible groove together and played
these historic first takes. Is that why
you think Kind of Blue is endured? Like
I I never get tired of listening thing
this thing. And I think it's because
it's all first takes like when you
listen to it, you think like you just
feel like I'm listening to something
that's never never happened before and
never happened.
&gt;&gt; Never happened before, never happened
again. It's it it's really hard to say,
Brett. There's something very mysterious
about it. Going back to Sinatra for a
second again, you listen to Sinatra. I
listen to Sinatra as annoyed with him as
I can get sometimes
for all kinds of reasons. The guy always
gives me goosebumps. What is it that's
giving me goosebumps about Sinatra? What
is it about Kind of Blue that gives you
goosebumps? There's a mystery to it.
There's a mystery to this album. There's
something about this album that you
can't there's a quiet what I call it I
call a quiet majesty to kind of blue
that you can't put your finger on. It's
it's really hard to define, but it's the
bestselling jazz album of all time and
arguably the best loved. Why is that?
There's just this quiet to it and this
mystery that just puts you in a
different place. It takes you to a
different place.
&gt;&gt; And what I love about Kind of Blue, you
have to listen to the whole thing. It's
not one of those things where you can
just listen to songs by You could, but
to get the full effect of it, you have
to listen to the thing in its entirety.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And you have to and you want to.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So they make this singular
album. What happened to these guys after
they made kind of blue?
&gt;&gt; The three guys of my book all wanted to
go out in different directions. Miles
had already of course led many of his
own groups and would continue to do so.
Col Train Col Train very much wanted to
become a leader and very quickly became
one. One month after finishing Kind of
Blue, Col Train recorded the great
transformational album Giant Steps with
that amazing number on it, Giant Steps,
and very soon thereafter would make a
Love Supreme and other great albums and
become this pivotal iconic, it's an
overused word, [laughter]
but there's nobody like Cold Train. Cold
Train wanted to be Cold Train. He loved
playing with Miles, but he wanted to be
Cold Train. And he had to be and Evans
had to be Evans. Evans went out. He
wanted to play trios, piano trios. He
did that for the rest of his short
career. Some would argue that Evans
didn't go as far musically, artistically
as Miles or Cold Train did. Some have
argued otherwise. One of the great
musicians I interviewed for my book was
John Batist. And John Batist talked
about an amazing album that Evans
recorded called Conversations with
Myself. What did Evans do? He double
tracked. He played uh piano and then on
another track he played along with
himself playing piano. And John Batist
argued that's a real innovation. So
Evans didn't play music, he never played
music that was difficult to understand.
He felt deeply. He played beautifully
lyrical music for the rest of his
career. But it was a lyrical music
unlike piano music that other people
were playing. So they they all needed to
go in their own directions.
&gt;&gt; And did Miles Davis continue to try to
push the envelope with jazz
&gt;&gt; constantly? That's all [laughter] he
ever did was push the envelope. But the
thing the thing about Miles was that
Miles loved to sell records. Miles loved
money. He loved living the good life. He
loved having Ferraris and he loved fine
wine, beautiful women, great art. He
loved having his own big apartment on
the Upper West Side. He loved all the
things that money could buy. And so he
had to sell a lot of records to do that.
So he was always looking out for
commercial opportunity. And when rock
and roll music upset jazz's apple cart
and then some, it really dropped an
atomic bomb into jazz in the early
1960s. night of February 9th, 1964, the
Beatles play Ed Sullivan and that was
the end of jazz. Really, in many ways,
really jazz started dying that night.
Miles had to find a way forward. And so,
one of the ways he found forward was
something that came to be known as
fusion. It was a combination, a blending
of jazz and and rock and roll, electric
instruments, electronic instruments,
electric guitar, electric piano,
electric organ. And a lot of people
hated it. A lot of jazz purists hated
it. But Miles recorded Brew,
which was another huge success for
Columbia Records and for Miles Davis.
Miles found a way forward commercially,
which wasn't always popular with the
gate guardians of jazz.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I've heard fusion jazz was jazz's
last stitch effort to make jazz popular
again.
Well, that's one way of putting it, but
I would say that a lot of it holds up.
You listen to Brew today and
it's a powerful album. You listen to
that beautiful, beautiful album feedro
of Miles Davis with a lot of electronic
instrumentation on it and that is
gloriously lyrical music with with a lot
of electric and electronic uh
instruments on it that holds up. So,
some of it holds up and jazz just uh it
changed. It transmogrified throughout
the 1960s.
Unfortunately, for jazz, a lot of what
happened in American culture impacted
jazz. It was not only rock and roll
music that beat jazz down, but it was
the fragmentation of American culture.
In 19 in the 1950s, Miles Davis was an
American superstar. You could go up to a
student on a Midwestern college campus
and say Miles Davis and they would know
who you were talking about and they
would like jazz and they would think
jazz was hip and jazz was the music of
the future.
What happened in the 60s and 70s and 80s
and then when the internet came in was
the fractionalization of American
culture. We became an a nation of 10,000
tribes. And so jazz continues to exist
but today it's niche music like so many
other kinds of music and it has its
passionate adherence and it has its
geniuses. There are great jazz players
today and singers today. people like
Robert Glasper and people like uh Jazz
May Horn, Espironza Spalding, Aaron
Deal, Brad Melddow, all these wonderful,
wonderful vocalists, instrumentalists,
but jazz is, you know, in 1957,
everybody in the United States would
know who Duke Ellington, Louisie
Armstrong, Ella Fitzgerald, Miles Davis
were. How many people today uh know who
I I I'm not going to name any musicians
I just named because I just named them.
But they're wonderful musicians. They're
great musicians, but they are known to
the comparatively few who love jazz
these days.
&gt;&gt; Are these musicians today who are
playing, are they innovating like Miles
Davis did, or have we reached the edges
of innovation in jazz and now it's just
we're perfecting it? It's kind of like
classical music. Like there's not really
much innovation going on. We're just
perfecting what's there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I don't think it's ever possible
within your time to know exactly where
you are. I think it's really only
possible years and decades afterwards to
know where the music is going. And so,
as an example, where Col Train went
after Giant Steps and after Love
Supreme, he began playing up and down
these chords into reaches of chords that
nobody had heard before. And people,
even jazz afficionados who had loved
Cold Train's music, began to get very
impatient with him and feel this music
is too difficult to listen to anymore.
And then people like Ornet Coleman and
and Cecil Taylor came in playing what
was then called free jazz. And this was
jazz that didn't even have any chord
structure. There were no melodies
anymore. It sounded to so many people
just like a lot of noise. It was one of
the things that drove a lot of people
away from jazz, but in retrospect, a lot
of people think it's great music. Is
anybody doing anything like that today?
I would say that you have people doing
things today that may fall with
difficulty on some ears, but I think
it's going to take a long time before we
know before it all gets sorted out.
&gt;&gt; Well, James, it's been a great
conversation. Where can people go to
learn more about the book and your work?
&gt;&gt; Ah, well, they can go to my website,
jamescaplan.net. They can go to uh to
Penguin Press's website and uh they can
go to your terrific podcast, this
terrific conversation we had right here,
Brett.
&gt;&gt; Fantastic. Well, James Kaplan, thanks
for your time. It's been a pleasure.
&gt;&gt; My pleasure, too.
&gt;&gt; My guest here is James Kaplan. He's the
author of the book Three Shades of Blue.
It's available on Amazon.com and
bookstores everywhere. You can find more
information about his work at his
website, jamescaplan.net.
Also, check out our show notes at
a./blue,
where you find links to resources. We
delve deeper in this topic and make sure
you give Kind of Blue a listen. It's a
great album. It's available in full on
Spotify. Check it out.
[music]
Well, that wraps up another edition of
the AM podcast. Make sure to check out
our website at arttomanley.com where you
find our podcast archives. [music] And
while you're there, sign up for our
newsletter. We got a daily option and a
weekly option. They're both free. It's
the best way to stay on top of what's
going on at [music] AOM. And if you
haven't done so already, I'd appreciate
if you take one minute to get us on a
podcast or Spotify. It helps out a lot.
And if you've done that already, thank
you. Please consider sharing [music] the
show with a friend or family member who
you think would get something out of it.
As always, thank you for your continued
support. Until next [music] time, it's
Brett McKay reminding you how to listen
to podcast, but put what you've heard
into action.
[music]