Greetings. I just want to welcome the
Facebook family. This is Dr. Kamal Kokai
here, the multi-dimensional healing
collective. And perhaps some of you all
were just on my um radio um program,
Quantum Wellness, with Dr. Andrew
Marino. and we were talking about
looking at the reality of of where we're
at right now with respect to addressing
the needs of of human beings in terms of
how we address ourselves, how we deal
with our biology, what's real, what's
scientific, what's worthy of study. and
we both come to the same conclusion that
things have kind of gone left with
respect to um you know how we're
actually proceeding to move forward and
what we're calling a reductionistic
paradigm right so my guest Dr. Andrew
Marino has been is the premier
researcher on looking at low-level
electromagnetic fields the effect of on
um human biology has done more
publishing in that area who's somebody
whose work greatly has influenced my
career and the path that I chose and uh
you know as I said on the radio program
I was so happy to discover that um he
was still here lecturing in the same way
that I discovered that my thesis advisor
is still around who went on to set up a
laboratory of human potential in Phoenix
and we've had conversations but Dr.
Marino. Um, welcome to our Facebook page
and let's just pick up the conversation
because you are using your your
scholarship to really document what
happened and why don't you talk a little
bit about that and where you feel that
we're at at this point.
Well, um I I spent uh 50 50 years
working uh full-time in um biomedical
research. Um after I got my degree in
physics, uh um I I stayed with a seminal
line of research that began with Robert O. Becker uh who asked the simple question
um about
um about about living systems. How do
they work? How does bone heal? How is it
bone can uh uh uh heal? uh uh uh the
injury is sensed, bone grows,
bone is laid down, uh too much bone is
laid down, it's remodeled. And when you
go back and look histoologically, you
can't find anything that's
uh uh different than normal. It's a
perfect replica. It actually
regenerated. Um he started asking
questions about how that's controlled.
Uh it it it can't be it can't be
biochemistry. biochemistry is involved
but biochemistry isn't a control system.
What turns it on and off? Um then he
expanded his interest to uh
regeneration. Why is it we can cut off a
limb of a salamander and it grows a new
limb? Uh a frog which is one step up
phoggenetically. You cut off a frog's
leg and you wind up with a frog with a
stump. Why why did the ability to
regenerate tissue stop? uh he he he
began a series of um studies in the
early 60s.
Uh decided electromagnetic energy was
key. Uh he wanted a a physicist that to
help him. Uh we did a deal with my my
mentor. I was a first year graduate
student. uh I was hired into his lab and
I began performing experiments uh to
help uh um put a scientific foundation
under his theories. He was very very
famous guy in the 60s his a series of
seven or eight papers he published in in
the most prestigious scientific journals
in the world science becker right Dr.
Robert O. Becker made great great progress.
Uh um uh and uh and and we started using
electrical energy for growing bone uh
and some of his colleagues immediately
formed a company and started selling
getting FDA approval and selling devices
using electrical energy to grow bone. He
thought that was wrong that they ought
to study side effects
first. That's what a physician do no
harm to find.
uh and I started then he gave me the
responsibility for doing studies to see
if it did any harm. So I simulated the
electromagnetic energy environment in
the laboratory and exposed animals and
got adverse effects. Uh Dr. Becker sent
that result to uh uh power companies and
the government uh and the power
companies the government ignored us and
the power companies said go to hell. You
don't know what you're talking about.
Wow. Wow. There was no way to talk to
me. Uh and my life went off in that
direction for the next 50 years. Uh
fueled in that direction. Dr. Becker got
terminated uh at the end of the 70s uh
by the National Academy of Sciences and
its role uh in interfering with VA
research. Uh but I uh uh I had the
greatest job in the world at that time
and I the lab closed. So I I found a
medical school in Louisiana and I got
the best job in the world that existed
at that time and held it from 1981 to
2014. All following that that line of
showing that electromagnetic energy was
biologically active, that it was
important, that it produced effects in
animals. and then understanding how how
the laws of physics could permit it
because the guys from industry were
hired to say it was impossible. I showed
it was possible and then I got into
human studies and then I did the final
definitive experiment a month before I
retired in 2014. That's the way the
whole thing went. Right? So, so here we
are and you know as I explained on the
radio program because human beings are
suffering in general from a
consciousness deficit disorder where the
focus becomes more of what an individual
wants to do or has the power to do even
though it might harm or have a negative
impact on the environment or on other
human beings because they have the
wherewithal to do it. they just go ahead
and do it. So, and we see that in so
many areas of of human, you know, of
human life. But clearly in the medical
field, um, when you go back and you, you
know, as you were saying that some of
that initial research is looking at why
salamander can regenerate and why a
person, human beings can't regenerate,
right?
um it becomes very interesting in terms
of the
application of these um electromagnetic
fields and what to do with them. Right?
So the fact that all of that research
was cut off at least looking at the
harmful effects of electromagnetic
fields, right? in terms of the benefits,
you know, has anything continued, you
know, in your mind that's worthy of of
scientific consideration?
Listen, that we got got cut off is not
just research into harmful effects.
Every time I published an article
showing harmful effect, uh the industry
went out and hired somebody at Battel
Northwest or one of these research for
hire places and they rigged an
experiment uh to show that I was wrong.
And I and I have the whole story because
I got a uh vice president Manddale told
the department of energy to send me the
information I wanted and I saw all the
in
the correspondents that went back uh uh
back and forth rigging the experiments
against me. Uh it's just not it's just
not
um harmful results that are rigged by
industry. Let me make it clear to you.
It's all studies involving
electromagnetic energy. The pursuit of
studying cybernetic systems in the body.
The idea of studying the role of
electromagnetic energy with the
exception of the well well understood
huxley model of nerve flow which we have
known since
1956. With that exception, no studies
are funded by the government. the the
the rule is we shall not fund those
studies because they are
non
reductionistic. Uh so it's all studies
involving electromagnetic energy, not
just the bad part, anything at all, the
good part. So let's just um let's just
break that down a bit for people because
we're saying anything that's
nonreductionistic, right? So in other
words, that's saying that unless it's
just a carefully controlled, I would say
leftrain way of looking at something
where, you know, it's a logical pattern
as opposed to something that's more
open-ended and just exploring. Well,
what does this mean? No, no, no. I I I
certainly don't mean to imply that.
Everything I did was rigorously
scientific. No, I I get that. Okay.
Everything was a controlled study. The
question is what kind of studies are you
going to do? Are you going you can do a
reductionistic study and study
biochemistry or you can do a non-
reductionistic uh study and study or uh
uh uh control uh uh one is focused on
mechanisms. The other is focused on on
on explaining how something that we
observe takes place and documenting
theories about how it uh it can take
place but but not based on biochemical
explanations based on cybernistic
cybernetic explanations. It's a
different approach to biology.
I understand you're right that that is a
different approach. So within that I saw
that part of one of the positions or
work that you've done is in cybernetics
right and how much progress were you
able to make before like the door was
closed? Uh uh well I I I I stayed on the
narrow course of uh um making the point
that the human body detected
electromagnetic fields such as ones come
from power lines and human body detected
electromagnetic energy that comes from
cell phones. I I proved it with a
controlled study mathematical rigor p
less than05 and all on human beings all
published in journals. That's as far as
I could take it. Uh beyond that, it's
it's time for the next guy to step in.
My career, too. Well, let me ask you,
given that the the potential harmful
effects that um that these low-level
electromagnetic fields in general can
have, are you aware of any technologies
that from your perspective are
worthwhile for people to invest in
relative to protecting themselves from
smart meters and things of that nature?
Now, now look, look look um
electromagnetic energy uh man-made
electromagnetic energy is a stressor.
It's a biological
stressor. You don't have to be much of a
physician or you don't have to be
skilled in the knowledge of Hans's work
to understand that stress taxes the
body's adaptive system and and and
increases the rate of disease. Uh uh so
the the way to deal with it is to
minimize stress. Uh some people um are
uh uh exposed to electromagnetic energy
if they're going to do that because they
just just and they're not going to
separate and give up their cell phone.
The only rational strategy is to
minimize stressors in other area of
their of their life because cell phones
are here forever. They're never going to
go away. uh and they're never going to
get explained and and and understood
because research to do that can't be
done. It's the companies certainly
aren't going to do it and the government
certainly isn't going to do it. Uh so
the response is be prudent, minimize
your exposure to stressors so that
you're removing taxes on your adaptive
capacity and you'll live longer and be
healthier. So what I tell folks there um
um as medicine has progressed and gone
through different stages within the
alternative medical field, you have
something called functional medicine
where there's all kind of testing where
they can really document the level of
oxidative stress on the body, the level
of of chronic inflammation and begin to
use things that counter that. Now, what
I would say is that um and we won't get
into particular therapies and things,
but given that um we're dealing with
things that are of an energetic or
electromagnetic nature, wouldn't it be
possible then to use other types of
things that generate fields that can
somehow neutralize that or counter that?
Look, I I have two things uh uh
um to say. First, you've fallen into a
serious trap in the use of a
reductionistic term, oxidative stress. I
certainly wouldn't use that term at all.
You're way down. You're you're patting
you're patting the biochemist from the
top of their head. Don't don't don't do
that. I'm talking about biological
stress, hand cell stress, the HP axis,
completely different thing. Okay. The
the the second thing I'd say is that um
there are no other uh
um if we if we understand and agree, you
see the holistic approach that you're
advocating and following is terrific.
The problem is it's the teeniest part of
present day medicine. It has no in
medical schools I've
seen almost zero
standing. That's that's one of my
personal observations. It's very small.
We're not teaching medical students
about that. We're just not doing it. Uh
so it's hard to make progress in the
area that you're functioning given those
limitations.
So let let me frame it another way,
right? Because in the study of biology,
you know, we start off with there's the
basic cell. So you have the nucleus, the
cytoplasm and the cell wall, but the
very thing that's left out of that is
the life energy itself. It's the energy
that actually animates the cell, right?
Um that's that's that's not right. That
that
that's there's there's a it's a living
organism. Now, the energy that animates
the cell that that sort of makes it seem
like there's something there that's
real. Energy is not real. Energy is an
invention of a physicist and he invented
it as a word for mathematically
describing the driving force of natural
processes. It's not it's not a real
thing. So, you got to be you see you can
get troubled and and well, what's what's
more real? Is it the energetic field or
the matter? Which is actually more real
then if we're going to talk in those
terms, what's what's real is that a cell
is a living system. So it's a it's a
system all by itself devoid uh from the
laws of it's got to obey the laws of
physics. If you pass electricity to it,
it's the electricity it can be measured
such and such. It's got to obey the laws
of physics, but the laws of physics
can't explain it. So,
right, but this is what I'm I'm getting
back to what Becker the question was,
well, what makes the bone actually heal?
What causes the bone to unite, to heal
itself? So, in other words, what is
actually giving life to the cell? What
is actually causing all those processes?
If we're not going to call it energy,
what what would you want to call it? He
did not pose the questions and the
issues that way. He want he he started
with a hypothesis that the healing was
was controlled by a growth system and he
wanted to understand the nature of the
growth system and the nature of the
growth system was electromagnetic. That
that's the technically correct language.
you could easily get.
So then going going back to the cell,
what would we say is the nature of what
keeps the cell going? Is it just a
series of thousands of chemical
reactions every second? Or is there
something to actually look at that's
underneath that that actually allows the
cell to be alive, so to speak? If I
understood the question, what makes the
cell do things? The cell is processing
information from the nerves. Uh, it's
receiving signals. It's sending signals
to the brain. It's doing all of this and
it's consuming energy. Where is it
getting the energy from? From food. From
the process that you learned when you
did the KB cycle when you were a
freshman in medical school. That's where
it gets the energy from. Chemical
energy. Chemical energy is the it drives
the system. does not control the system.
That's what Becker asked about. Two
separate things, right? That is um I I
appreciate the perspective, but I I I
guess I have a slightly different
understanding of that. And in part it's
informed by other cultural systems or um
so when we like in Chinese medicine, if
we start talking aboutqi or prana,
right? when I as a martial artist could
see different things done that defied a
material understanding of what was
happening right then I mean so we called
itqi when someone is able to direct
energy in a particular way and where
it's actually palpable um and as an
extension of that even in in something
called raiki pronic healing chong where
energy is actually directed, right? Um,
and even in terms of our thoughts is,
um, I think when we did the radio
interview, I mentioned that I had
patients that had when they were told
they had AIDS, they died within two,
three days, their bodies just shut down.
So, I'm just suggesting there's
something else that's underneath all the
chemical
reactions that are taking place that
allow the cell to function. So, and I'm
So, clearly this is not in a
reductionistic kind of model and stuff.
No, right. But I I'm just like, what do
we call that? Um, uh, call it what Dr.
Becker called it, a cybernetic model.
Look, you you're using ter we're talking
about terms. Uh, these terms are coming
out and they're not carefully defined.
uh they have meaning to me and they're
going to have meaning to your your
guests. Uh uh uh but um no two guests
probably going to have the same
understanding of the terms. So there can
be some confusion. That's confusing,
right? You use the term cultural
systems. Now Dr. Becker was a true
scientist. He had a theory that
cybernetics was important and he saw
acupuncture a
classic cultural system. He saw it as as
as interesting and and pot and worth
inquiring into using empirical methods.
If you do not inquire into something
using objective empirical methods, then
you're nowhere. you're wasting your time
and it's going to go away when you die.
You leave nothing. Uh he inquired into
into
uh into acupuncture. I think I have
elsewhere told the story of how he did
it and why he did it uh and and which
led to our studies of it. Uh Dr. Dr.
Becker and I have written six or seven
plus two or three other people in our
lab. six or seven papers about
acupuncture as a
cyber providing evidence that it's a re
there's a basis a scientific basis
according to western concepts of science
not eastern western
we only follow western here
uh and and those articles are published
in journals and are and are the most
cited studies today for anybody who's
studying acupuncture. So I understand
exactly what that means, what a cultural
system having respect for it is, but not
for every cultural system. Some c
cultural systems been sucked out of
somebody's thumb. I mean it doesn't
merit uh uh uh um the studies that for
example Becker and I did. Right? So
here's the thing that happens, right?
Um once as a human being or as a
practitioner once you move past just the
idea of
biochemistry right once you dip into
this thing called the energy the life
force theqi or whatever right then one
it's very subjective and two your
results will vary depending on your
ability to harness that energy as well
as the patient's reaction. action to it.
Right? And I say that I say that because
we're not talking about double blind
control studies. We're talking about
onetoone empirical studies that take I
don't want to call it a study but
clinical
interactions between a patient because
one acupuncturist can get a totally
different result than a different one
because it has to do with their read on
that particular energetic system and
what's needed. And there are other
systems that we're not even talking
about acupuncture, but there are other
other ways to manipulate the biological
energy that go beyond just
electromagnetic fields. Now, I'm I'm
saying that I know you would shake your
head. It's okay. It's okay. But um this
isn't something that's necessarily going
to be studied in a particular you can
study from the vantage point and this
has actually been done of Lin McTagard I
believe her name is when they've looked
at just having people meditate and focus
meaning intention in a particular area
and they're able to document that
something actually changed. So it's one
thing to actually have a methodology
where you can actually measure the
changes in the electromagnetic energy
but there are other areas where you
can't well science is able to do that
more but that's a whole another
conversation but you can't really
measure well how are these changes being
affected it's it's different but go
ahead I would let you speak look
um uh how are these changes being
affected? Uh assumes that there there
were changes due to the intervention.
That that's dubious because you've got
no clinical
evirical evidence. You just got an
observation. You have an observation
that the patient's symptoms and signs
changed. If not, what would spontaneous
remission mean? Uh
uh um the spontaneous admission could
have endured if he never even knew a guy
named Kamal and he spent his time
watching the Brooklyn uh the the the the
New York Mets best play
baseball and and and he got excited and
that's where it came from. You got no
basis for linking the two. Look, let me
let me go back to the core point here.
uh um uh using words
uh using words that are not carefully
defined in an explanation I is is a
you're
just cruising for a bruising. You're
just going to have problems. cultural
systems now a and and paying respect to
cultural systems in anything more than
the fact that they've hung around for a
long time and there may be something
important but there's no scientific
evidence as that term is understood by
western science and that's the only
language the only science I can speak so
what you mean by I I I understand that
but what's happened people will do
studies that are more empirical studies
ies meaning they're outcome outcome
studies outcome you applied a set of
variables you did this and then there's
an outcome that happens
if you look at outcomes I understand it
it is not the kind of double blind
control study but in my world even that
doesn't make sense because you're
actually trying to eliminate the very
thing that is so fundamental to people
which is consciousness and intention.
Eliminate anybody that you try to
eliminate that. The the placebo effect
is real. And and and I my a drug I
developed for osteoarthritis and it
failed in an FDA study was because of
the placebo effect. I know more than
anybody that's ever lost money invested
in a in an FDA drug what a placebo
effect is. And it is real. But what is
it though? But what what what's actually
happening? Nobody knows. It's never been
studied. That's where it ends. Period.
Uh you got you got to recognize that.
You also misuse the term empirical
observations. Every observation I made
was controlled empirical observation.
There's no other kind of observation.
There's no theoretical observation.
There's there's an uncontrolled There's
uncontrolled obser.
you you can't you are not justified in
in concluding a cause and effect
relationship in control of empirical
observation you can so look at it this
way if somebody comes in to my office
right I give you an
example I'm at an event and somebody is
having difficulty breathing they're
clearly having an asthma attack they
don't have their inhaler right I happen
to have a a magnet All right. Which
using a Korean hand acupuncture point, I
put it right on the center of their
chest, but the center of their chest
happens to be on my middle finger. I put
it right there. Right. And the asthma
attack, it breaks like within a minute
or two. Right now, I'm not going to try
and I'm using that cultural system that
was developed within that framework.
Right? So why does one culture tap into
electromagnetic field energy, right? And
another culture really taps into
um matter or material energy, right?
Different cultures depending on how you
are in the world or how you interact
with nature, you're it's going to change
your focus and how you interact with
nature, right? So one culture will focus
on something else, a relationship that
in another culture may not even be
perceived or it seems magical or
whatever, right? So no, no, no. The the
the
uh uh cultural system of acupuncture
goes back 2,000 years and the word
electromagnetic is not even invented.
They weren't doing anything about
electromagnetic. they they they had an
an
observational uh pattern. Uh they could
do human experimentation without
following federal rules that I had to
follow. And they came to a conclusion
that acupuncture works. That is such a
thing as meridians and there are points
and and if you put a needle here and
twist here and twist there, the symptoms
are going to go away.
I'm sure I'm sure some of it is trial
and error, but in other cultures where
someone goes into the forest, right, and
trying to come up with a particular
plant medicine that's going to help
somebody, right, and they literally are
having a
conversation, right, with
um they're sharing in the consciousness
or or energy field of a plant and are
able to tap into the fact that this
plant might be useful in your mind. I
can talk about your face. That's total
nonsense. And that's not it's like back
back penicellin. You take the mold and
you put it on and the infection goes
away. It's nothing to do with energy.
Has to do with biochemistry. Simple
simple simple. I I understand. But it's
like it's tapping into the field of
information and knowledge of that that
allows you to do that. But this is my
point at the very beginning. Once you
cross a certain line, then we start
tapping into other things that um don't
necessarily adhere to the rules of of of
the scientific method. Science itself
means to know. And they're just
different ways to know that are outside
of what we've been taught within an
alopathic or western medical framework.
What does mean? What does know mean to
know? What does it mean in in this
context? If you science science is a way
that gives you a way to know things. No,
I'm not talking about science. I'm
talking about this uh uh this this other
system you're talking about. I know what
knowing in science means. What about
knowing? When somebody puts their hand
in Chinese medicine and they put their
hands on pulses, right? And they're
feeling these pulses relate to different
energetic systems in the body and they
can arrive at an understanding of what
is off or what needs to be addressed in
the body. That is one way of knowing.
That is one way of of interfacing with
that system. There's no evidence that
system exists. How how can that? That's
not true. But but leaving that if you
walk into a room and I'm sure you've had
this. If you walk into a room and again
everybody has a bio the heart has a
bioenergetic field and it does. But if
you walk into a room and you sense that
wait something is not right here you
know I don't need to be here and you
have a particular feeling about that
space and you leave the question is is
that it's just something that you're
conjuring up in your brain or did you
actually interface with another field of
energy that wasn't like you're like h
that doesn't work or or did you happen
to see a guns sticking out of the pocket
of the guy in front of you made you feel
uncomfortable. That would be a direct
observation. But I'm saying that people
function on other levels beside just
their five senses, right? That's a great
theory. There's no evidence for it, but
it's a great theory. I I'll I'll send
you some stuff that actually can that
that does document that, but that's
that's for another lifetime. Let's say
we're not going to get it settled today,
are we? Huh? No. Get it settled today.
So, but you know what? We're going to
end here, but I totally appreciate all
the work that you've done and the
foundation that you're laying and the
information that you're going to share.
And like yourself, I do hope that the
reductionist model that we move past
that and we begin to look at other other
ways of of looking at systems, right,
and approaching it. and um your
observation about the fact that research
money isn't given um to I mean I've had
even a grant turned down and stuff but
it was definitely something that was not
going to fly within a pharmaceutical
driven you know model so and do hang
around for at least another 10 years to
see what
happens as we move through this era and
I'm going to do the same myself, God
willing. Um, thank you so much for for
taking time out of your day, Dr. Marino.
Okay. All right, multi DHC family. Um,
share your comments and, you know, look
forward to interacting with you more.
Take care.