[music]
Um, these are my reflections as a music
theorist with a semiodic background on
the problems of meaning and
interpretation that I trust will be
relevant to a number of disciplines.
So fruitful interactions between music
semiodics and other disciplines.
One introduction semiotics as a
discipline.
Semiodics is not an empirical science
nor is it merely an art [clears throat]
of interpretation.
It is a discipline that reconfigures the
simplistic opposition between presumably
objective, empirical, scientific and
subjective, interpretive, hermeneutic
modes of inquiry.
How?
by recognizing not only the presumably
inherent properties of its object or
subject of study but also the defining
inter relationships that object and
subject has with others.
Physics even has recognized this
necessity at the level of particle
theory. But the study of more complex
organizational interactions leading all
the way to human life has also led us to
an appreciation of the concept of
emergence which can roughly be defined
as those new organizations, interactions
and significations that could not have
been predicated or predicted from lower
levels.
We have also begun to recognize that
there may be more than one path to such
understanding.
Western science's systematic discovery
of the mechanistic and chemical
interactions in the living human body
while extraordinary in its findings has
not achieved a full explanation of the
energy known as theqi including its
nodes and pathways throughout the body
as mapped over centuries by eastern
practices.
Although western science has confirmed
the instrumentality of such related
practices as acupuncture
and the puzzle of emergent consciousness
is a phenomenon that continues to
intrigue the best minds across the
spectrum from the scientific to the
philosophical and metaphysical.
What is the role of semiotics in
understanding a human practice such as
music?
Music semiodics is speculative, a
speculative dimen discipline that
attempts to hypothesize the ways in
which signification works.
Parts of these hypotheses may well be
subject to experimental testing with a
proviso that experiments cannot provide
a complete explanation but only a window
into a complex human competency.
Although scientific experiments on
hearing and listening can offer initial
evidence of cognitive constraints,
the capacity for musical styles to
achieve emergent forms of listening may
transcend those constraints.
A simple example for tonal styles is our
ability to hear acoustically equivalent
intervals such as the diminished fourth
and the major third. as diametrically
opposite in their effect. One is
dissonant and the other is consonant. So
if you can go to slide two, our first
music example, I'll go ahead and
continue reading. The emergent
difference between acoustically
equivalent intervals is reflected in the
distinctive spelling and scale degrees
of the pitches involved.
For example, in the subject of box fugue
and C# minor, the dissonant diminished
fourth is spelled B sharp to E. In other
words, scale degree seven up to the
lowered third in C#arp harmonic minor.
I'll play it.
There it is.
[music]
But that very dissonant interval going
from the seventh up to the fourth which
we hear is a painful tragic grieving
dissonance.
[music]
[laughter]
We could also reinterpret [music] as C
to E. B sharp being equivalent to C. But
the interval of the diminished fourth is
in no way expressively equivalent to the
interval of the major third. And that's
where we have the concept of emergence.
Another form of emergence is due to the
triadic harmonic basis of western
tonality.
Chord tones of root, 3r, fifth, and even
seventh are relatively stable such that
the perfect fourth ordinarily a
consonants is heard as unstable
needing to resolve to the relative
stability of surrounding chord tones. As
in this example from the Mozart
Reququum, it's the Vocame from the Kung
Futatis and the sopranos and alas sing.
[music]
[bell]
And you can hear the move to the perfect
fourth [bell]
which resolves like a bass suspension to
the trionee the diminished fifth which
itself
must resolve back to the major third.
So a perfect interval because it needs
to resolve
to the chord tones of the dominant
seventh chord is heard as a dissonance.
Whereas the dissonant diminished fifth
relative to the perfect fourth is a
relative consonance
which then is heard as the distance
resolving to the consonants of the major
third.
Okay. So we'll see that example in a
moment here.
[clears throat and cough]
There are three factors that preclude a
more empirical experimental verification
of the competencies presupposed by a
musical work and its style. They are one
historically grounded with intertextual
historical resonance even for current
styles.
They must be learned. And the modality
of musical meaning is not simply
communicative, but entails the more
speculative interpretation of aesthetic
and expressive meaning.
We cannot objectively verify a past
practice if we must first historically
and theoretically reconstruct it, which
also entails learning emergent
complexities and for the aesthetically
warranted potential for interpretation
knowing that that is ultimately going to
be very fluid.
Nevertheless, musical semiodics,
understood as a speculative discipline,
has rigorous methods and ways of
construing evidence that can help us
reconstruct a historically grounded and
aesthetically warranted competency. one
that must be learned to a high degree of
artistry by contemporary practitioners,
performers, listeners, and even
composers wishing to replicate a past
stylistic competency.
Although the reconstruction of
underlying competency will not produce
the equivalent of a grammar for
language, it never is nevertheless
possible to offer plausible explanations
for the kinds of learned practices that
underly the transmission of meaning
through musical experience.
two
modes of human signification
and the reconstruction of a musical
style competency.
Thus, from a semiotic perspective, modes
of human signification from the
referential to the expressive and from
language to music and the other arts
require more than objective dissection
for their explanation. Such human
competencies entail meaning and hence
interpretation.
But the systemic regularities
presupposed by these modes of thought
and communication also require more for
their reconstruction than a mere
summation of interpretive acts.
the [snorts] building of deep structural
theories that can account for
contextually dependent exchanges among
humans. From the immediacies of speech
or performative encounters in music to
the readings and experiences of texts
and scores produced prior to those
encounters requires a different kind of
science, one that is regulated by the
contexts of signification.
Semiodics seeks to explain how such
signification is possible for historical
music. Semiotics attempts to explain how
types of meaning might be
compositionally staged and thus
plausibly interpreted
first within the contexts of musical
styles which I define here as those
competencies presupposed by musical
works that ground further interpretation
of potential artistically rich meanings.
This definition is a variant of one that
I came up with in my dissertation in
1982.
Since for music referentiality and
situationality are often indeterminate,
we should not expect to discover
explicit meanings,
but rather an intricately designed
channeling of more generalized
reference. And to compensate more
precisely calibrated emotions or
expressive meanings that constitute a
stylistically warranted discourse or
trajectory within which individuals can
experience uniquely situated
interpretations.
Nonetheless,
a speculative semiotic theory requires
modes of interpretation that are
adequate to the rigor of semiotic
reconstruction. Here Charles Saunders
Pers's concept of abduction
shared by science and hermeneutics can
be a fruitful guide.
Abduction akin to the process of
hypothesis formation involves the
speculative generalization of a
principle to account for an act or event
that may have appeared inexplicable on
first encounter.
With respect to aesthetic texts,
observing regularities of practice,
compositional formula, schemata,
patterns, etc. should lead beyond a kind
of inductive reasoning based on
statistics to a more creative abduction
of the principles that underly a
competency as evidenced by those
regularities. In other words, the deep
structure of a style, not merely its
surface manifestations.
For an aesthetic text, however, we
cannot assume regularities are
necessarily constrained by strict rules
or prohibitions or that they are
reflective of fixed norms. A rare
musical event, however, atypical, need
not be considered anomalous if it can be
understood instead as a unique
realization
of a regulative stylistic principle.
For example, a recapitulation beginning
in the subdominant is highly atypical
with respect to the majority of sonatas
in which the recapitulation is
distinguished by large-scale tonal
resolution to the tonic or home key.
However, recapitulation in the
subdominant key is not anomalous with
respect to the principles of the style.
And in fact, it is actually a simpler
solution since instead of having to
rewrite the modulatory transition to
stay in the tonic for the second theme
to resolve the second theme, one can
simply play a transposed version of the
exposition and the transition will
modulate up a fifth from the subdominant
to the tonic for the second theme. The
principle of resolving the second theme
in the tonic key in the recapitulation
is thus preserved.
Understanding the regularities of a
style is also a step toward
hypothesizing
expectation or stylistic implications
against which creative choices may be
understood not as violations of rules
but as deferrals or denials of first
expectation. Leonard B. Meyers 1956.
or to move as he did from psychology to
a more semiotic perspective.
Implications in his 1973 work
implications that are stylistically
valid modes of achieving greater
expressive effects.
Indeed, expressive motivations are often
the driving force behind such apparent
innovations.
As Meyer first observed, if we expect a
resolution that does not immediately
occur, there will be an emotional charge
as we respond to the deferred
expectation or as he later framed it, a
deferred realization of a stylistic
implication.
a more cognitive approach. In this way,
the degree to which we experience
emotion will be calibrated according to
the degree to which the implication is
initially denied.
And we'll be moving up to slide four, so
you could go ahead and put that up if
you would like. Example three, what I
call a res a rhetorical gesture is one
that breaks the unmarked flow of the
discourse with a highly salient
alternative.
Consider this example. If there is a
stylistic implication for cadence as in
5- seven implying resolution to one and
instead of one we hear six, we
understand the deferral as a
stylistically typical but semiotically
deceptive cadence.
Thus, we would not react with great
emotion, but instead recognize and
interpret the delay as implying a one
more time. One more time. That's Janet
Schmfeld's wonderful term approach to
that same cadence, this time resolving
to the tonic. But if the denial of tonic
is more dissonant, for example, a
diminished seventh chord that has no
logical syntactic function, then the
cadence has been emphatically evaded and
the rhetorical effect will be
emotionally more profound.
In this example, you will first hear a
chromatically heightened deceptive
cadence as five goes to 77 of six to six
by the end of measure 18. So, it's
already strategically enhanced as a
deceptive cadence. It's already a bit
more salient than just a routine
deceptive cadence.
But after the one more time recovery in
measure 19, the pianisimo measure,
uh, to set up the implied cadence in
measure 20, Beethoven instead
substitutes
a more startling evasion to a completely
irrational diminished seventh chord in
the down beat of measure 20
after the surprise. Now, this is what's
interesting. Beethoven actually
compositionally stages a fortisimo
reaction in which the diminished 7th is
now retrospectively
rationalized by resolving on the third
beat of measure 20 as a dominant to D
minor the two chord of C major [snorts]
but instead of moving syntactically to
five of C for a more typical restoration
of the evaded cadence Beethoven inserts
another forimo reaction action in
measure 21.
This time directly from D to C
interpreted as five of three or five of
F, the relative major of D minor.
This actually recalls a typical Baroque
progression enshrined in the pomemettoso
pattern forming the basis for
innumerable Baroque variations.
Beethoven imports it here, I believe, in
order to suggest a sense of profoundity
due to the venerable status of that
earlier style.
But since five of F is also the same
chord as one of C, Beethoven can simply
reinterpret it in measure 22 to regain
his deferred credential setup. And this
time he resolves it properly to the
tonic in measure 24.
So I will play this example and talk
through it with you. Starting at measure
15.
[music]
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Deceptive cadence
[music] recovery
credential 64
cadence
diminish seventh. Where are we? response
[music]
like a retati.
[music]
There's that baroque gesture and then
recovering [music]
the same as measure 19. [music]
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; And the third time is a charm.
It would not have been appropriate for
him to introduce still another
diminished seventh unless perhaps he was
writing in a late romantic style
where Vagner keeps giving you those
augmented evasions of cadence. [snorts]
See what happens in measure 20 is more
surprising even than the heightened
deceptive cadence in measure 18 that was
um chromatically enhanced and thus we
have a more intense emotional response
which is actually staged by Beethoven in
the music
virtual agency.
Thus, the staging of expressive effects
goes far beyond the mere mapping of
melodic contours. The ascending line is
iconic of upward motion, say in measures
17 to 18, or dynamic energies. If we
consider the ascending line as indexical
of rising emotional intensity
to [snorts] embrace more complex
emotional effects in this example delays
and invas evasions involving a more
symbolic level of harmonic signification
which supports an emergent dramatic
trajectory of for instance thwarted
desire.
Now, we don't know whose desire or what
the context is for this thwarting, but
then we can begin to understand in our
own interpretations and add our own more
specific emotional um situationality, if
you will, as we listen to this otherwise
abstract. No, absolute in the sense of
quintessentially emotional.
For non-program programmatic music such
as this, there may not be any real life
situation motivating a composer to stage
such emotions. [snorts] In fact, the
composer may not be attempting to
respond to any particular situation.
Nevertheless, listening with the
semiotic competency of one or in this
case more than one musical style,
remember the Baroque importation, the
listener can both recognize and identify
with such emotional scenarios with the
option to fill them with the
particularity of any number of emotional
experiences having a similar structure
and grounding in that listener's actual
life.
can thereby experience a unique
emotional trajectory, but one that is
nevertheless shaped by the demonstrable
trajectories of the musical work as
grounded in its style or styles.
If shared by other competent listeners,
we have not merely a subjective but an
intersubjective grounding for our claims
about that experience. However,
generally we theoretically characterize
it, meaning the experience of the
emotional trajectory expressed by the
work.
In the reconstruction of this rich human
competency,
the notated score is but one form of
evidence. The semiotics of music can
fruitfully interact with other
disciplines to help explain other
contextually appropriate competencies
with bearing on that musical experience.
dragged down by external forces. We may
appeal to the human experience of agency
in the first case
or an analogy with effects of such
physical forces as gravity in the
second. And I'm thinking here of my own
work on virtual agency and also Steve
Lson's and Arie Cox's work on physical
forces and mimetic
responses.
We can draw upon the psychology of
agency and the physiology of reactions
to physical forces as we construct a
virtual environment in which those
forces act upon musical lines or
sequences as they take on a virtual life
of their own. So we have both the
virtual environment and the virtual
agencies acting within that
gravitational field if you will.
The particular rhythmic, metric,
melodic, contoural, and dynamic shapes
of musical events can also mime human
gestures, including the qualitative
fusion of imagistic and temporal
gestalts, as I discussed in my 2004
book, thereby providing an immediate
insight into modalities of human
emotion, for which David Lov and Naomi
are wonderful u proponents.
The intricate detailed recognition of
faces constitutes our imagistic capacity
immediate where the gestalt patterning
of a given person's walking style is
captured by our temporal capacity.
Oliver Saxs in his 1985
famous case of the man who mistook his
wife for a hat illustrates how one might
lose one capacity. the imagistic,
seeing a hat on a hat rack with a coat
and thinking it was his wife. Um,
but retained the other, the temporal.
Apparently, the individual he studied
could not recognize faces, but he could
identify his interestingly voice
students not only by their singing, but
by their walking signatures. So if you
would see them coming down the hall not
by facial immediate recognition but by
temporal gestalt of the walking
signature.
Examples of imagistic gestalts in music
include our immediate gestalt
perceptions of tambber and chord
quality. Think of the opening sonori of
the eroica
and their expressive shaping through
time through motives and melodies as
well as chord progressions constitute
our temporal gestalt.
Now, it just so happens that musical
gestures within a prototypical two-cond
boundary can integrate to the highest
degree both imagistic and temporal
gestalts.
And that's what makes these gestures so
highly memorable for their distinctive
configurations and it thereby enhances
their affective force.
Scientific studies of gesture and
emotion can provide evidence for various
types of gestures ranging from the more
conventional or emblematic the peace
sign um to the more spontaneous or from
the immediacies of indexing literally
pointing to something to more abstract
forms of pointing which I've been
illustrating already in this lecture.
I'm pointing to the concept I just
talked about as discussed by David
McNeel in 1992.
We can explore basic types of human
emotion as well as the processes by
which emotions evolve in complexity.
Thus, from more immediate physiological
and cognitive responses to more
considered stylistic and aesthetic
appraisals as further elaborated by
philosopher and esthetician Jennifer
Robinson in 2005 and in our joint
article for music theory spectrum in
2012.
We have seen how music theories have
established hierarchies of closure and
goal directed motions as regulated by
tonal syntax for the strategic
exploitation of those implications that
I described above which can play with
degrees of deferral and realization as
well as with degrees of repetition and
variation. And the music psychologist
here I would mention would be David
Hiron and Elizabeth Ora Margulus who's
now at Princeton. And we can learn from
current theories of inaction that engage
listeners own reactions. my former
doctoral student um uh Briera in what
would have been a dissertation that I
think would have been wonderful um has
drafted a good deal of work on relating
theories of inaction
as well as their ability to infer
virtual agency
at still higher levels. We can explore
analogies in music to the dramatic and
narrative trajectories found in
literature with their implications for
profound expressive journeys including
equivalents of arisatilian reversal,
recognition and catharsis. And others
who've worked on narrativity in music uh
in the American tradition are Byron
Alman and Michael Klene
and the intersections of such amalgams
as topics. We think of Ratner, Alen
Brook, Agawu, tropes, my own work on
troping or such network-like enrichments
of hierarchy through interextual
interactions.
Again, Michael Klein's important book in
2005 can take us still further as we
will explore in the next section. I
would mention here that I uh completed
on January 1st an article uh introducing
topic theory um with some of my own more
recent contributions of marketist to
topic theory that will be appearing in
resto
u mjata pavska is uh the one who
requested that article uh for that
journal. So
three
semiodics as a filter or lens for
relevant interdisciplinary borrowing.
Semiodics can provide a lens through
which we can apply theories developed
for other purposes. Interdisciplinary
borrowing
however can be misleading unless we have
a clear idea of the boundaries
epistemological and other otherwise of
music. And here the rigor of semiotics
comes into focus. We must respect the
productive ways as well as the
constraints upon ways that music can
emulate other disciplines through its
own capacities for signification as made
plausible by analyses and
interpretations respecting the
principles of relevant musical styles.
A common error, and one that has given
semiotics a bad reputation, is the, at
least among philosophers, is the one
toone mapping of meanings onto musical
events, as though music were a simple
code of correlations, such that overly
specific meanings are justified whenever
they appear to fit the energetic
contours of a musical work. By this
metric, music can be taken to mean just
about anything. And the fact that it can
would suggest that attempting to
establish emotional meanings for musical
work through testing of untrained
listeners would fail to illuminate what
I call those aesthetically warranted
emotions in the 210 2010 article that
[clears throat] might be more rigorously
established
here. I do not mean to constrain the
potential of music to mean beyond
historical context of its creation.
theories of reception, histories of
performance styles and practices,
[laughter] and the productive
implications of those different
perspectives can all be relevant to the
ongoing reconstruction of a musical
works styles and interpretation of its
potential meanings.
[snorts] Instead, I would note that some
experiences experiments may tell us more
about individual listeners and their
biases than about those more intrinsic
meanings a musical work makes possible.
Nevertheless, one can gain insights from
such experiments since they help
establish the kinds of perceptual
oppositions that ground our cognitive
categorizations. I think of the work of
Carol Crumb Hansel on topic theory for
example.
But other disciplines may offer still
better clues. The theory of marketness,
first developed in linguistic theory by
Trebettcoy for phenology, then developed
by Roman Yakabson and Michael Shapiro
for grammar and poetry is concerned not
only with perceptual but important
conceptual oppositions, conceptual
oppositions as they help organize
grammarss or in our case styles.
For every opposition, there is a
potential valuation such that the marked
term of the opposition implies a
narrower range of meaning. Let's call it
X. While the unmarked term is best
characterized more neutrally as
signifying nonX as opposed to say Y.
Markness is relevant not only to
properties for example the marked minor
versus unmarked minor unmarked major
mode for some styles such as the
classical mode um but to processes as
well within harmonic syntax a proper
credential resolution to tonic is
unmarked with respect to any evasion or
deferral of that resolution and that
evasion or deferral will then be marked
by carving out a narrower form of
expressive meaning just as dramatic
pitch is marked with respect to its
substitution for the diietonic pitch
that might have appeared.
Any such breaking of an implied
continuation can be marked more
saliently as a rhetorical gesture as I
demonstrated earlier and hence become
expressively focal.
The principle of marketness takes us one
step beyond Surir's claim that meaning
is difference. It provides a systematic
explanation for the relative
specification of that difference with
respect to meaning as well as a
historical process by which further
oppositions can progressively carve out
further nuances of meaning.
Let's explore how the opening kung
futatis
contrasts with the voc in measure 7
along several musical dimensions.
We can see how stylistic oppositions
correlate with general meanings.
Beginning with the marked mode of A
minor, [music]
which cars out a narrow meaning, perhaps
tragic versus the unmarked mode of C
major, which would then be character
characterized more generally as
non-tragic.
We need other oppositions to serve to
further delineate the expressive
potential of that passage in measure 7
and 8. Here
we find the opposition between loud
versus soft,
low versus high register enhanced by
male versus female voices and a
rhythmically energetic versus a more
sustained um high register, excuse me,
sustained um passage
enhanced by the opposition between the
initial upward sequencing
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; And what turns out to be a varied
repetition
[music]
as opposed to sequencing. Okay. So all
of these oppositions further specify the
non-tragic major mode as more serene or
even angelic as a plea in response to
the hellish agitation of the opening.
Then the women's progression as a
learned contropundal formula also draws
in the primal authority of a venerable
past style and its simplicity framed by
the u major third perhaps correlates
with a higher pastoral mode as
emblematic of purity or subliminity.
Both learned and pastoral importations
are topical and their merger here
constitutes a trope, a concept I will
deal with further below with respect to
music's capacity to create its own
metaphors. [clears throat]
Music seionics also draws on history but
history as filtered through culture. In
reconstructing reconstructing an
artistic culture within a larger
socioeconomic culture, one must be
careful to avoid the presumptions of a
sidegeist, namely that a composer is
constrained in her options by the
concepts that are available either
philosophically or scientifically at
that time.
While a history of musical emotion is
indeed possible, Michael Spitzer's 2020
book is a marvelous example of this. And
historically warranted emotions provide
a kind of rigor in reconstructing how
composers might have experienced the
emotions they were attempting to stage
compositionally.
There is also a danger in overly
limiting what composers were capable of
understanding.
The evidence of artistic works may speak
volumes for a sensitive interpreter. And
we need not rely solely upon
contemporaneous treatises or or
conversations and letters of composers
and others to unlock modes and
capacities of signification that we
could nevertheless defend based on
mutually confirming evidence of
reconstructed styles and analyze
strategies in a corpus of works.
It is also a methodological hazard to
assume that a composer necessarily
reflects those tensions that are current
in her socopolitical situation.
a composer may decide to address social
issues. And they're wonderful examples
of such ideological decisions as when
African-American American composer
Margaret Bonds incorporates the poetry
of Langston Hughes in her songs I too
and the Negro Speaks of Rivers in order
to promote a more positive image of
African-Americans and to counter a
racist society that had denied their
basic humanity.
And composers may be unwitting
participants in an ide ideology of which
they may not be fully aware as in the
opposite case of white composers
demeaning or even appropriating the
works of other cultures.
But we should also allow for the
possibility that a composer was not
speaking to or especially constrained by
a contemporaneous political social
situation.
For example, as I have argued in my book
on gesture, the most important external
influence on Schubert in his last five
years was Beethoven's music.
Schubert's response to Beethoven's
example in forging his own
retrospectively late style shares a
similar concern for interiority,
a virtual subjectivity that forms a
world of its own for many composers
without regard to external political or
ideological circumstances.
So basically I'm saying there's room for
both uh approaches and but we should not
uh force one on the other where it
doesn't seem to be appropriate.
[snorts] Section four semiodics and
hermeneutics the dialectic of style and
work.
[snorts] The example of Marinus
discussed above is especially
instructive for music in that it
provides a structure for meaning rather
than an explicit key to what that
meaning might entail.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; For the latter, semiodics must not only
reconstruct a style comprising its own
oppositions, but must also implement a
hermeneutics, namely a principled
approach to interpreting [clears throat]
that style as it manifests in an
individual composer's choices or
strategies within a particular
historical context.
As I've argued elsewhere in articles in
96 and most recently in musical
quarterly in 2022,
literary hermeneutics as it emerged in
the 19th century in the work of
Friedrich Schlommacher
already incorporated complimentary
grammatical and psychological as he
called them modes of interpretation that
roughly correspond to my interaction of
style as akin to grammar with poetics
thrown in and strategy as akin to
psychology. ology only in the sense of
an individual's choices.
I have proposed the ongoing interaction
between reconstructing a style and
interpreting the strategies of works in
that style as a methodological
dialectic.
If semiodics is concerned with the
grounding of meaning in a style with
stylistic markus supporting the
correlation of types of musical
structures and events with respect to
their more general meanings. Then
hermeneutics explores the strategic
marketness developed within individual
works and is thus concerned with the
interpretation [clears throat]
of tokens of more general types.
Regardless of how one labels the
components of this interaction as two
parts of a traditional hermeneutic
methodic method or a complimentary
interaction between the goals of a
semiodic and a hermeneutic approach. The
important point is the interaction
itself.
This methodological dialectic works like
a feedback loop. Interpretations of
related strategies lead to
generalizations of style types and
established style types guide the
further interpretation of strategically
varied tokens of those types which lead
to the generalization of new types and
so on. This feedback
helps us refine our theorization of
relevant structures or events both at
the surface and deeper. But it also
helps coordinate the kinds of meanings
that motivate the continual evolution of
those style types as composers seek new
forms of expression.
So a theory of meaning and a theory of
change, which we'll get to in a moment
here, um must be mutually implicative.
Since western music lacks the relatively
stable lexicon of language, its
interpretation involves a constant
renegotiation or fine-tuning of the type
token relationships that undergur
meaning.
Marketness is a powerful tool to
coordinate meaning at the systematic
systematic level of a style and the
strategic innovation of new kinds of
oppositions can extend this rigor to the
work. But there are still other
approaches that can help address the
uniqueness of a musical work. For
example, a musical gesture, as we've
just discussed, may constitute a
completely fresh amalgam or synthesis of
the most basic musical elements as they
coalesce into a unique musical event.
In searching for helpful analogies from
other disciplines, then it is important
to keep a key distinction in mind.
Does the other discipline help one
illuminate the structuring of an
underlying stylistic competency
including its systematic components?
Or does it have more applicability to
individual musical events in a work and
their more flexible realizations of
style principles?
Apparently, unique musical events can
only be considered as strategic choices
if we propose a style that affords a set
of options and that can accommodate
further departures as both coherent and
expressive.
the early theories of distributional
linguistics before Chsky failed before
Chsky distributional linguistics people
like Harris Chsky's teacher failed to
recognize deep structures underlying
linguistic competency despite relying on
what they thought were objective
discovery procedures which are
meticulous surface comparisons and
statistical analysis of distributions.
Thus, it was not likely that early
semiotic approaches, for example,
Jeanjac Natier in 1975, paralleling
pre-Chin linguistic approaches to
neutral segmentations of the surface
could fare any better for music.
Without a robust attention to the
reconstruction of style principles,
purely structural music analysis would
also be likely to overlook significant
functions and would be unable to
coordinate structure with expression
beyond mere surface analoges.
As Leonard B. and I soon realized even
statistical approaches to expectation,
for example, Markoff chains and
information theory would not provide
access to the functional significance of
events with respect to style.
The essay you can find in his 1967
collection.
Section five,
other fruitful interdisciplinary
analoges.
In my own work as a symbiotically
inclined music theorist, I have often
explored other disciplines to see how
they handled theoretical issues that
would need to be addressed as part of a
foundational approach to the discipline
of music theory.
With respect to concepts of style and
style growth, the subject of my
dissertation in 1982,
I was intrigued by paleontologists Niles
Eldridges and Steven J. Gould's
hypothesis of punctuated equilibrium
through which they explained the lack of
a continuous fossil record, a line of
evidence by positing relatively sudden
developmental changes in speciation
followed by much longer periods of
relative stasis. Now, by sudden, we
might mean 250,000 years, but that's
just a second in geological time.
Now, the cultural evolution of music
obviously is more Lamarian than
Darwinian,
but it appeared to follow a similar
pattern in a far more compressed time
scale. And I conjectured that style
could be modeled to reflect a comparable
differentiation between development and
speciation.
As translated for music, the distinction
would be between style growth, in which
a style coherently absorbs innovations
and can thus be said to develop, maybe
even to the point of mannerism, and
style change, for which one would need
to construct a new level of style
competency or a new hierarchical
reorganization
of previous levels, and for which one
might best understand the style as
branching off now into a new species, if
you will. The latter would be necessary
in order to understand innovations that
went beyond the capacity of a prior
style to rationalize or explain or use
expressively understand expressively.
[snorts]
For his perspective on hierarchy, I was
inspired by Arthur Kesler's notion of a
holierarchy,
a reconceptualization of hierarchy in
which each element was not only a part
but also a whole. For music, one
extension would be to consider a given
musical event as closed, complete, whole
with respect to lower levels, but open
as part of a larger event with respect
to higher levels.
It's a concept that Eugene Narmour
presented as part of his critique of
Shanker's theory of voiceleading
hierarchies in tonal music. I still
remember how vehement Shankarion said,
"How can a musical event be both closed
and open? It doesn't make any sense."
But it certainly makes sense if you have
an expanded notion of hierarching.
In my work on musical meaning in
Beethoven in 94, I drew not only from
the linguistic concept of marketness,
but also from interdisciplinary
scholarship on the tropes of metaphor
and irony. I demonstrated how a composer
might stage a purely musical metaphor
and developed this aspect of musical
creativity, which is one of the key
characteristics of metaphor.
I sought to counter a prevailing
tendency in which any musical or any
verbal description of expressive meaning
in music, for example, sad, was
characterized as metaphorical based on
crossdain mapping alone from language to
music. An absence of a creative fusion
leading to an emergent meaning.
My test cases centered on the
juxiposition of topics,
relatively stable style types with
familiar if not fixed expressive
associations in which their
juxtiposition
simultaneous or successive within a
given functional location such as a
theme could substitute for a verbally
predicated relationship such as this is
that in language
juxtiposition in a functional location.
For example, a theme could by itself
prompt an interpretation of the merger
between their respective connotations
leading to the creative emergent meaning
that is so characteristic of metaphor.
My argument was supported by the
evidence of a purely visual metaphor as
seen in an article by N. Carol in 1994
and the troping of juxtaposed poetic
images that also lacked ver verbal
predication.
Taking the principle further, I argue
that even music syntactical events such
as harmonic progressions could be
subject to tropological interpretations
in an article in 2012 and that the very
importation of a topic was inherently
tropological in an article in 20 2014.
Still other interdisciplinary influences
on my work have been mentioned above
with respect to gesture, emotion, and
agency.
Sometimes fruitful analogies may arise
from the most unexpected of sources.
Music theorists typically recognize
Botheus for his translations into Latin
that help preserve ancient Greek music
theory. But it was his consolations of
philosophy in 524 that inspired my
conjectures on basic attributes of a
robust subjectivity that would have been
understood by educated composers and
hence available for potential
compositional staging a thousand years
before the modern subjectivity
attributed variously as first emerging
in the music of the 16th or 17th
centuries.
Five.
In conclusion, the usefulness of music
semiodic perspectives for other
disciplines.
Music's semiotic status as a sounding
temporal form of human aesthetic
expression and interaction
has proven fascinating across the
disciplinary spectrum.
One could trace the history of western
music from the early Greek exploration
of the mathematical proportions of
intervals through acoustic,
psychoacoustic, psychological and
cognitive scientific approaches and from
on the other hand early metaphysical
speculations to current philosophical
and aesthetic theories and speculations
on all the way to the ideological or
political meanings of music.
complementing or competing with the
steady unfolding of practical music
theoretical explanations for the
emerging complexities of counterpoint
for example or harmony tonality or even
post tonality.
Each investigator has been influenced by
or consciously attempted to incorporate
the relevant interdisciplinary knowledge
of their era, developing systems and
terminologies that require careful
translation interpretation on their own
by later scholars seeking to incorporate
those insights.
My own contribution to this entanglement
has been to tease out ways in which
composers might have staged potential
signification for listeners. Working
from what I would consider to be a
semiodic axiom that every form is
motivated by meaning which you'll find
underlined by Michael Shapiro in his
works from 1983 on.
And for music I would say that every
meaning is expressively motivated. Every
structure is expressively motivated
at least for most styles.
No true isms here for that apply
universally. [snorts] My recent work on
levels of virtual agency for music in
2018 book may offer a compelling
alternative to a simplistic concept of a
unitary persona that some music
philosophers have disparaged and
probably rightly so. Steven Davies, for
example, and it may suggest another
hypothesis for music psychologists such
as Patrick Yuselin and Daniel Visio to
explore an accounting for how listeners
come to understand music's expressivity
as what I would call virtualized
emotion.
Thank you.
The next four slides contain my
bibliography.
We will show each slide about 10 seconds
to allow you time to scan and or uh take
pictures.
[music]
&gt;&gt; [music]