If you are a fan of centralization,
my [music] work isn't for you.
&gt;&gt; Well, Dr. Cruz, thank you so much for
having us here. Um, folks, this is the
guy, if you've been listening to the
podcast, this is the one I've told you
that's probably moved the needle more in
my life than anybody else outside of
Joel Salatin. Two very different things
here, but really there's a lot in common
here. Um, I'm just so thankful that he
granted me an interview and an audience
to be here. So, um, look, right off the
bat, Dr. Cruz, I want to ask you
and I'm going to have to set this up a
little bit. I want to know why the
needle moves so much for me down here.
I'll give you an example. Here I am,
y'all. 55 year old man. The last time I
ever did sprints on the beach, it was
probably five years ago and I woke up. I
was as stiff as the Lincoln Tunnel at
rush hour and I was messed up for a
solid week.
I've been out here and I've been running
every single day for an hour.
&gt;&gt; That's your answer.
&gt;&gt; So, tell the audience what you see.
&gt;&gt; You see a magnet.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I see a magnet. Okay. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What's that on the What that shavings?
&gt;&gt; No, it's sand that you ran on.
&gt;&gt; Oh, are you kidding me?
&gt;&gt; So, look what the answer is. You just
got it.
&gt;&gt; You have you have apocrine sweat glands
and ecrine sweat glands on your feet.
&gt;&gt; So, look at it again. Look at the
connection. Wow.
&gt;&gt; So, what were you doing? You
[clears throat] were permaculturing your
muscles.
&gt;&gt; That's exactly what you did.
&gt;&gt; Well, here's the crazier part is not
only did I do that, I pushed myself
beyond anything because I wanted to
actually see what would happen. Now, the
last time I did it, I woke up the next
day and I was hurting for a week.
&gt;&gt; She did it with me and I did the last
time I did it, it was back and forth on
a football field. I did it 10 times as
hard as a human could push himself. Woke
up the next day, no soreness, no pain.
It was like I never did it.
&gt;&gt; So, and we did it all barefoot. Did it
all facing to the east as the sun was
rising. I'm just blown away that it has
that much because I've heard you I've
heard you talk for a while. I'm blown
away that it actually has that much.
&gt;&gt; When you did it on when you did it on a
football field, you only had light and
probably water helping. There's the
magnetism piece.
&gt;&gt; That much of a difference. Huge. It's
humongous. People don't believe me when
I tell them they come to the beach here,
especially the black sand beach. It's
all basalt lava. You know what sits
below us is all these volcanoes. So the
magnetism here is off the chain. Now
what does the the main effect of
magnetism do?
&gt;&gt; [cough]
&gt;&gt; There's a lot of effects, but the main
effect that you experienced was one of
the exhaust fumes from us since you're
the plant guy. We're going to go to the
other side is water from CCO at
cytochrome 4 and the other one is CO2.
You know, you breathe CO2 out for the
plants. What does CO2 effectively do in
us? It's a magnetic shield for the FO
head in the mitochondria and that
selects out hydrogen and dutarium. Okay.
So when you're able to get rid of the
dutarium because you're expelling CO2
makes it much more likely you'll photo
repair when you have your solar panel
out running back and forth which is the
reason why you recover faster here. So
the key thing is the three-legged stool
for life needs all three pieces. The
problem that you just found is what
happens when you have two and a half,
2.3, 1.7 depending on whether you're in
western North Carolina, El Salvador, or
running on a football field somewhere in
the United States. You don't know that.
Now, what's the ultimate snapshot? If
you could have a snapshot,
if you could have a camera that looks at
your IMJS, which is your inner
mitochondrial junctions,
this is the thing in the Christa that
look like all these squiggles that
you've probably seen. The more they line
up, the more closer you are to 3.0,
okay? Because that's correlated with
energy. That still doesn't give you the
full answer because the photo repair
we are not costly in energy. We are
costly in time as mammals that evolved
after the KT event. That's where we're a
little bit different than plants. We are
very very complex. So you have to have
the signaling from your eye and your
skin to drive this program in you. And
when you were running on the beach, you
clearly had it. So that is the reason
why you brought all the things that
evolution brought to bear in you at one
time. And what should you take home from
this or what should the audience take
home if you haven't
is that goes to prove to you that each
spot on earth has a different
magnetic compass has a different effect
for different hllet types has a
different effect for different people.
So when you find out what place is best
for you, then you have a duty yourself
say, "Okay, why am I living in western
North Carolina?"
Do do I have a duty to myself to maybe
examine this? So for example, in
permaculture,
[clears throat] you know, I don't have
to tell you guys this. You're not going
to go plant [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] coconuts in the
tundra, but effectively that's what
you're doing by living in western North
Carolina. So when I say that, you're the
one that has to resolve the inongruity.
Like I'm the one that has the flashlight
and shows you why it happens. But then
you have to say, well, you know, this is
this is just not parsimmonious for my
life. Nature doesn't give two shits.
Does she does she care about the
coconuts bitching? They can't grow in
Toronto. No, they just don't grow.
When that happens to you, you get
diseases.
Well, speaking of which, um, speaking of
those diseases, came across your work
about eight months ago. Up until that
time, they diagnosed me with quote, "the
worst sleep apnea they've ever seen ever
since I got out of the army."
&gt;&gt; And Michelle as well.
&gt;&gt; Worse sleep apnea, high blood pressure,
both of which I never had before the
military.
&gt;&gt; And then
another issue that I'm dealing with
right now. I was one week on doing your
protocol. And when I heard it, I went in
full steam ahead. I don't do anything
halfway. So immediately where I live,
it's south facing. I can see the
sunrise. I'm looking at it. Realize
because of your video that you put out
on X one time that I was doing it wrong.
That I should be looking directly at the
sun for as long as I can. Within one
week, you can ask her sleep apnnea gone,
high blood pressure gone. Now, I do have
a lingering thing that I'm down here and
then I just heard you in another
interview with Archie talking about how
to get rid of that uh the condition
where your fingers go numb or they go
white.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Reo is phenomenal.
&gt;&gt; Right. And you've [clears throat]
already you've already explained what I
need to be doing um to do to get that
fixed. But it has improved. Whereas it
would go all white before, now when it
does get cold, it's it's more speckled.
So, I'm guessing that's improvement.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And down here, I'm wondering I'm I'm
just floored because I heard you say
this and I've examined as much of your
work as I possibly can. Now, I don't
know all the technicals and stuff. I
haven't been into it that much, but I'm
seeing the me needle move where I was
wearing that stupid machine every single
day to the point where in the first week
I was doing your protocol and all I was
doing at this time was grounding myself
because I live so isolated. I'm
completely naked on the farm when I'm
doing most of what I'm doing out there.
And then honestly other things that
other people don't probably don't want
to talk about like libido especially
down here. I mean I I can do more on six
foot of mattress than one of these
monkeys out here on 60 foot of vine in
this environment. Honey, you might need
a safe word after a while here. But the
point being is that I just feel like I'm
on a whole another level down here. And
even up there the needle was moving. So
I'm wondering just how far I can move
things.
&gt;&gt; There's only one way to find out. You do
your own biohack. you come to an
environment that you're based in, you
have to remember, I think people forget
kind of how aging works. Um,
you can call aging a disease. I don't,
but the way I want you to think about it
is when you come out of the vagina as a
baby, you're 80 to 90% water. At your
age right now, 55, you're about 50 50
maybe 55% water. When you understand
that light and water interact to create
the battery new with melanin, then you
begin to understand, well, that is the
reason why we need [clears throat] to do
more photo repair as we get older. So,
when you think about western North
Carolina right now, February 24th
versus here, you know, we consider this
cool. This weather is probably better
than you're ever going to get. Perfect.
even [clears throat] in western North
Carolina, even if it was probably June
or July. So, when you understand that,
then you can understand why you want to
be in a place like this because you're
better matched for it. Your skin clearly
is better matched for this, better match
than I am. Um, but the bottom line is
the more you [clears throat] optimize
light, water, and magnetism, the more
water you make. So, in other words,
you're not locked in to the amount of
water or CO2 that you made at home.
Okay? And then you have to decide to
yourself or you have to decide with your
wife, is this a benefit big enough for
us to pull up our stakes and go do
something with? Because the one thing
that you you're not allowed to do,
you're allowed to lie to your wife,
you're allowed to lie to everybody else,
but you can't lie to yourself. The most
valuable asset you have is time. So, I
just told you how to reclaim time.
Reclaiming time is a function of light,
water, and magnetism. The biggest part
of that is the way water and melanin
create the battery in your eye that
controls trillions of matrices of
mitochondria.
The more effective you are at doing
that, [clears throat] the longer you
live without a doctor. That's really,
if you distill down the decentralized
medical thesis, that's it. So, you can
imagine [clears throat] if you go back
to North Carolina and you're running on
the beaches there right now versus the
beach I just showed you, you should do
this next time you do your own video.
Take a magnet with you, put it on the
beach in North Carolina, and see, do you
get the same effect that you have here?
You'll find out you don't. Then you got
to ask yourself, okay, because I'll tell
you, if you really look at that picture
carefully, you notice the center of the
magnet didn't have any of the sand in
it, right?
&gt;&gt; What month are we in? February. Come
back here in June and July when the
sun's hitting it. It's more magnetic in
the summertime.
&gt;&gt; So then you get another viewpoint. You
go, "Wow."
&gt;&gt; So guess what? You're trying to tell me
now that season's chains are
electromagnetic footprint. What is the
the magnetic hysteresus that's inside of
us? That's what your hletype is. Your
hletype is a function of where your
biology works best. Okay? And then we've
created, you know, society and
civilization where we left our ancestral
home. We've got other adaptations that
allow us to live at higher latitudes.
But even today, when you're more
congruent, you're making it easier for
your cells to control those trillions of
matrices in your mitochondria. So, it
[clears throat] should be no shock to
you that there's certain places that
your magnetic commas works better and
you're finding out that this is one of
those places. Most people that come
here, it doesn't matter what your
hletype is, are going to find out the
same thing.
So my wife who's a paleface like you is
almost certainly going to find out that
the needle moves for her in a positive
way too. Even though I'm more adapted,
you may you you're going to probably see
a bigger benefit than she will. She'll
see a benefit, but the reason that you
have this huge change is because you're
melanated on the outside. Now
melanination on the outside means you
need more sun. It also means you need
more magnetic flux. But the key thing,
the real key thing for longevity is how
good the optical lattice clock is in
your eye. And remember, the optical
lattice clock in your eye is the RP and
the SCN. They come together. What's the
key to that battery? Water production
and melanin. The melanin in your eye is
more set by your genetics than anything
else. It can be affected epigenetically
by the amount of polarized light you're
in. And that's one of our big problems.
You know, you don't have that problem on
your farm because most of your clients
are plants and they work by chlorophyll.
My clients don't. They they need their
melanin to be operational. And melanin
is being destroyed
in humans mostly by light. In your
world, in the permaculture world, the
farming world, melanin is being
destroyed by glyphosate. Glyphosate is a
competitive inhibitor of melanin. The
reason they've done that is because the
Rockefeller medicine guys that control
centralized medicine know about this
optical program on chromosome 2. That's
all tied to the stuff that's going on
now with Epstein. Um the interesting
thing is when you can destroy melanin
and there's ways to do it. You can do it
from the front side or the backside. The
GLP-1 drugs do it on the back side. When
you destroy melanin, you're effectively
not able to tell energy where to flow.
And remember what I said to you before
mammals post KT cells are not costly in
energy. It's costly in time. So I want
to make sure you understand this very
clearly because this can confuse people
if you're not fast in science. So you
know the famous Einstein equation E=
MC². It's called mass equivalence. So
what does it say? If you look at it, E=
MC² is 2 * 3 equal 3 * 2. It's like a
simple math quiz you learn in third
grade. So the question is when you look
at it say wait a minute if 2 * 3 and 3 *
2 is simple then how does energy know
how to flow? It turns out the metric
that turns it how to flow is time. So
what happens in evolutionary history
over 4.6 billion years [clears throat]
we start in the archan 4.6 6 billion
years ago. And magically, the first
thing that happens before your magical
time, your magical time is called
photosynthesis. That happens, you know,
2500 to 300 million years to 3,000
million years ago. My magical moment,
the difference that separates me from
you, from from your other guy, Joe uh
Salatin,
is Joe is an expert in photosynthesis.
I'm an expert in radiosynthesis.
&gt;&gt; What is radioynthesis?
Radioynthesis is the archan earth that's
anoxic. Got a primordial soup in the
oceans and through a process of
self-organization and ridiculously
powered light from stars because
remember at that time there's no ozone.
So what's the first thing that happens?
First thing that happens is we get
melanin on the surface of the planet and
it happens without any genes. And this
sounds crazy when people hear it, but
you have another protein in you that
actually did the same thing. It's called
feradoxin. Feradoxin is the ancestor to
all your hem proteins that are in your
body right now. And when you look into
what I just told you, because this is
going to be hard for people on this
video to swallow, you're going to tell
me that we've got proteins out there
that we were able to make without genes.
The answer is yes. And we know that to
be true. The problem is the Rockefeller
Medicine guys made sure you never knew
it. And Joe Salatin never talks about it
because he doesn't understand the
implications of it. But let me tell you
why it's important.
Radioynthesis set the field. It's kind
of like when you're going out to plow a
field for corn. There are certain things
you need to do to that field. Well,
that's exactly what happens on Earth
first. And what's the the single most
important thing shows up? It gives cover
to the future to domains of life that
are coming. They're not here yet, but
those are bacteria and archa. And that's
important in your world. Why?
&gt;&gt; Because that is going to be the process
of turning the soil over atomically,
things like that. But melanin gives the
surface life cover from this cosmic
gamma VUV light. Once that cover is
there, then things can begin to
self-organize down at the sea vents and
those things come up to the sea vents
and they start making oxygen. Takes a
huge long time for that to happen. In
that process, then your world and Joe
Salatin crash. Then magically
photosynthesis shows up. But remember
what I told you. This is literally takes
three billion years to go from radio to
radiosynthesis to photosynthesis.
And here's the irony. All the science
that you focused in on all of it. It's
from photosynthesis on. It's like you
and Joe never look back and go, "What
the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] happened before?" Why don't we
ever talk about the three billion years?
You know why? Because that's the melanin
story. And the reason they're imperative
to block this is because when you find
out how the melanin was originally made
that you didn't eat genes, then you find
out in us that now it's been codified
and dropped in chromosome 2 and you
understand that the Rockflow guys are
pounding that chromosome with everything
they possibly can do. Then you got to
ask yourself why is that? What what is
the reason? And the reason is simple. If
they ruin the clock and your eye and
your skin, you have to use more of their
products. Now, what's the collateral
effect for you and Joe? The more of that
they do, the worse they make farming.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And that's the reason why you guys are
big into permaculture. The problem that
you have is what they're doing to plants
is really difficult to fix because of
the use of glyphosate. They're ruining
all
I mean everything.
What do the bacteria and the archa and
dirt fundamentally do? They kind of do
the same thing that melanin does except
a little different way. It's atomic
recycling. The atomic recycling is
important because there's key nutrients
that are important for chlorophyll for
growth uh for plant life. And every
plant has a different how shall we say
atomic need. Okay.
The bottom line is the energy source has
always been present. It's always been
the sun. Now the energy source for
plants also changed just like it changed
for life. When the ozone layer comes to
be all of a sudden everything changes.
Why? Because when ozone comes what does
it do? It blocks a big part of the
electromagnetic frequency comes in. Now
you know today modern life it's visible
spectrum 250 to about 3100 and a little
bit of the RF which is the Schuman
resonance. That's kind of what
everything that you and Joe believe
operates on. What you don't realize is
what happened before has a hysteresus in
you. In other words, there's a fossil in
you. The fossil in you happens to be
what I teach everybody about. It's
called leptin. And you've heard me
talking about leptin.
What's the pathway that leptin's
connected to? The leptin melano corton
pathway. So I just told you that
something that happened before the goe
and something that happened in archan
earth is fossilized in your eye and your
skin and you're wondering why you do
better at a place here where that
pathway is optimized. Well, what's the
fossil
in leptin? When you look at it, uh, it
has an absorption spectrum of 220
nanometer light. When I did my Vermont,
I think it was 2017 talk, I put the
slide up and showed the research that
proved that's correct. Then I asked the
audience one question. Where's that
light come from?
Doesn't come from Earth.
&gt;&gt; Well, but think about it. I I told
everybody that day. I said, "It doesn't
come from the sun." Why? Because the
ozone layer blocked it. Let me ask you a
question. Was that always true?
&gt;&gt; No. Before the ozone layer, 220 did get
in. And you want to hear something else
that's funny? Every aromatic amino acid
that's used in plants and us also has an
absorption spectrum that goes below 250.
Want to hear something even crazier?
Plants and us use cholesterol. Do you
know that cholesterol also has an
absorption spectrum there? So what am I
trying to tell you? I'm telling you
because you and Joe look this way, not
back. You don't realize that all the
base chemicals that are based in plants
and us have an evolutionary history that
goes back before the ozone layer. So
guess what happened to life? When the
ozone layer comes up in the GOE, all of
a sudden life's got a huge energy
problem, doesn't it? Because now 220,
200, 180, it's not there. So what did
life have to do? It had to adapt.
So what did it do in us over that period
of time about a billion and a half, two
billion years? We took that ability
inside to our eye to our mitochondria
and we made our own 220 nanometer light.
We have internal suns built into us.
&gt;&gt; That blows my mind every every time I
hear you say that.
&gt;&gt; But it's true. And now we know it's
true. How do we know it's true? Because
guys like Roland Van Wick and Fritz Pop,
they took your world, Joe's world, cut
the plants and said, "Look, biopotons
are everywhere." And here's the crazier
thing. Extreme low frequency UV light.
And then you start going back to the
story. All the aromatic chemicals
are all have this kind of frequency.
Leptin has this frequency. Melanin
absorbs it all. So you begin to see a
different, how shall we say,
quantum engineering for evolution. And
this is the stuff no one ever talks
about. Everybody always wants to talk
about what you and I subsist on, which
is food, plants, and things like that.
But if you don't understand
what I just told you from the time of
photosynthesis
to the beginning, then you missed the
greatest part of the story. And how did
you specifically learn about
radioynthesis? You didn't learn about it
from Rockefeller. You didn't learn about
it in your permaculture stuff. You
certainly didn't learn about it from the
US military. You learn about it because
the Russians created this huge problem
in Chernobyl in Ukraine. They put a
concrete dome over, you know, a a melted
core to protect us because what did they
tell us? You're old enough. You heard
the same thing I did in '86. Humans
can't go there for 10,000 years, right?
&gt;&gt; So, what magically happens? Plants and
everything else starts coming back 12,
13 years later.
&gt;&gt; What do the Russians do? They drill a
hole in the concrete, put a camera and a
robot in there, and what do they find?
They find fungi and early ukariots
filled with melanin doing what?
&gt;&gt; Taking gamma radiation and turning into
energy.
&gt;&gt; So, guess what's inside that dome?
&gt;&gt; Archan Earth.
&gt;&gt; Got it? But see, I saw that right away.
And I knew this before Chernobyl came
up.
But if you're going to say things like
this, you know what they say,
extraordinary claims need extraordinary
proof.
&gt;&gt; But when I got the proof, guess what?
Then I started to sound a lot less
crazy.
&gt;&gt; There was a farm down wind of uh
Chernobyl. It's called the Lubka farm.
And okay, undoubtedly you've heard about
it. Uh-huh.
&gt;&gt; Mainstream science couldn't seem to
figure out why even though they were
growing brassacas, which would be your
cauliflower and things like that that
there was they couldn't get a geer
counter to go off no matter how much
they tried.
&gt;&gt; And they couldn't figure out what they
later discovered, which didn't I mean
it's not like refusing DNA here. Um they
found out that they were pioneering
windro composting at that place. So the
bacteria, the fungi, nematodes,
protozoa, arthropods
down to a smaller level, the archa, all
of those guys were absolutely getting it
done just like you said right in
Chernobyl. But that brings me to another
point where
knowing the benefit of nature and what
it provides for us right off the bat.
The whole time we've been here what nine
days and I haven't seen a single
chemtrail.
So with the powers that shouldn't be, is
that the primary motive up there?
Because if you go out with a
spectroscope, [clears throat] good luck
in trying to detect UV in the
environment that we live up there in the
United States of Amnesia.
&gt;&gt; Well, I would tell you though that goes
back to the original story that I told
you about running on the the um the sand
for photo repair. Geoengineering
[clears throat]
is being done
uh for some very interesting reasons.
It's not the geoengineering that
happened in the 50s and 60s is different
than geoengineering now. that started up
because they wanted to terraform Earth
to figure out how to get to Mars.
What's [clears throat] going on now?
They've ruined
the soil in the United States so bad
that they have to change the frequency
of the sun to get Monsanto's seeds to
germinate. So when you understand that
seed germination is tied to calcium, you
may not know this, but you should.
Calcium is also absorbed by melanin. And
actually in us the free radical signal
that comes in it makes a certain amount
of calcium. So this is how there's a
correlate between us and seeds. And if
that amount of calcium is not quantized
the process doesn't go as planned.
That's one of the major problems between
say bandwidth zero to 5G. Plants now
have the same problem. The thing is
their system is what I would call
adivistic to us. It's comes from a much
earlier time. So it means the biologist
that understands mitochondria has to
also do their due diligence and
understand truly how chlorophyll gets
taken apart. The reason is because
melanin is a competitive inhibitor uh
for metalation. I just told you the
answer what happens in your world that
the things in the ground including the
nematodes the arthropods
&gt;&gt; lose the ability to actually atomically
recycle for the plant. So when you lose
that ability, you have to put things
back into the soil in order to get it
done. And what is the government telling
you by geoengineering certain places?
They have to geoengineer more than
others. Like for example, Shantel will
tell you a place where I did some work
that we were stunned. It was about 2930
latitude. I'm not going to tell you
where it was. More geoengineering done
in this place
um than you could imagine. And this is
in the middle of [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] nowhere. But
what do they grow there? They grow a lot
of things for the US market. Okay, so by
being here, you would think normally at
this latitude this would be a good place
to live. All my clients that lived in
this area, some of them still to this
day don't even know what I'm telling you
right now. This is the reason I told
them they had to move because yeah, the
latitude is good, but this specific area
is no longer Earthlike. It's more like
Earth was in the GOE. And when you
understand that, you can't be there.
Because remember, once they ru ruin the
soil, what else did they ruin? They
ruined the water table. Once the water
tables ruined, then we're back to the
three-legged stool. And then you begin
to understand why plant life and human
life are linked. Like there's studies
out there that show if you cut trees
down in the area you live, then animals
actually also don't do as well from a
longevity perspective. That's the
fundamental link between they use our
exhaust gas and we use their exhaust
gas. But people don't realize that these
things go all the way down into the
soil. And the glyphosate story is a big
one. But they now have to mitigate
light. They're changing the rules of
engagement of photosynthesis.
And what are they effectively doing?
What effectively are they telegraphing
us when you ask me this question?
Because most people never get to this
level of sophistication. Photosynthesis
also is kind of like autism. It's got a
spectrum in which it can work. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And what is the government
effectively doing for big food and big
aggra? They're figuring out what the
spectrum of photosynthesis can be on a
planet. And they're using different
places on Earth to figure this out. for
the moon, for Mars, for wherever else
they think we're going to go. Of course,
there's other big problems with those
places like no magnetic field, which
brings up a a whole other bag of tricks,
but for this discussion, that stuff's
not important. When you need to
understand what's going on in your
world,
terraforming El Salvador is very
difficult to do. Why? You can block the
sun,
but to do that, everything around here
is a magnetic crystal. I I famously tell
people all the time, if you take a pee
in my front yard, you'll make a coconut
tree.
That's not true in North Carolina.
&gt;&gt; And that is the reason why you have to
look at places [clears throat] they're
heavily geoengineering differently. Like
for example, if you go to Arizona,
you'll see very little geoengineering in
the desert. You'll see it around
Flagstaff,
&gt;&gt; around the cities. Yeah,
&gt;&gt; right. Because what are they trying to
do? They're trying to control things
where the people are. That's ultimately
what the program is all about. And when
you understand that uh they really
should be terraforming the desert
because that will teach them how to deal
with Mars. Why? Because we know New
Mexico and Arizona don't have great
magnetic flux. When you compare that to,
let's say, I don't know, Lafayette,
Louisiana. Lafayette, Louisiana.
Everything's green there, too. Well,
that's a totally different environment.
And can you change an [clears throat]
arid environment to a lush tropical
forest? You actually can. Do we have
that science
available to us? We actually do. We can
physically do that. Um, the problem is
when we do it versus nature doing it,
there's [clears throat] always
collateral effects because we're not
taking into account all the different
things that are important to the
biologic systems that are present
around.
I got to say, if you're okay with it,
I'd like to talk about El Salvador a
little bit. We were out the other day.
is it's first of all I'm just shocked
and astonished at how open and friendly
these folks are until they come up to me
and realize I don't speak Spanish
fluently,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; And u you look like
&gt;&gt; because I look like it and they're
they're put out by it. So,
&gt;&gt; but we we linked up strangely enough. Um
strangely enough, I didn't realize I had
fans down here, people that recognized
me from the permaculture work we do. And
um we were invited guy tried to sell me
a 10 and a half acre. It was a place up
in the mountains about 2700 feet, I want
to say. And Dr. Cruz, I I'm telling you
what, what I witnessed there knocked my
junk into my watch pocket.
&gt;&gt; Couldn't believe that two steps off the
road and 30 steps into the deeper part
teaming with everything you could
imagine in terms of food.
&gt;&gt; Probably five different cultivars of um
mangoes, you name it. If it was
tropical, it was there all the way down
to the coffee. So, every forest has
well, in a tropic and subtropics, you're
going to find eight layers of a forest.
And every single one of them
&gt;&gt; in this place produce fruit,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; I mean, the hardest thing to find in
nature is fat,
&gt;&gt; but there were two different types of
avocado trees sitting right there on
this property. So, what I'm wondering is
in this particular place, I don't
understand how
I I guess make me understand why so many
locals it seems are more willing
to
it seems like they engage more in a lot
of the junk food when you got
&gt;&gt; I I probably picked they probably gave
us 200 bucks worth of fruit
&gt;&gt; that I would have paid for in the US but
the locals don't seem to eat it. What's
what's up with that?
&gt;&gt; Well, they eat it. But here's the
problem and this is where you're running
up to I guess my neck of the woods. Your
clients don't talk. They're stuck in the
environment you put their seed in.
My clients have two frontal loes and
they break every rule of nature.
So you need to understand that the
people who've gone through three civil
wars here,
&gt;&gt; okay,
&gt;&gt; for 50 years,
&gt;&gt; PTSD.
&gt;&gt; Well, it's not just PTSD. It's they
would like something different. And they
look at the United States as this golden
age. So they want Pizza Hut. They want
uh Wendy's. They want McDonald's.
Uh
&gt;&gt; yeah, Starbucks. And I I was like, who
would drink Starbucks after we just went
to a coffee plantation?
&gt;&gt; Well, but you'll be very surprised. This
this is the thing about I think
civilization, society, even within
uh this framework. I actually said this
to you and your wife before you started
filming that there's part of me that
gives two [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] about a lot of different
people. The people that you just talked
about, I've already written them off.
Like if you are a fan of centralization,
my work isn't for you. Like I want to
separate it out right away. A lot of
people who do podcasts, a lot of people
who are in this space like no, I want to
make this all inclusive. I don't.
&gt;&gt; I'm right there with you. I I want to
focus on the people that really have a
decentralized mindset that understand if
you can create three different mangoes
in here. Why is this important? And why
is it important to feed that food to an
animal, a ruminant, to turn it into a
fat and a protein for us? Because we're
way down the food chain and that's what
we're supposed to be eating more than
the fruit itself. Um, the interesting
thing is this place supports growth of
everything. Like photosynthesis here
isn't the problem that you have at home.
The problem that you have here in El
Salvador is really a problem that's
related to civilization, civil war,
broken government, uh, people that are
worn down to a nub. But do these people
know how to farm their land better than
you probably do? The answer is yes. The
thing that they're missing is they don't
know how to do it as well at scale.
Little farms that you see on the side of
the road selling you papayas that look
like the size of footballs.
&gt;&gt; You're like, "Well, they're doing
something right cuz we don't get papayas
like that
&gt;&gt; in the United States even when we're
using all this fake farming." And the
the answer really is is
the people who are centralized down
here. That's why you see all these
modern innovations. The people that like
I'll tell you the girl that is my maid
right now. If you stick around and watch
for lunch, what she eats, she doesn't
eat McDonald's. She doesn't eat that.
She eats local food. So, there's more
people here that eat the local food.
Plus, the other thing is the food that
they're bringing in from the US, it's
very expensive. Like if you go to
McDonald's right outside on the main
road here,
&gt;&gt; you'll find that a a a hamburger that
back in the states you could buy for two
bucks, here's going to cost eight.
&gt;&gt; So I'm going to tell you, even though
American innovation is here, that's why
nobody was lined up out there, I guess.
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And see, that's why I'm going to tell
you
&gt;&gt; this is a good thing. This is an uh why
this stuff is here.
&gt;&gt; Fiat money is failing in the United
States. So what are they doing? They're
looking for other markets here. The
problem is what are they meeting here?
They're meeting here people that are
back at say United States time 1930
in the Great Depression. People here
only make $1,000 a month. They're not
going to spend $8 for a freaking
hamburger.
&gt;&gt; No.
&gt;&gt; You know, they're going to do things
differently. But, you know, the thing
here that's big is papooseas. Papooseas
street food. little bit of pork, little
bit of chicken, and most of it's all the
the fruits and vegetables that you talk
about on a corn tortilla that's cooked
on a rock, not in an industrial oven.
Most of that stuff is done, you know,
the way it was done here 3 400 years
ago. That hasn't left this culture yet.
And I hope that it never does leave this
culture. Um
but I think in every society you have to
be cognizant that um
the so I should say the city or urban
planning has to support the centralized
and the decentralized people. The
interesting thing is the decentralized
folks will not rely on centralized
systems. Decentralized people will rely
on themselves.
El Salvador has more of that than
centralization.
And I think because you probably spent
most of your time in this country in
places where people were centralized,
that's why you're seeing it. You would
have been down here five years ago when
me and Shantel came here. None of this
existed. All these things were there
like down where you guys are on the
beach, there wasn't even a gas station.
First time I got gas in this country was
in a Clorox bottle with a red rag over
the top to refill my gas tank. So, you
go down there now and you see Super
Selecto, you see Pizza Hut. None of that
was here five years ago. See, I was I
was also wondering um I want to hit this
be before I know we close. I want to
have respect for your time. Um
you often talk about a Dunn and Krueger
moment. And for me, it was when one of
my viewers sent me this video. They
often send me a lot of stuff. A lot of
it stuff not necessarily helpful. For
some reason, I clicked on it and it was
that interview. It was one of the
interviews. I think it was the one you
did with Logan. And um that in that
interview or one like it, I realized my
own Dunning Krueger um moment being that
where we live, we raise basically all of
our food for free. We raise our
ruminants,
&gt;&gt; cows, sheep for free. Our pigs are the
only thing that cost us money. 21 cents
a pound. Chickens free. And we do this
all by using waist streams. We have I'm
we have an orchards. We have food
forest. We have annual crops. We have
all these things going right now. And I
honestly thought that wow, if there's
anybody else farming more decentralized
than me, I don't know who that is
&gt;&gt; until I heard you go about the two other
things that I really didn't put a whole
lot of stock in. And sadly, I think a
whole lot of other farmers and people
that work in construction feel the same
way. For example, every farmer I know,
every permaculture designer I know would
be out there early morning doing all
their work. Because of your work, I
switched everything around. I'm out
there looking at the sun, doing what I
do. But now, instead of
taking the time during the day when I
can get some of that beneficial UV,
which I come to discover it is actually
beneficial.
&gt;&gt; Um, most of us would be inside. Most of
us don't get anything that's beneficial
to us. We do our work in the front and
the back of every day. Now I do it
centrally in the middle. Now I realized
during that podcast, and it may have
been the one that you did with um Oh,
shoot. It was a really long one. Uh
Danny Jones. I think that might have
been it.
&gt;&gt; Um
&gt;&gt; I don't remember talking about farmland.
&gt;&gt; No, no, no, you didn't. But it
[laughter] it it it was a catalyst to
make me think about my own situation.
&gt;&gt; So I was thinking, okay, I got my
animals squared away. We raise
everything for free. we we only need to
go to the store for toilet paper and
aluminum foil for for the most part. But
I didn't even once consider the fact
my money not decentralized on that
&gt;&gt; and my health I'm not decentralized on
that because
&gt;&gt; like you often say I was following the
food gurus didn't see the needle move
and like I said I did your protocol for
one week high blood pressure gone sleep
apnnea gone so that was a big big big
change for me as far as realizing okay
my animals are squared away but these
other two pillars how important are Hey,
&gt;&gt; I mean
&gt;&gt; I mean just a rhetorical question, I
know, but
&gt;&gt; I don't think it's a rhetorical question
because you're asking
you you're asking me, Jack, I fixed my
food and I'm still falling apart. I
fixed my animals. I'm still falling
apart. What that should say to you is
what am I missing? What other part of
this story is falling apart? Like I said
the same thing to Logan. I mean, he does
the same thing you're doing in Arkansas,
yet he's got a kid that's got cancer.
So, what happened? You know, do people
ask that question? No. Because this is
the funny thing.
When you ask that question, it brings
you down a lot of different roads that
you don't travel. So the first question
I think especially when it comes to
cancer
the doctors who you go see like about
your blood pressure about your reos or
Logan's kid with cancer they lead you to
believe that the problem is within you
&gt;&gt; not within the environment
&gt;&gt; and I'm telling you it's exactly the
opposite.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And the reason why and this is
very important
especially since you understand plants
well
I told you that you have trillions of
matrices in you mitochondria matrices.
So here's the thing you don't hear from
doctors melanin on our shell right in
our on our brain is designed to control
everything on the inside. How how do we
know that? One of the things it does, it
absorbs all frequencies of EMF. It
charge separates water. But here's the
big one. Big one is it's a metal
chilator. It keates iron, malibdinum,
copper, maganese, calcium, magnesium,
and dutarium. Okay, that's what it
specializes in. Turns out each one of
those atoms do a specific thing in your
matrix to control the metabolic flux in
your matrix.
So when you think about that, here's an
outside control system from the light
that monitors everything inside. Now
that's one. The other one we talked
about vitamin D. You know about that
one. Cholesterol has got to be changed
by 312 to 320 nanometer light. What
happens with that? That cholesterol
estester has to go to your liver and
kidney to be changed to the active part
outside in again. Now we're going to
talk about your issue because you
brought it up twice. blood pressure and
sexual dysfunction.
UVA light stimulates nitrogenous
release, makes nitric oxide. Nitric
oxide lowers your blood pressure through
the region renan angotensus system. Also
gives you a stiffy from PD4.
So when you actually see it, there's
another outside inside control system.
But when you went to the doctor, they
told you the problem was with it.
&gt;&gt; With everything. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, I just told you three big things.
And when you think about this, you go,
hm. Like when you think about plants,
what are you thinking about? You're
thinking about water, which they don't
make. They consume. So that means it's
an outside in. Light outside in. Dirt
outside in. Everybody with plants gets
outside in. But with us, it's an inside
out problem.
That's the first problem. And when you
travel that road, you start to go, hm,
if they get that wrong, how many more
things are being told to us incorrectly.
And then you start to find out some of
the lowhanging fruit things. Like for
example, if you really understood the
outside in thing, would you ever put
&gt;&gt; sunscreen on? Never. Would you ever wear
Coco Chanel glasses?
&gt;&gt; Never.
&gt;&gt; How about clothes? Because you know,
last time I checked, anytime a kid's
flying out of your vagina, they don't
come out with [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] nitrogen fixer
t-shirts,
right? [laughter]
And what else do we know? You said
something else interesting. Um, when you
ran on the beach, you didn't know too
much about those ecine glands on your
feet and that that connection's better.
Have you checked shoes out lately?
Especially farming shoes. Everything is
made with a gasoline heel. Comes from,
you know, some kind of chemical that
someone has made from Dupant. Was it
like that when people farmed two, 300
years ago? No. It was from the hides of
their own animals,
&gt;&gt; wasn't it?
&gt;&gt; Think that might have a a role now based
on your running on the beach story.
Everything plays a role. Turns out that
you have to realize your system is based
truly as an energy accountant to figure
out how to parse this whole story
together. And the worst job you do,
you get imprinted in your time ledger.
What's your time ledger on you? It's the
IMJS in your mitochondria. When they all
line up perfectly, you are energy
efficient. Then timing controls
everything. But what happens when timing
is off and the IMJS in your mitochondria
look like [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] Like instead of your
mitochondria is looking like little
beans, I don't know, they look like a
heart or they look like, you know, a
corkcrew.
That's how you know you got a problem.
That's how you know you can have uh a
nitric oxide problem even though you're
outside. Or if you're doing permaculture
and you're spending most of your time AM
and PM and not at the best time of the
day, what does neurobiology tell us? The
best time of the day for humans to be
outside solar noon. It's when your brain
works the best
&gt;&gt; and every farmer does it backwards,
&gt;&gt; right? But just think about what you
said. So, how could food and exercise
really change
your problem? Like, what's the axiom
that you haven't given me yet, but the
reason why I kind of dig it into Logan?
Food is medicine. No, food's not
medicine. Like when I tell you if you
don't see AM sunrise, eating animal fats
can be a danger to you. That's true.
&gt;&gt; People that have cancer, sometimes the
ketogenic diet is not good when you
don't see AM sunlight because you can't
use the TCA cycle or ura cycle. When I
said that 20 years ago, people in the
paleo world told me I was crazy. Now the
data shows I'm right. Well, the evidence
in me feels that it's right because I've
seen the needle move in a massive way.
There is no way on earth if I would have
ran sprints up and back 10 times,
there's no way I would not be jacked up
the next day. Um, Dr. Cruz, I I'll end
with this because I I know you're a busy
man and I I'm so thankful to have a
little bit of your time. Um, I did an
experiment that I heard you mention to
Logan and it's with I guess it's in my
bag here, my dutarium dutarium depleted
water.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um, you mentioned something to him
about
&gt;&gt; about a son in the backyard that they
should take two plants, one with DDW and
one without it.
&gt;&gt; I did it. Hopefully this is the right
brand.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's Look, that's way better
than the water that's grown in in North
Carolina.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I can tell you that. Um, so I went
ahead and did it and I started some
seeds. We did it was in one flat and we
started them from seeds. One we had a
control. We had another that I think had
half of the detarium depleted water and
the other was all of it. The one where I
just went full bore on the detarium
depleted, it did as good as the control.
But the one where I mixed it,
those guys were on steroids. What
exactly happened in there with those
plants? Now, it was working really
great. I was hoping to take some video
of this, but I screwed it up because I
got busy, forgot about it. But you could
see that the ones that had 50% DDW
&gt;&gt; were blowing up.
&gt;&gt; Had I let them go, they would have been
&gt;&gt; I mean they were already twice as big as
the ones on either side of it. So what
ex what exactly did I just witnessed
there?
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean it goes back to the story
that I tried to tell you before that the
alignment of the mitochondria. Same
thing in your chloroplast. Remember a
lot of people don't know this. Plants
have mitochondria. Okay? But in the
chloroplast, when you get perfect
geometric alignment of these IMJs,
you're making energy really powerfully.
So, think about what our president just
came out and said that was probably
offensive to you and Joe Salatin, that
we need to have glyphosate in order to
grow our food. You just found out if you
use dutium depleted water, we could
probably use the state of North Carolina
to grow as much food as we need for the
United States. But see when we use
glyphosate we need to use the whole
bread basket to grow [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] In other
words it becomes very inefficient but
it's good business for who? Big food and
big aggra. So the point that I'm trying
to make to you is the better the
alignment of the geometry in chloroplast
and mitochondria
the better one will do because what's
happening there it's separating out
dutyium from proteium. Proteium is light
hydrogen. What does a chloroplast and a
mitochondria
what is its fuel source? H+ prote.
So anything you can do to help the plant
do well which in your case was you gave
it half its fuel source
light hydrogen. You made it way more
quantum efficient. Why? Because it's
tied into the sun. Why do I always tell
people just like I told you before that
fats and protein can be toxic. If you
don't see the AM sun,
you have a problem. Plants always see
the AM sun.
&gt;&gt; They never miss it. So what am I trying
to tell you? That when you use more
complicated fuel sources like fats and
proteins, you cannot miss the key
spectrum of light that starts the
process. You plants are way easier to
deal with. But I tell people we're a
little bit more complicated house plant
cuz we are. But plants teach you this
lesson. That's what's happening in the
thioalkyoid membrane of a chloroplast is
it's parsing out dutarium and hydrogen
so that the alignment of the membranes
inside that transform energy are more
closely aligned. And the alignment is a
function of dutyium and hydrogen because
what do you know about it? Hydrogen has
one proton. Dutium has a proton and a
neutron.
&gt;&gt; That means this has double the mass. So
if you have double the mass, you have a
huge kinetic isotope effect. So what
happens when you need this perfect
alignment? Perfect alignment goes away.
That's how it happens. And if you think
about what Einstein said, back to his
equation, E= MC², when you look at it,
anything where mass is is encumbered, it
encumbers energy. Remember, E is on this
side, M's on this side. So the more mass
you have, the less energy you can have.
You need more light energy to do that.
Can you turn up the volume on the sun in
North Carolina?
No. But what did I just tell you?
mammals are capable of doing,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; We can turn up the power in us, but the
only way we can do it is we have to get
rid of dutyium as well. We have the same
fundamental problem that your plants
have in North Carolina, but nobody
realizes it. And when you see it through
a plant and you feed it a diet that it
really wants, the light does the rest
because it's really it's a function of
light. And that's what I always try to
get to people's heads when they look at
E= MC^2. You know, look at the equation.
Look what's on it. You got energy here,
light squared with mass. Why does light
squared have to be there? Because mass
encumbers light.
If there was no mass in the equation,
you can make huge amounts of energy. You
make huge amounts of energy, your plants
grow like crazy. This is the reason why
people have known for a long time
dutarium depleted water for for uh
farming is huge. It's why now we're
finding out in biology that dutarium
depleted water is big for us.
Problem is Rockefeller medicine doesn't
want you to know that. Monsanto and Bear
don't want you to know that.
&gt;&gt; Well, I know it and I know it all too
well, I'm afraid. Well, Dr. Cruz, I
can't thank you enough for your time.
Um, thank you for I mean beautiful home.
I mean, when you said this thing was
literally no walls, I I see exactly what
you're talking about here. This is this
is really astonishing. So, you brought
the outside in, and it makes perfect
sense to me. Something uh
&gt;&gt; Well, it should make perfect sense after
I just told you that melanin works that
way, vitamin D works that way, and
nitric oxide works that way. So, why
would you want it any other way?
&gt;&gt; It seems like everything we're doing is
backwards. I mean, we know the price of
everything and the value of nothing
really. When you get down to brass tax
on this stuff,
&gt;&gt; that's that's the effect of
centralization. When you decentralize
your life, you decentralize the way you
think. All of a sudden, you realize that
everything that you used to believe is
not true, and it's time for you to
change it.
&gt;&gt; Cool. Well, thank you so much for your
time. I I sure appreciate it. That's
quite a grip.