I'm Dr. John Kruse and today I'm talking
about does creatine help your brain. So,
as usual, I'll start with the take-home
message and that is in the last few
years there's been a tremendous surge in
internet claims that creatine will help
not only your muscles but your brain and
sales of creatine have jumped up
dramatically. And while there is
extensive research and human experience
showing that creatine in conjunction
with exercise does help build muscle
mass and strength. The evidence that it
helps with mental and cognitive
capabilities is extremely weak,
extremely contradictory.
And at this point in time, it would not
be fair to say we have any evidence that
it's helping with ADHD
or clearly with other mental health
conditions. Now, that doesn't mean
future research may not reveal a role
for it in mental health or cognitive
health, but it's not there yet as of
September of 2025. I'll start with what
is creatine.
So if you see a video where they are
talking about creatine being a protein,
run screaming in the other direction.
Creatine is not a protein. Now it's not
that distantly related. So proteins are
a series of amino acids linked together
and special bonds called peptide bonds.
And the smallest protein consists of at
least 20 amino acids. Creatine is just
combining the amino acid arginine with
glycine, linking those together in a
bond that is not a peptide bond, and
then adding another a methyl group
originally from methionine, a third
amino acid, but specifically from
acodenosil lmethion, which is Sammy,
that same substance that's used for
treating depression.
So again, it's a much smaller molecule.
That means consuming it in your diet.
It's not as likely as a large protein to
be broken down and degraded. So in most
humans, about half their creatine supply
comes from diet and about half comes
from being manufactured by this process
in your liver, kidneys, and pancreas.
And when I say you get creatine from
food, virtually every meat source is a
good source of creatine. vegans and some
other people with restricted diets may
be getting substantially less creatine.
So that's why the half from diet half
your body makes us very rough
approximations comes from the Greek word
for flesh. So again that's it was found
and discovered first in animal proteins
animal muscles and it is very different
origin than the word Latin word that
means to bring forth or produce where we
get the word create creative and
creature after creatine is made in the
liver kidney or pancreas or absorbed
from the digestive system it's in your
circulatory system in your blood and
there are active transporters that move
it into muscle cells and nerve cells.
Once it's in the muscle cells, the nerve
cells, it's phosphorolated. So a
phosphoral group is added on to make
phosphocreatine
and it's actually phosphocreatine, not
creatine itself. That's the primary
storage molecule in the muscles or in
the brain. Subject to action by an
enzyme called creatine kynise or CK
converts phosphocreatine back into
creatine. And when it does that, it
releases or creates causes formation of
an ATP molecule. And ATP is the energy
molecule that's used for cells in cells
throughout the whole body. And
particularly cells that are
metabolically very active like muscle
and nerve cells require lots of ATP and
that's why they benefit from having
storage
energy storage systems in sight at their
location.
Now, creatine is not to be confused with
creatinine.
So, creatinine is a breakdown product of
creatine. And if you've had blood tests
where they ordered what's called a
metabolic panel or a chemical panel,
you've probably seen creatinine being
recorded because it is one of the very
simple basic measures. And particularly
creatinine is a marker of kidney
function because of how it's filtered by
the glomemeular part of the kidney. When
they calculate a GFR or glomeular
filtration rate and measure kidney
function, the variable that that's
relying on is creatinine. Now taking
large amounts of creatine in your diet
can lead to misleading creatinine levels
in your blood and body. So that's one
important thing to be aware of. And you
might also have heard of creatinine
kynise
because it used to be a primary the
primary way to detect from blood samples
whether someone had a heart attack. So
there's different forms of creatine
kynise
used in skeletal muscles muscle
throughout your body versus cardiac
muscle in your heart. releases of large
amounts of MD form of creatinine kynise
in the heart was a signal that you were
likely had a heart attack. There are
more specific markers that are being
used now. Creatine was discovered in the
muscles of animals more than 100 years
ago.
It wasn't too many years after they
discovered it that they found that
feeding those animals, including humans,
extra creatine did increase the stores
of phosphocreatine within muscles and to
a lesser extent the nerves. So again,
the nerves are not as adapted taking it
up. This was known for years and there
were sort of experimentations seeing
what it did to muscle ability to
perform. But it wasn't until the 1992
Barcelona Olympics where Lynford
Christie, who won the 100 meter sprint
for the for Britain,
publicly talked about using boosting
with creatine, as did a few other
British track stars. Within four years,
by the time the 1996 Atlanta Olympics,
the claim is more than 80% of
competitors were using creatine to boost
muscle strength and/or endurance. So
creatine is considered a natural
substance. It is not a banned substance.
It is allowed by doping agencies. And
there have been extensive rodent and
human data that in conjunction with
vigorous exercise, taking creatine from
an external source does build muscle
size or volume and does build muscle
strength. There are some exceptions to
that. So in horses, the studies indicate
that feeding them extra creatine does
not lead to increased muscle stores or
creatine or phosphore creatine or change
any strength or performance measures.
And why that's worth bringing up is that
this is a very simple basic important
metabolic process, but results in one
species can't necessarily be translated
to another. So when I'll jump ahead in a
little bit and talk about
cognitive or per um
neural functioning improvements in
animals. That doesn't necessarily tell
us what is happening in humans. A
typical loading dose for creatine is to
take 20 g a day for 5 days and then to
continue with 5 g a day indefinitely. So
way bigger dose than you're getting for
most other supplements which are
measured in milligrams which are a
thousand of a gram or micrograms. So
something like synthroidid for thyroid
problems is measured in micrograms which
are millionth of a gram. So when we're
taking creatine as a supplement, it's a
fairly substantial dose compared to many
other supplements or
medications. Most people can tolerate
that large dose of creatine. Again,
we're getting a normal some amount of it
in our diet anyway. Some people do have
nausea as a side effect.
moderately common. There is some a few
pounds of weight gain and some of that
seems to be muscle mass and some of that
seems to be water gain as more creatine
is stored in the muscle. There's water
is pulled into the muscle as well. So
you need to remain hydrated when you're
taking this creatinine the breakdown
product of creatine
can be boosted by taking extra creatine.
That does not mean that their kidneys
are failing, but it can make it harder
to interpret kidney reports. In the few
decades after this became popular among
weightlifterss and bodybuilders, there
were several reports of kidney problems,
among people taking loading doses in the
range of 20 gram a day of creatine.
Renologists, people who study kidneys
have re-examined many of these case
reports or all the case reports they
could find and were available. they
could come up with other explanations
other than that the creatine was
responsible. So many people who were in
these case reports had pre-existing
health problems. Almost all of them were
engaged in really excessive exercise
regimens. And we know that rabdomiolyis
which is breakdown of muscle proteins
and releasing of the blood to a
dangerous level is a not rare outcome
from really excessive bouts of exercise
and particularly kidneys are the organ
that are most likely to be damaged by
robomiolyis.
So the kidney experts
consider that if you are healthy to
begin with and you're staying hydrated
that creatine in the commonly used
dosages is likely to be extremely likely
to be safe and benign and that maybe
some individuals with pre-existing
health issues or kidney damage should be
monitored more carefully and be more
careful about. Most confounding thing
there is that kidney damage is often
silent until it presents very far along.
So I had a friend in my running club who
was in his late 20s. He looked
completely healthy. He would run with us
weekly and then on routine laboratory
tests was found he was in endstage
kidney failure. Turned out that there
were genetic reasons and he wound up
needing a kidney transplant from his
brother. Kidney damage itself can be
sometimes hard to detect until it's very
far along. But what about creatine for
the brain? Again, that's what many
people are promoting it for these days.
And there's fairly good evidence that in
humans and in many other animals that if
you increase the amount of creatine in
the diet or as supplements, there is
some increased level of creatine or
phosphocreatine and stored in neurons.
It's not nearly proportionally as big an
increase as we see in muscles. And
again, there is active transport that's
required to get it into muscles. It
seems to be a less efficient process.
And whether it's primarily on neurons
versus aststerytes is not as effectively
put into the brain, but there are
measurable increases can be found. 1990s
there were some anecdotal case reports
of creatine being used in a range of
neurologic conditions. What I'm going to
get into looking at some of that data in
a very cursory form. I am indebted to a
researcher. I never met him, but he
writes extensively. His name is Iiggore
Eckert. He's a Brazilian. He's not
associated right now with any university
elsewhere. A careful statistician and
has pointed out flaws in many studies
that have been produced. So Parkinson's
and Huntingtons are both muscle wasting
disease. We call them neuromuscular
conditions, but it's very clear in both
of them that the pathology or damage is
to the neurons and it's secondarily
muscles that are controlled by those
neurons whether away or become spasmotic
and contract in aarent
ways. So a consortium of several
different universities several years ago
almost a decade ago in a large
methodologically rigorous study they
gathered more than a thousand or almost
a thousand patients who were planning to
gather more than that they had 5 years
of data and they actually stopped the
trial because of futility and the
futility the official terminology is
that the evidence was so robustly
showing that there was no benefit to
taking creatine in terms of functional
ability, in terms of muscle wasting and
Parkinsonism that it was considered
unethical to consider unethical to
continue the study. 7 8 years ago, a
study in Huntington's and Huntington's
is much rarer condition, but they had
gathered more than 500 different
patients against several different
universities. had several years of data
and they stopped the study again for
quote futility that creatine was not
showing any improvement compared to the
placebo group. It was considered
unethical to keep going with that study.
So the biggest studies we have on
Parkinson's and Huntington's or any
neurologic condition indicate no benefit
from taking creatine. A few years ago,
there's a 2022 metaanalysis published
and it claimed there's evidence that
creatine helped with human memory and
other cognitive executive function
abilities. And Eert wrote the letter to
the editor for that journal pointing out
that in this metaanalysis they did
repeated measures from the same
patients. Meaning many of the patients
had multiple studies, but they were
treating them for analysises of these
were the same patient with multiple test
results, particularly different
individuals. And the authors retracted
their findings.
And the final conclusion with the proper
analysis was that any differences
between the creatine and the
placebo groups were insignificant. That
there was not a group effect on memory,
cognition, other brain functions. there
was a little evidence that maybe in
older individuals or some other subsets
maybe creatine was having an effect. So
a more recent study, a 2024 meta
analysis combed through hundreds of
studies. They only found 16 that were
done as randomized control vigorous
rigorously done studies less than 500
subjects. So that's averaging between
only about 30 subjects of study. That's
a pretty small sample size. And their
conclusions in this meta analysis was
creatine.
And these were looking at a variety of
mental health conditions and people in
stress environments or other conditions,
sleep deprivation, others. There was no
overall impact on cognitive function
that there was no overall impact on
executive function. There was no overall
impact on attention.
Now there was a small decrease in the
time needed to perform attention tasks.
There was a measurably positive impact
on memory. Creatin across the studies
did seem helpful there. There was no
overall impact on processing speed. And
that the improvements that they did find
were only in narrow groups of patients,
not in healthy normal individuals. So
again, that doesn't disprove creatine
might not have more benefits, but the
studies have been so inconsistent both
within a study and between studies in
terms of proving any of evidence. Now,
some have claimed we should be able to
see more of a benefit in executive
function tests rather than very simple
tests of attention, memory, perception
because executive function circuitry is
more complex and more energy dependent.
There's one sleep deprivation study
where the acute effects of sleep
deprivation could at least be
ameliorated, improved, taking creatine
the next day. Not a particularly large
study, not one that's been replicated
yet. Again, that's not disproving it.
It's just saying we need more evidence.
There's some evidence that in the
elderly, maybe with Alzheimer's or mild
cognitive impairment, there might be
signs of some evidence. there's at least
enough there that it's worth repeating
and enlarging and doing more rigorous
experiments. So far, there's not a
single study looking at ADHD. I mean, if
you go on Reddit or online and other
forum, there's some people who swear
that creatine helped with their ADHD.
There's also numbers of people who have
felt that it didn't do anything. and
those small numbers of individuals who
felt harmed their or worsened their
ADHD. Now, one interesting possibility I
haven't seen anyone else writing about,
I'm sure someone else has thought about
it, that for the muscle benefits, you
have to be doing fairly rigorous
exercise, exercising those muscles.
So, it's possible that creatine is going
to be most beneficial when you combine
it with some mental exercise. It's also
possible with more thorough studies, we
will find bigger impact in more areas.
Or it's possible that we will see like
with the Huntington and Parkinson
studies, there's just not much there for
the brain cuz neurons are a different
organ than muscles and work differently.
The good thing is again that creatine
seems to be fairly safe. So there's much
less barrier to trying it on your own if
you would like to. Right now, the
evidence is pretty darn weak that it's
going to boost your brain function.