Welcome to DNW. My name is from Bemo and
today I'm joined by Mr. Rupert
Sheldrech. Mr. Sheldrech, thank you for
joining us.
&gt;&gt; Good to be with you.
&gt;&gt; It's it's wonderful that you made the
time to speak with us uh for a little
while. Um let me introduce you for the
few viewers and listeners that might
have not heard of you. Um we are mostly
a Dutch audience, I I presume. So um
some people might not have heard of you.
You are uh trained as a biologist. You
uh a biochemist. you've done a lot of
research at Cambridge, you've been at
Harvard, you've also been in other
academic institutions around the world
uh amongst uh amongst them India and
you've done some research to formative
causation and then you found out that
within the existing paradigm it's
difficult to explain how that really
works and then you've gone on to write a
lot of interesting books um and which
put you outside of academia for the most
partic
uh your main um your main field of
research. So we'll talk about that
today. And I think because you were not
really accepted within the scientific
community uh anymore, some people even
call you a pseudocientist, you've also
developed some critique of modern
science um which has um notably been uh
worked out in your book about the
science delusion. Is is that a fair
summary of your of your main interests
and your vag
fair? I'm I still do most of my time I
still doing scientific research. You
know I publish I've published about 20
papers in peerreview journals in the
last five years. So I'm very active in
scientific research. Um it's just that I
don't do it inside a university. Um, but
I'm certainly think of myself as an
active research scientist.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah, that's a good uh uh that's a
good nuance. Yeah, you still conduct
scientific research, but it's not always
although peer-reviewed journals are are
within some sort of a community usually.
So,
&gt;&gt; Oh, yes. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Oh, yes. I'm always in favor of
peer-reviewed journals and that's I
publish my papers in them and
&gt;&gt; so yeah I I I believe in playing playing
science by the rules so that's what I
try to do.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful. Well shall we dive into uh
into the concept of a morphic resonance
maybe? Um uh and where where shall we
start? So um you you've developed this
concept I believe as a reaction uh to
people that say that uh the forms in
nature certain behaviors can be
explained from a um a strictly
mechanical materialist point of view.
You've said oh this is not really the
case and you've developed this concept
to uh as a hypothesis of how things
might work. Uh is that is that all
right? Can you can you elaborate on that
a little bit for our audience?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Well, I came to this idea of
morphic resonance when I was working at
Cambridge in developmental biology,
particularly with plant development.
And so it didn't come out of esoteric
ideas or oriental philosophy or anything
like that. It came out of hardcore
biology. Um, and I became convinced that
you can't explain the forms of plants or
the instincts of animals which are
inherited
just in terms of genes. What genes do is
code for the sequence of amino acids in
proteins. And some of them are involved
in switching on or off other genes. So
just making the right proteins isn't
enough to give you a leaf or a petal or
a root uh or an embryo of an animal is
more than just the genes. It's but you
know when you build a house you don't
just need bricks and cement and uh
reinforcing steel and timber. You
actually need an architect's plan as
well. Um you certainly need the
materials but the genes explain the
materials and the the structure of the
materials in living organisms. They
don't explain their form or their
behavior. And so I became convinced
there must be another way of thinking
about this.
In fact, there was another way. I didn't
invent the idea of morphogenetic
formshaping fields. This was first
invented in the 1920s and had been
developed by a lot of biologists, a kind
of minority school of biology, a more
holistic approach. The genetic approach
and the molecular biology approach was
very reductionistic. you know trying to
reduce everything to molecules which is
the aim of molecular biology as the name
implies. Um whereas this more holistic
approach said that there are in
developing organisms there are
organizing fields which shape what
happens and they're analogous to
magnetic fields. If you look at the iron
findings around a magnet for example,
the eels has a shape, a structure, you
can't see it. It's invisible. But the
iron filings line up in lines of force
around the magnet uh in a particular
structure from an invisible field which
is within and around the magnet. And the
idea of morphogenetic or formshaping
fields when it was first put forward by
developmental biologists working on
fungi and on animals and then later on
plants um was the idea that in a
developing leaf for example there's a
kind of invisible leafshaped field that
shapes the leaf as it grows like a mold
and and it's a holistic principle. It
works from the top down rather than the
bottom up. Um and this helps to explain
a number of features of biology. Uh for
example, if you take a sea urchin embryo
and at an early stage you cut it in
half. Uh what develops is not two half
sea urchins but two small but complete
sea urchins. Each part of it which would
normally only give part of the sea
urchin can give the whole sea urchin.
And it's similar to a magnet. If you cut
a bar magnus in half, you don't get one
north pole and one south pole. You get
two small magnets with a complete uh
magnetic field. So there's something
holistic about fields and so this is
really a field theory of development. I
didn't as I say I didn't invent this.
It's already well established and there
are biologists today working with this
concept. Most notably Michael Levan at
Tufts University in the United States.
What I contributed to this approach uh
was the the question of looking at the
question of where do the fields come
from? Uh if you have these fields that
shape organisms, what gives the field it
shape in the first place? And there are
two possibilities. One is that there are
field equations in some kind of platonic
space outside space and time and that
these govern what happens. This is the
usual approach of scientists. Even if
they claim to be hard-nosed empiricists,
they're usually secret platonists
because most of them believe that nature
is governed by eternal mathematical laws
that were all there at the moment of the
Big Bang.
&gt;&gt; They don't they don't think about it
very much. They just take it for
granted. Um the trouble is with eternal
laws for morphogenetic fields, it makes
biology completely non-historical. You
know, the morphogenetic fields for the
dinosaurs would have been there at the
moment of the Big Bang. They'd still be
here today. It wouldn't really matter
for these equations whether the
dinosaurs had evolved or not or whether
they'd gone extinct. But biology is
radically evolutionary and historical.
What happens depends on what's happened
before. And so the idea of morphic
resonance is that these formshaping
fields have an inherent memory which uh
comes from previous organisms of the
same kind. Each species has a kind of
collective memory. Each individual
contributes to it uh and draws upon it
and therefore there's a cumulative
memory. Uh and so inheritance doesn't
just involve inheriting genes through
DNA or even epigenetic modifications of
the genes through the methylation of DNA
or through changing the proteins that uh
surround it. Uh but largely depends on
morphic resonance from past organisms of
the same species.
And this is a testable theory. It says
that if you train rats to learn a new
trick in Amsterdam, for example, then
rats in London and New York and Sydney,
Australia, uh should all learn the same
trick quicker just because the Dutch
rats have learned it. Um on the basis of
similarity that it has to be the same
breed and the same trick. Um and it also
means that if you solve the times
crossword puzzle um uh today um you know
it will help make it easier for others
to solve it and in fact people have
found that it's easier to do the times
crossword puzzle the next day instead of
on the morning when it's published. Um,
so there's a collective memory. Um, and
I think it affects all our lives. And
perhaps the most radical implication of
this theory is that our own memories are
not stored inside our brains, which is
what people usually assume. The normal
assumption is memories are stored as
modified sinapses or phosphorolated
proteins or even as modified DNA or RNA
inside our brains. Because the
materialist assumption on which science
is based is that if memory exists, which
it does, then it must be material
because everything must be material or
physical. So, it must be inside the
brain. I don't think it's like that at
all. I think that uh we tune into our
memories by morphic resonance from the
past. And the reason we tune into our
own memories is because we're more
similar to ourselves in the past than to
anyone else. And morphic resonance
depends on similarity. So we're more
similar to ourselves. We have our own
memories, but we're also similar to
other people, especially members of our
family in similar the same culture. And
so there's a collective memory as well.
But I'm suggesting individual memory and
collective memory differ in degree but
not in kind. Whereas the conventional
view is that if there's a collective
memory at all of the kind presumed
by Jung then it's completely different
from individual memory which depends on
changes inside the brain. So roughly
that's the idea and it's obviously it's
controversial because it's not the way
that most scientists think about these
things but I think it fits the evidence
better and provides us with a more
reasonable way of thinking about nature.
I think nature has habits not laws. And
I think that the habits of nature, the
whole of nature, including physics and
chemistry, evolve along with the cosmos.
&gt;&gt; Well, thank you for that very clear um
overview of the theory. Um you've
covered a lot that some testibility of
this idea in the in in how we learn or
how these habits seem to create uh or
seem to get ever stronger. If one group
of rats discovers something, then we've
seen this recently with the orca whales.
Um once one group starts tipping over
boats, then all over the world suddenly
these groups seem to learn this
behavior. Uh I don't know if this has
been thoroughly studied, but it was a
nice example I think of this uh of this
idea. Um you've also touched on this the
on the idea of of memory, individual
memory, collective memory. Um so maybe
we can we we can dive in a little deeper
already. Um because this is these kind
of fields as these morphogenetic fields
they are not consistent of matter
obviously they are not uh in spaceime
they are not even energetic
uh as far as I can gather from what I've
read uh they're they're actually not um
describable at all in a in a
conventional uh way. So I was interested
in in how you um how you were explaining
this and maybe um um maybe to save some
time you've you've you've told elsewhere
that that you've uh you've done LSD and
DMT and other uh you've you've had other
transcendental or transcendental like
experiences you're a transcendental
meditator yourself um is is there a way
of seeing this field in your imagination
is this is your research led by some
some sort of more concrete reed uh idea
of what these fields are or is this just
a very dry hypothesis and do you just
try to um to use it as such in your
research which you do of course but
&gt;&gt; well first of all I would say that the
let's separate the topics of
psychedelics and these fields because
the fields don't depend on psychedelic
experience or
in a way a separate part of my life um
um but the I don't the fields are
describable. Um the fields are local.
The fields your fields within and around
your body. My fields within and around
my body. The field of a developing
cabbage plant is within and around the
cabbage plant. What's non-local is the
resonance between fields across space
and time. Morphic resonance which
connects things from the past to the
present across space and time. But the
fields themselves are local. Not
&gt;&gt; and now you're describing them in terms
of of what they do, not what they are.
Correct?
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm talking about what they do.
But
when you if you ask this question, you
know, well, what are they? What are they
made of? Then if I say to you, what's a
gravitational field made of or what's an
electromagnetic field made of? um you
know
this would then become a difficult
problem to answer because you know
gravit Newton when he proposed gravity
had no idea how matter could attract
other matter across empty space. Um
actually he thought God did it. He
thought that um God the sense organ of
God was empty space absolute space and
God's omniscience and omnipotence were
responsible for gravity that matter
itself couldn't possibly attract matter
throughout the whole universe uh thus
matter. So then Einstein came along with
the idea of the gravitational field
saying this is geometric that the
gravitational field isn't in space and
time it is spacetime and the structure
of the gravitational field that you know
if I drop something it falls to earth
and you and I sitting on chairs we're
not floating around that's because the
gravitational field is acting upon us
but
&gt;&gt; we had aist on on the show and he said
one of the biggest mysteries in physics
is what makes the sun uh warp spaceime
they don't know it
&gt;&gt; well exactly so what is the
gravitational field you know I wonder if
physicists who take LSD or DMT actually
see it or something but nobody knows
what it is it's to say it's geometric
means that it's a property of space
itself now and then the electromagnetic
field you see Faraday when he first put
forward the idea of electric and
magnetic fields um didn't know what they
were he knew what he thought of them as
region of influence in space. That was
the definition.
&gt;&gt; And then he had two theories. One is
that the fields were, as he put it,
modifications of mere space. Uh he liked
that idea best, but 19th century was
rather materialistic. And so he said the
other possibility is that they they're
made of subtle matter, the ether. And
when Maxwell developed his equations of
electromagnetism,
he assumed the fields were made of
subtle matter, the ether, and that ether
was what conducted light. But when
Einstein put forward his general special
theory of relativity, he said the ether
doesn't exist. Um, the electromagnetic
fields are made of what? They're made of
the fields themselves. They're nothing
other than special patterns that have
these effects. And they're not made of
anything. And in super string theory or
M theory where physicists try and unify
the different fields of nature, the
strong nuclear fields, the
electromagnetic and the gravitational
fields, they try and do it in terms of a
10dimensional or 11dimensional
primal field. So it's fields all the way
down. And what are they made of?
Dimensional patterns in space. So the
thing is I don't think that
morphagenetic fields need to be more
concrete than the fields of physics
which are talked about without
embarrassment in physics textbooks and
university courses even though we don't
understand what they are and we can't
see them. Um I think they're similar in
nature. I think it's another kind of
field.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Um that's um uh I can follow what
you're saying and and then the physicist
might say well the the gravitational
field is very well defined um we have a
clear formula of what it does and then u
well you would probably say well first
of all there's dark matter and second of
all even the the physiological constants
um you don't you don't believe that they
have been constant or are constant um is
that right? Well, yes. Well, first of
all, if they say the gravitational field
explains everything is perfectly well
defined, as you rightly say, it doesn't
explain everything, which is why they've
had to invent dark matter five times
more than normal matter. Um, never been
observed, no independent evidence for
it, but they need it to make their
equations balanced to explain the
structure of galaxies and so on. So,
this is far from being a clear,
well-defined, totally understood theory.
It's utterly obscure. I mean dark matter
is literally obscure and their whole
theory depends on it. So it's not really
a very good example of a totally
well-defined theory. Um
so uh well I think the with more genetic
fields you see the there are some
quantum physicists like the late David
Bow or professor Bernard Carr in London
who's a leading theoretical physicist
who thinks that morphagenetic fields may
be explained in terms of these extra
dimensions that you have in super string
or M theory. Um Bernard Carr points out
that super string and M theory with 10
or 11 dimensions, one of time and nine
or 10 of space have all this extra
potential in them. No one knows what all
these extra dimensions are doing. They
could easily be coupling things up
together across space and time. They're
in current physical theory, they're
severely undermployed.
So it may be that in even in existing
physical theory there's uh the
possibility of finding a a basis for
morphagenetic fields but my main aim is
not to come up with speculative theories
of what they might be. In fact I now
receive one or two speculative theories
of what they might be every week in my
inbox from people who
&gt;&gt; people who've generated them by AI. Um,
so I mean this is one of the problems of
my life at the moment. I get about 10
theories of everything a week generated
by AI. Um, and so do other scientists,
not just me. Um, so
I don't have the feeling that what we
need is more theory. I I'm much more
interested in evidence because when
Faraday put forward his idea of
electrical and magnetic fields, there
was no mathematics. He didn't know what
they were. He just described the
phenomena. One of the phenomena was the
rotation of electric things in magnetic
fields which gave rise to the electric
motor. Now there's millions hundreds of
millions of electric motors in the
world. They all work. Whatever theory we
have, you know, then Einstein Maxwell
has a theory. Einstein has another
theory. And in quantum electronamics,
the theory of electromagnetic fields now
says that all electromagnetic
interactions are mediated by virtual
photons that pop into being from the 0
point energy field which underlines
everything. Well, no one's ever seen a
virtual photon because by definition
they're not observable. Um, we've got
now a theory that's based on a a field
that's supposed to be full of energy
that's everywhere. a teaspoon full of it
has enough energy to power the world for
for for years. You know, it's this is
this is a theory. Um, no one's ever
observed these things, but electric
motors just go on working anyway. If
that theory
&gt;&gt; your point your your point is uh is very
clear. Um and I'm sorry for convoluting
um the questions about how would you
describe this field in your own uh
personal experience but now that we have
done this homework of explaining why we
don't have to um why why we don't have
to describe what these fields are made
of um I'm still very interested in uh
your inspiration for for these if you
want to share it of course otherwise we
can just go on to the function of these
fields as you uh as you've suggested.
Well, um, I think that psychedelics can
illuminate the nature of the mind and
for me they've been very helpful. I
first took LSD around 1970. So, I mean,
this it goes back a long way. I'm not a
a sort of
psychedelic
maniac or anything and I I have taken
them occasionally over the years, but I
certainly it's not my main activity or
anything like that. But the reason I
thought of morphic resonance in fact had
nothing to do with psychedelics.
I was grappling with the question of how
these fields could be inherited. I was I
was convinced there must be more genetic
formshaping fields. I was convinced they
couldn't just be explained by eternal
mathematical formula because biology is
evolutionary. There's a presence of the
past in biology in everything that
happens.
So at that stage I was you know I was
really this was I was working in
Cambridge and I I was sort of thinking
of just for for for weeks months I was
thinking how can they be inherited it
can't be through the genes there must be
some other way and then I read a book by
the great French philosopher Hri Bergson
um matter and memory published in French
in 1898 in English in 1911.
And Bergong was totally out of fashion
at the time. U but a friend of mine who
was interested in French literature told
me about Bergong and said he thought I'd
be interested. I read matter and memory
and for me this was a revelatory
experience because what Bergson chose in
matter and memory is that uh that memory
works in a completely different way from
matter and that he was the first person
I met who argued that memories are not
stored inside the brain the standard
view which we've already done and he
thought memory he was thinking only in
terms of human episodic memory
remembering particular events as opposed
to habits. Um, and he thought this
memory involved a completely new kind of
causation of influence across time at a
distance in time and that that memory is
not something in space. Memory is a
relationship in time. And in the
background of that theory um was the
idea of memory in Platinus the
neoplatonic philosopher. Um Bergon
lectured on Platinus at the college of
France. So this was rooted in ancient
European platonic philosophy and the
British philosopher Bertrand Russell was
very influenced by Bergson in
considering another kind of memory which
he called manemic causation. M neme m i
manemic to do with me a form of
causation that's different from normal
causation as a causation across time. So
when I discovered that actually all
these people and long tradition had
considered there was a new kind of
causation across time I it was a
liberating thought for me and then I
suddenly flashed upon me that morphic
resonance well the name morphic
resonance came to me that could be a
resonance of form across time of
self-organizing
rhythmic patterns because all forms all
all nature is rhythmic or hence
resonance um across time and when I went
to after working in in Cambridge I went
to India where I was working in an
agricultural research institute the
international crops research institute
in Hyderabbad. Um I then discovered when
I started talking about morphic
resonance to my Indian colleagues that
their response was totally unlike my
colleagues in Cambridge who were
puzzled, baffled, sometimes angry at
this idea. My Indian colleagues took it
completely differently. They they said,
"Oh, there is nothing new in this idea.
Ancient rishies and seat seers have said
this thousands of years ago. Of course,
there is memory in nature. It is part of
karma." You know, their philosophy of
karma and and Buddhist philosophy also
has this memory built in. So I had the
opposite problem in India from in
England. England in England people
thought this was outrageous idea and and
and you know barely comprehensible
whereas in India their response was
totally blasze you know nothing new in
this people have said this for thousands
of years and I said why don't Indian
scientists get on and try and test it
and do something about it so the problem
there was to try and get them to see
that you need to do something about this
idea if it's going to change science
it's not enough to sit in a chair and
ancient rishies have said this thousands
of years ago. Um anyway,
&gt;&gt; I thought the um the inspiration uh I
thought I read that somewhere but then
then it's good to write a record. I also
read that the big influences were
Platonic and and Beth and um but I I
thought the um I thought LSD had
something to do with it which which
would have been interesting to me but um
&gt;&gt; oh well it has something to do with my
views on consciousness which is another
part of my work but but not specifically
to do with morphic resonance.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um
well can we um just to um to tie into
the story about India a little bit um
what
they have this this karmic theory and
the history and nature they also have
the the idea of the nakashi records of
the um which is which is more akin maybe
to union uh collective consciousness. So
this this goes to into deeper archetypal
knowledge maybe spiritual knowledge as
well not only the knowledge in nature
but also these um more spiritual
concepts. Um how do how do you feel
about the likeness between uh
morphogenetic fields in the acrashic
records? Can you and and and union uh
collective uh unconscious uh I know
you've spoken about this a lot but um I
still think a lot of viewers would um
would find that very interesting.
Well, I think morphic fields and morphic
um resonance is very and the collective
memory is very similar to Jung's idea of
the collective unconscious, but he was
talking just about humans. And what I'm
saying is this would apply to dogs and
cats and and plants and you know holly
hawks and palm trees and and even to
atoms and molecules and crystals that
there's a a memory in all these things.
It's not just humans. So I would say uh
Jung's idea of the collective
unconscious is part of a vastly bigger
theory of memory and nature. Um in terms
of the accashic record it's not the
Indian texts don't actually use that
phrase that was a phrase introduced by
theosophists in the late 19th century
interpreting Indian philosophy concept
like allayia vignyana which means seed
consciousness. They said there was
something like seeds in nature from
which had happened before could grow
again and so on. But they they collect
the idea of the accashic record I think
is a bit misleading because it's a
metaphor and the idea of a record
immediately conjures to one's mind
either a gramophone record or a filing
cabinet or a smart you know hard drive
or something like that. it implies some
spatial memory system and akash is the
element of space. Um so for some people
it conjures up the image of something
like a cloud in the sky like a iCloud in
the sky which has all this information
in it. But of course computer clouds
aren't in the sky. They're in data
centers using huge amounts of energy um
with actual physical hardware. um
storing the information on discs and and
drives and things and flash drives. Um
so I think the accashic record gives the
wrong idea the idea of some kind of
celestial filing cabinet. Um the idea
that memory is spatial
like sometimes people say to well where
is morphic resonance stored? Well, you
see, I think it's the wrong question
because, as I said earlier, memory is a
relation in time, not in space. And
although we store records, you know, on
carved in stone, on Greek inscriptions
and Egyptian hieroglyphs and stuff or
written in books or on parchment or or
now in in flash drives and stuff, we
store own memory in physical forms. It's
not how our own memories actually work.
It's how our cultural memory is
preserved in literate cultures. Uh but
most cultures were traditionally not
literate and and the memory was
preserved by oral transmission. Uh which
again is much more like this
transmission across time, not storage in
space. So anyway, I think it's a
misleading metaphor, but it's similar.
It's saying something similar that is a
kind of memory in nature.
So how do you how do you um
uh
how do you uh explain is not the word
but how do you um how do you split uh
archetypal images that our individual um
imagination might be might be fed in
dreams or images that we might get or
psychedelic experiences.
um how would you account I know you you
do account for it in your theory but
maybe you can elucidate a little bit uh
of elaborate a little bit on that um so
so let's say um we we might have the
same um the same archetypal ideas in our
dreams but they both enter our
individual consciousness so here we we
go into the topic of consciousness
perhaps um as well
&gt;&gt; well I think they're a collective memory
you And I I think there are some
archetypes which are extremely deep like
for example the archetypal experience of
a baby sucking its mother's breast and
and this is archetypal not just for
humans but for all mammals which by
definition breastfeed. Um so there are
some things experiences like that which
are very deep deeply archetypal. There's
the experience of being born coming out
through the birth canal um which the
psychologist Stan Gra who did a lot of
research on psychedelics in the 60s and
70s
&gt;&gt; um found that many people who took
psychedelics uh LSD was what he was
looking at particularly had kind of
near-death experiences. uh what they
experienced was being in a most horrible
situation where being compressed,
trapped. They felt uh you know that they
were being crushed. They had this awful
experience and then they found
themselves going through a kind of tube
and out into the light and then the
light was full of peace and joy and
bliss and so on. And this is very
similar to near-death experiences where
people have a terrible accident and they
go out of their body and then they go
through a kind of tunnel into the light.
And and this is transformative for many
people because when they're in the
light, they they feel they've seen an
aspect of reality they didn't know
before. They've experienced it. Many of
them lose the fear of death, become much
more spiritually in in interested and so
on. Well, um, Grath found this happened
with a lot of psychedelics. And I think
actually for a lot of people,
psychedelics today can be a kind of
right of passage of expansion of
consciousness, awareness of other
realms. That certainly was for me. Um,
when I first took LSG, it was very
similar to what Graph described. But
then you see he says that traditionally
humans have had the experience of being
born and after floating happily in the
amniotic fluid inside one's mother's
womb for 9 months.
Suddenly things turn nasty. The the womb
starts contracting. You start being
crushed. You feel trapped. It's no fun
being there anymore. You want to get out
of there. And what happens? You get out
of there through a dark tube that leads
you into the light and then a completely
new experience of life happens. And so
you could argue that even for people
born by cesarian section there's this
deep archetype of this birth experience.
Grath argues this is a deep yian
archetype based on experience.
And then if you take cultural
archetypes, for example, in India, the
elephant-headed god Ganesh is
everywhere. There's pictures of Ganesh.
He's statues in temples, pictures on
calendars in people's houses and so on.
You see Ganesh everywhere in India and
Indians have dreams of Ganesh. I
discovered online groups where Indians
discuss their Ganesh dreams with each
other. Um so Ganesh is part of their
dream world. Um, but there are people
who've had psychedelics in the west who
knew nothing about Indian culture who've
experienced elephant-headed multi-armed
figures that later when they came across
images of Ganesh, they realized this is
what they'd seen in their psychedelic
experience.
&gt;&gt; I think that psychedelic experiences
enable us to enter this dreamlike world.
But when we enter from in sleep into the
dream state then they're often confused
and fleeting our dreams except if you
have a lucid dream when you learn how to
control your dream you the dream waking
up within dream knowing you're dreaming
&gt;&gt; but I think psychedelic experiences
visionary experiences with psychedelics
are similar in kind to dreams but more
vivid more co coherent u more
experienced in a more enduring way. And
so I think that actually there's a big
overlap between the archetypes people
experience in psychedelic experiences
and dream archetypes.
&gt;&gt; Does this extend to premonition as well
and visions of the future or do you
believe it's all it's always to do with
memories?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think dreams are interesting
because it's not always to do with
memory. Um, I think some of it is. It's
I think pre-cognitive dreams really
happen. I mean this is not because I
have a theory of them. I don't the
morphic resonance is about influences
from the past not from the future.
&gt;&gt; So um I don't predict precognitive
experiences on the basis of morphic
resonance. But I think they happen
partly because I've experienced them
myself through pre-cognitive dreams
partly because in psychic research
people have studied the cognitive dreams
in in the natural history of them. Um, I
I studied it myself after the World
Trade Center 911 disaster in New York. I
thought, well, if anyone's going to have
precognitive dreams, this would be a
pretty good thing to dream about. I
mean, it's so spectacular.
&gt;&gt; Became archetypal that the planes
crashing into those towers. Um within a
few days of the uh 911 disaster, I had
advertisements in the Village Voice
newspaper in New York and posters in
Union Square, New York and elsewhere um
saying, "Did you dream of the World
Trade Center? I have 75 dreams that
people sent me. In some cases, they told
their dreams to someone else, you know,
after the dream, but before the
disaster."
&gt;&gt; And they were in of three main kinds.
One kind was people in planes that
crashed into a skyscraper. Not
necessarily the World Trade Center.
Sometimes it was the Empire State
Building, sometimes the Sears Tower in
Chicago. Um, some of them were being
trapped in a burning skyscraper that was
collapsing. And some of them were being
in the streets of the city with deathly
calm with clouds of dust rolling down
the street in a sense of doom and
disaster. you know that the in being in
a doomed city um
&gt;&gt; people that that read reports about the
Northwood plans of the CIA were really
people that imagine this uh this
particular situation you feel
&gt;&gt; well you could that would be an
alternative hypothesis that the people
weren't precognitively dreaming it they
were picking it up telepathically from
the minds of conspirators and the CIA
and Mosap or whoever whatever conspiracy
theory it is Um but I think so many
other examples of precognitive dreams.
&gt;&gt; I think that's
&gt;&gt; these are known records of the CIA where
these plans were uh these Northwood
plans were uh were published but uh but
no matter so that's very interesting. I
didn't know that you that you did this.
Um so so why wouldn't you extend your
your uh your fields to the future then
if if you have uh if you have some uh
verifiable
um verifiable data that that shows that
people do have premonitions or uh this
kind of dreams.
&gt;&gt; Well morphic resonance is primarily
about habits uh repeated in the past and
morphic resonance explains unconscious
habits. It explains some conscious
memories. Um, but I don't think that
it's a I don't think it's a total theory
of everything. It doesn't in itself
explain consciousness. Um, um,
consciousness, as you know, is the hard
problem in in philosophy of mind. And
morphic resonance is good at explaining
unconscious things. It's can help
explain memory. But consciousness itself
and the nature of consciousness is not
explained by it. Nor is creativity. Um
resonance explains habits in evolution
but it doesn't explain how new things
happen. And so evolution, biological,
psychological, cultural, cosmic, all
forms of evolution involve both habits
and creativity interacting.
And so consciousness and creativity
are mean there's something else that's
not part of morphic resonance. And I
think that the nature of consciousness
and how far consciousness extends in
time uh is another question. Most
precognitions
uh of things in the next 2 three days
occasionally a few weeks or months but
they're very often quite short term. And
so then you see when you think of
consciousness what's its relation to
time as William James and others have
talked about it you know consciousness
is not instantaneous
our consciousness is spread out in time
which is why when you go to the cinema
and you see a film you see continuous
motion rather than a sh series of still
photographs which is what films are
there lots of photos but if it was
instantaneous the film wouldn't be a
movie, it wouldn't be moving. So, our
consciousness is spread out in time and
it may be spread out in different
lengths of time depending on the
circumstances. Maybe in dreams it
encompasses a greater time both future
and past. Um, and in in waking life it
may be 100 milliseconds or 500
milliseconds or something like that. The
spread of it, I don't know. These are
mere speculations. I just think there's
so much we don't understand and
especially about consciousness itself.
&gt;&gt; Uh it's interesting that you've touched
on creativity as well because because I
think they're very related and that was
actually one of the questions I had
reading about um these habits that that
are captured in these fields. So that
that form um um sort of as a collective
memory and I was um I I was interested
in in in how you envision uh individual
um individual innovation shaping these
fields. Uh because I because I would
imagine that you would say well if a lot
of people have have done something in
the same way and this habit becomes
stronger than other habits. that made
sense to me and I think that that really
fits our observations in the world. If
uh if something is done a certain way
then many people gravitate towards these
patterns uh even of belief. We'll touch
on this uh maybe with uh uh the
scientific illusion if we come to this
but um
um
how how how do you see innovation or
creativity in this? is not something
this theory captures or
&gt;&gt; no it doesn't capture it because it as I
say it's really about repetition morphic
resonance is about why things are
repeated
&gt;&gt; and um obviously creativity happens and
I think there's a kind of natural
selection at every level I mean in a
sense I'm a kind I'm not anti- Darwinian
I'm kind of super Darwinian in the sense
that I think that even in the realm of
nature crystals, molecules and so on.
Um, whenever an old habit is blocked,
you can get creativity. Lots of new
things happen. And biological mutations,
for example, if you irradiate a plant or
an animal and cause lots of mutations,
you get hundreds of different
changes in genes and hundreds of
different changes in the organism as it
responds to the changed genes. And most
mutations are harmful, but some may have
a benefit by natural selection. And
those are selected by natural selection.
They get repeated. The more often
they're repeated, the more habitual they
become.
&gt;&gt; The same in the human realm. And every
year there are millions of several
million new books published and there
are thousands and thousands of new
patents and thousands and thousands of
new tunes released and so on. But most
of them you never hear about again.
There's a cultural selection where some
tunes become popular and get into the
top 10 of pop charts and so on. Um
others languish and no one ever hears of
them. So what I think is at every level
there's a vast amount of creativity and
then there's a selection of a few out of
this large range of possibilities um
which then become habitual. So there's a
kind of natural selection operating uh
at all uh at all levels of nature. Now
it just seems to be the case that
creativity is inherent in nature. I mean
if you look at evolution, why do we need
millions of species of beetles and
thousands and thousands of species of
fish and and butterflies and so on? I
mean there predigiously creative. Nature
is predigiously creative. the whole
universe is it just seems in the nature
of things to be creative. But if it was
only creative with no natural selection,
it would be chaotic. So a combination of
creativity, natural selection and habit,
I think gives us the universe we live
in.
&gt;&gt; Great.
Um
that makes sense. Um you you've you've
mentioned uh Stanis of this now. Um from
from uh from him to Richard Darnis is
only a small leap. Um I was interested
um I'm an astrologer myself. Have you
read Have you read Richard Tarnis's
work?
&gt;&gt; I've read some of it and I know Richard
Tarnis and he's very kindly done
readings on my own charts uh for me. Um,
so I mean I I I haven't studied
astrology. My wife's keen on it. So if I
have any astrological questions, I just
ask her. Um, but the
you see in principle I think that the
the state of the solar system at any
given time is is the solar system is a
kind of organism. The planets are in
different relative positions to each
other. And I think the quality of time
within the solar system is changing
owing to these movements of the planets.
I don't have any problem with that idea.
It's in fact it's simply a fact. Um but
um the idea that these can actually
influence events on Earth then it's an
EV for me it's an evidential question.
You know what's the evidence? And I've
seen some evidence but I've never been
motivated to look into it very much. So
I I'm I I sort know Richard Tons's
things about the influence of the outer
planets and Pluto and so on. It's it
involves looking at a huge amount of
historical and biographical data which
I've never felt motivated to do.
I suppose it's because I've always been
more interested in
the kind of experiments I I can do. I'm
I'm an experimentalist by nature and my
mind rapidly goes to experiments and I
love experiments that can actually do
here on Earth and preferably as simply
as possible. Whereas with astrology and
indeed astronomy, you can't do
experiments. Astronomy is just like
astrology is an observational science.
It's not an experimental science. You
can't move a galaxy to see what happens
or or blast a star into a different
position. Um you astronomers can't do
experiments and you know I'm an
experimental biologist by nature. I I
love doing experiments. So that's one
reason I've never been drawn to that
area. It's more about correlation and so
on, which is
&gt;&gt; I think some some people in uh in um uh
in Switzerland might disagree with
physicists or astronomers not being able
to do experiments, but I I understand
what you mean. Um let's let's move on
because of time um maybe because um you
you've already um said some things about
how you can test this theory. So we now
we now know what these fields are, how
you see them, uh how they relate to some
other interesting topics of
consciousness or archetypes or even
astrology. So let's dive a little bit
more into your actual research. Your
research is trying to test this theory.
Um as you you are a biologist or a
biochemist or well usually it's it's the
same thing maybe. Um, so
maybe um you you you've ventured into uh
into more uh spiritual um spiritual
topics of late. Um your last couple of
books are about these topics. Um they're
about um not so much about animal
behavior. You've done a lot of research
about that and maybe we can skip over
that and tune into the things you're uh
you're researching now. It's like the
the sense of being stared at or um the
the influence of gratefulness or
pilgrimage. I think you that's one of
the topics you've been studying of late.
Um would that be a good bridge to to to
to look to your current interests and
also in this more experimental part of
your work?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Well, let me I'll start with the
sense of being stared at because you see
I think that our view of ourselves and
our minds has been tremendously
constricted. The materialist worldview
which is still dominant in the academic
world and in science departments and in
government and industry and education um
has the idea that we live in a universe
made up of unconscious matter obeying
mathematical laws. Um, and it's all
purposeless and unconscious. Everything
is made of that unconscious matter. The
problem with that view, as you know, is
that when it comes to ourselves, um, how
come we're conscious if our brains and
our bodies are made of nothing but
unconscious matter. The hard problem in
the philosophy of mind is the fact we
ought not to be conscious if
everything's unconscious. And some
philosophers of mind have spent their
entire careers trying to prove that
we're not conscious. They I don't know
if they even convince themselves, but
they certainly don't convince many other
people. And and that's why it's called
the hard problem as you know. Um because
we ought not to be conscious. But it's
still based on the idea that the
materialist idea is the consciousness is
generated inside the brain. It's all
inside the head. Now, I think that our
minds are extended in space and in time.
They're extended in time through our
desires and our intentions and possibly
and also through precognitive
experiences. They're extended in time in
the past by the way we're connected with
what's happened before through memory
and habit.
&gt;&gt; But I think they're extended in space as
well. I don't think they're inside our
heads. I think that when we see things,
the images we see are outside us exactly
where they seem to be. I mean, this is a
difficult point to get across because
most people take it for granted that
when they look at a tree, their image of
the tree is where the tree is. It's
outside them. It's that's they're seeing
a tree. It's out there. The official
view of course is not that. The official
view is that light comes in from the
tree. changes happen in the retina and
the brain and the brain then generates a
virtual reality display of a tree inside
the head, a representation of the tree.
Um, so it's meant to be inside your
brain. Now, that's the official view and
people who've been trained in
universities and teach in universities
will know that's the official view and
that's what they'll say if you ask them.
If you ask most people, they don't think
like that. They don't experience that.
is they don't have a theory that goes so
against their own experience. They think
their mind that the somehow the image is
where it seems to be. And I think
they're right. This is what people over
the whole world have always thought is
what children think in our own culture.
Um people assume the images are out
there where they seem to be. So if
that's true, that would mean our minds
extend in every act of vision throughout
the world. Everything we look at, even
if we look at a star, the mind reaches
out in a sense to touch a distant star
across literally astronomical distances.
So our minds may be extended in everyday
experience just through vision. So to
test that um how do you test it? Do we
really project out images? Is this just
a way of speaking or a kind of an
alternative framework or something? I
think it's actual fact and and it should
be testable. So if I look at you from
behind and you don't know I'm there,
could my mind reaching out to touch you
by projecting an image to where you are
be felt by you? Could you sense you're
being looked at and turn around and find
I'm looking at you? And when you ask
that question, you find that it's
extremely common. Um, it's uh 95% of
people, including children, who've
experienced being stared at from behind.
You turn around, there's someone looking
at you or you stare at someone and they
turn around and look back. It doesn't
happen all the time or every time, but
it does happen. And it happens with
animals, too. They're very sensitive to
it, more sensitive than most humans.
&gt;&gt; So, I've been doing research on this for
many years. And indeed I had an
experiment in the Netherlands for 25
years at the Nemo Center in Amsterdam.
It was one of the most popular exhibits.
It was called, you may have seen it
yourself, have you got eyes in the back
of your head? Um, and it was very
popular with families and children would
sit there blindfolded and behind a
computer would tell the person behind
them whether to stare or not to stare.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. and their response was either
right or wrong and it recorded and
statistically analyzed the results.
Hundreds of thousands of trials happened
in in uh with the statistical
significance was astronomical that most
people had got eyes in the back of their
head. They could tell when they're being
looked at. And was um all analyzed
statistically by a statistician at the
Free University in Amsterdam, Yanvan
Paus. and he um and this experiment ran
and what it showed was the most
sensitive subjects were children under
the age of nine which is what I found
myself. Anyway, my point is this is
something you can do research on. A lot
of research has been done. This seems to
be a real phenomenon and what I've um my
latest iteration of this research is an
app which works on mobile telephones.
It's called sense.training.
Eye is sense.training.
Um, and I'm currently recruiting people
to take part in this research. I've set
up a research group. Um, and I invite
anyone who hears this to um to look into
it. If they go to my website, they'll
find sheldrake.org. They'll find the
sense training app and they can uh email
me and I'll put them on to uh through
the website. as a contact address and
put them on
&gt;&gt; Google Play and then the the the Apple
store. How do you call the other one?
&gt;&gt; Yes, it's on Apple and Android. Yes,
it's on those stores. I see. I I see.
&gt;&gt; The other experiment you told me about
before we um we went into this recording
um uh the joint attention tests with uh
with nursing mothers. Is that also fly
an app or is that uh
&gt;&gt; No, the joint attention is is can you
tell when someone else is looking at the
same thing as you?
&gt;&gt; And by the age of one, most babies learn
to look at the same thing. It's a big
step in child development. Children who
don't develop this often turn out to be
autistic. But that's why when you see
parents walking around with children,
I've done it myself, you know, they they
you're in the street and they point to
say doggy, you know, or or cat or tree
and and this pointing and looking at the
same thing brings minds into a kind of
resonance with each other. And I've done
experiments that show that if you look
at the same object for example if I if I
have um a sheet of paper like that. So
imagine that's a wall and if someone's
there and I'm this side you have an
object there you're both looking at the
same object but you can't see each other
like put apple in a doorway. So you the
the wall you both on different sides of
the wall you can't see each other. Then
using my same appense training app you
can do experiments where one person
either looks or doesn't look at the
apple um uh and the other person has to
guess if it's being looked at or not.
Can you tell when someone else is
looking at the same thing? Do your eye
beams intersect or interact?
If we're projecting Ibeams which are
part of our extended minds, do extended
minds interact? This is so I have a
research group for joint attention as
well and anyone who wants to can take
part.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Wonderful. So but you're
especially looking you told me for uh
for nursing mothers, right?
&gt;&gt; Oh, that's another project. Yes. Um so
let me just briefly outline that. Um
because
&gt;&gt; I thought that's the joint attention uh
uh the joint attention experiment but
that's those are different things then
&gt;&gt; yes the nursing mother one is a
telepathy experiment.
&gt;&gt; Ah okay yeah
&gt;&gt; I've done a lot of research on telepathy
because I think minds resonate with each
other at a distance for people who are
bonded. I've done published a big review
last year of research by myself and by
others including Dick Berman at the um
at at the University of Amsterdam um uh
about telephone telepathy. Can you tell
when someone's intending to phone you?
When the phone rings, a lot of people
just know who it is before they look at
the caller ID or answer it. That's a
telepathy experiment. I've done a lot on
that, but we haven't time to discuss
that. But what I'm looking at right now
is uh telefan babies and nursing
mothers. Many nursing mothers have had
the experience that when they start
going back to work after breastfeeding
for a few months at home, they go back
to work and what they find is that when
they're at work or when they're in
shopping or something away from their
baby, they feel their milk lets down.
Well, you and I have never experienced
this, not being women, but um what it
feels like for women is that their
breasts tingle. Not all women find this,
but and the breast starts squeezing out
milk. It's an oxytocin mediated reflex.
Normally, it happens when the mother
hears the baby cry. But when they're
away from the baby and this happens to
them, most mothers just assume that
their baby needs them and they used to
just go home. Now they ring home on
their mobile phone and I've done a study
on this uh 25 years ago. Um and we found
that they were they were usually right.
It was hugely significant statistically.
The mothers seem to be a telepathic
response. It wasn't just synchronized
rhythms or anything. It seemed to be a
telepathic response. Very basic
fundamental form of telepathy. They
didn't think about it. Their breasts
responded then they thought about it. It
was a physiological response.
So I now have a research assistant
working with me and we've launched a
project with nursing mothers and babies.
And now what we're doing is many mothers
now have video baby monitors. They have
smartphones to film this. Before we
didn't film it, we just wrote down the
the observations. But now we're doing a
filmed study with nursing mothers. So if
anyone watching this is nursing a a
baby, they've started going back to
work. And if they notice that their milk
lets down uh when their baby needs them
um and like would like to take part in
the study for which there's a modest
payment for participation then again get
in touch with me through my website by
email.
&gt;&gt; Wonderful. Wonderful. So maybe just to
um I know we're short on time, but um
um I think we've we've established as
far as we can in in a short podcast that
um what this theory is, how it works,
that you're that you've been working
tirelessly to to prove this or to do or
deise experiments. You've been doing
this since 1981, I think, of devising
experiments. Um not all universities
have picked up on it but um can we go to
the consequences or maybe you you um you
you you've been writing about spiritual
um uh about about spiritual experiences
more and more um what what what are the
implications of of this idea of of
morphic resonance and and what would you
like to I mean if this is all true and I
um and I believe you're on to something
and I think most people that are not
blinded by mechanistic materialism
understand that there's something to
this. Uh what what implications does
that have? What does it mean for us as a
as a human species or as conscious
beings? What what what should we learn
from this?
&gt;&gt; Well, there are many many implications
of course for the way we interpret
nature with the way we experience
ourselves and our families and
ancestors. Um but some of the aspects
I've been interested in in relation to
spiritual practices um through the use
of mantras and rituals. All religions
have rituals and in fact all societies
have them and what rituals often involve
is reenacting some primal act in the
history of the group. So, Jewish people
every year celebrate the feast of
Passover, which reenacts the Passover
dinner of the Jewish people in Egypt the
night before they left slavery in Egypt
to journey through the wilderness to the
promised land. And
&gt;&gt; they reenact that dinner and with the
right food, the right words, the bitter
herbs and so forth. And what I think is
happening is that by taking part in the
ritual today or at least on Passover,
people affirm their Jewish identity as
part of the group. They, as it were,
resonate together by doing the same
thing. But they also resonate with all
the people who've done it before them,
right back to the first Passover,
connecting with the ancestors and
connecting also respectively connecting
with those who do it after them, you
know, in generations to come. And
Christian holy communion itself a
Passover dinner is similar. Pope present
participant share a meal together a
ritual meal bread and wine of Christ and
become part of a community by having
this ritual meal together but also
connect with all those who've done it
before right back to the original last
supper.
And the American Thanksgiving dinner is
a secular ritual, a national ritual
where every year they Americans gather
together to have this ritual meal with
turkey and things which is a
commemoration of the original harvest
Thanksgiving dinner for the first
settlers in New England for giving
thanks for surviving their first year in
the new world. And through taking part
in these rituals, people become part of
a group in the present. They become part
of a social group through joint
participation and joint attention. And
um through morphic resonance they become
connected with all those who've done it
before. And uh that's what people think
they're doing in rituals. They think
they're connecting with those who've
done it before. That's why rituals are
conservative. If you do it the same way,
you'll connect better than if you keep
changing it. Um and I think rituals make
tremendous sense in the light of morphic
resonance. Um so I think it sheds a
great light on that particular kind of
spiritual practice. And another one
which you mentioned I'm very keen on at
the moment is pilgrimage because
pilgrimage was a great thing in Europe
as in everywhere in the world.
Everywhere in the world has pilgrimages,
journeys to sacred places which are the
meeting points of heaven and earth. You
know in Stonehenge in England 3,000
well 5,000 years ago uh you know people
were uh congregating at these great
megalithic temples uh at those
solstesses
midsummer and mid- winter coming on a
pilgrimage to celebrate together. And
these link heaven and earth. The stones
upright stones link heaven and earth.
Megaliths. Um then Egyptians had
obelisks. We have towers and spires of
churches. Mosques have minouretes. And
so sacred places have a vertical
dimension which I think literally
connects heaven and earth because these
vertical structures attract lightning
and bring physical influences from into
the earth at that point. I think there's
a physical aspect. But I think that when
we visit places which have been visited
before in a spiritual manner for
ceremonies and rituals on pilgrimage, uh
we connect with the experience of those
who've been in that place before.
There's a kind of memory in the place. I
don't think it's etched in the stones
because I don't think memor is material,
but I think we resonate with people
who've been there before in experiencing
the same stimuli from being in the same
place. Um, and pilgrimage uh to sacred
places archetypal in all cultures. I
mean, Muslims have them to Mecca and to
the shrines of holy men. Hindus have
lots of pilgrimages. Buddhists have
pilgrimages.
Hunter gatherer societies have song
lines like in Australia where they go to
these prominent places in the landscape
in their annual journeys around the
landscape. And all of Europe was
crisscrossed by pilgrimage routes in the
middle ages to Santiago to Compostella
to Can to Canterbury to uh to Trontime
Cathedral in Norway the shrine Olaf. But
in the Protestant Reformation this was
suppressed in England. It was made
illegal in 1538 to go on pilgrimages and
in most Protestant countries it was
pilgrimage was abolished which left a
void in the soul of the northern
Europeans. I think that's why the
English invented tourism. I think it's
best seen as a form of secularized
pilgrimage where tourists will go to
great sacred places, but when they get
there, they can't kneel down and say a
prayer or light a candle or do a puja in
the Hindu temple.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And you need to make a selfie.
&gt;&gt; Yes. They have to pretend that they're
there.
At the very least, they take a selfie.
But if they're a bit more intellectual
about it, they have to pretend they're
interested in art history or something
like that. when in fact they're not
really very interested in art history at
all in most cases. So I think what's
going on is connecting with this the
being drawn to these places where
there's this connect sense of connection
and what's going on in Europe at the
moment. I don't know about the
Netherlands, but certainly in Spain, the
revival of pilgrimage to Santiago to
Compostella is huge. And when they first
revived it in its modern form in the
1980s, in 1987, 1,000 people walked
there. Last year, 500,000 people walked
there. And in Britain in the last 10
years, the British Pilgrimage Trust, of
which I'm a patron, has been reopening
the ancient footpath pilgrimage routes
and developing new ones to our ancient
holy places, to holy wells, to the
sources of rivers, um, to the great
cathedrals. Um, and this has become a
pretty mainstream activity now. It's
astonishing how quickly this has caught
on, attracting many young people and
many people who would describe
themselves as spiritual but not
religious because it's deeply satisfying
to go on the journey connecting with
nature, walking through the countryside,
uh connecting with ancient holy places.
Um, and so I think that one reason I'm
interested in it because I like doing it
myself, but also because in terms of
morphic resonance, it makes sense to me
as to why this should be a satisfying
pursuit and an important one.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. It sounds very uh very
inviting. Um, yeah. I know you've al
also um written a lot about the
connection of people with nature but let
me let me let me let me um
yeah let us end maybe with this
question. I've asked you a few times
about about um the future about
consciousness as a whole. Um you you
talk a lot about habits and habit
forming. That's because that's what your
theory is about. Um but you also you are
also a religious man. Is there a is
there a a difference in quality between
habits? There are also very bad habits
in the world and we seem to perpetuate a
few of them uh as we speak. We're we're
entering a a time of of um well war and
conflict. Um do do you think there's a
qualitative difference between habits uh
from that you can derive from your
theory of um of morphic resonance? Are
there is there maybe a collective
resonance with good rather than with
evil or is this is this not something
you you venture into as a as a biologist
which you could imagine?
&gt;&gt; Well, I think you I don't think there's
a moral filter in morphic resonance. I
think any habits will be propagated by
morphic resonance, good and bad. Um and
so
the only moral aspect of it is a little
bit like Kant's idea of the categorical
imperative because what morphic
resonance says is we influence others at
a distance without even knowing who they
are by what we say by what we do and
also by what we think by our attitudes
because there's a resonant influence of
of those
from the point of view of morphic
resonance. And so
good habits can spread by morphic
resonance. I mean uh but so can bad
habits. And right now the habit that's
spreading most in the world is
consumerism which we we in Europe and
North America have exported to the whole
of the rest of the world uh with
advertising TV, consumer goods,
supermarkets and so forth. Um uh
encouraging everyone to become
inquisitive. Um and I think if we look
at the traditional theory um in the
Christian world um it makes sense to me
this model that we have the seven deadly
sins which are seven bad habits um you
know pride, envy, lust, gluttony and so
on and and we have the seven virtues um
prudence, temperance, justice and then
the Christian virtues
faith, hope and love. And so these are
all habits and virtues
in Aristotle's formulation are habits of
behavior, habits of conduct. The problem
we have in the modern world is that
since most people are not religious any
longer in much of Western Europe, uh
nobody teaches anyone about virtue and
it's just considered old-fashioned or
ory or something. Whereas there's every
incentive to the seven deadly sins. I
mean, we're delued with advertising in
social media which encourages to be more
proud, more envious, more lustful, uh,
you know, more greedy, more avaricious,
uh, more lazy. I mean, all the seven
deadly sins are encouraged on a daily
basis in every possible way. And the
virtues, the good habits are not
encouraged by hardly anyone. Um so I
think that it's really important in in
in as we move to the future to to um
revisit the whole idea of good habits of
behavior which can be taught to children
and and to grown-ups and which used to
be taught um still are in some families
but they're not really taught in our
educational system very much because um
I suppose the virtue of tolerance is
taught by the educational traditional
system, but it's basically tolerance of
other people's beliefs. It's not you
couldn't say to people, look, these are
traditional Christian European virtues
because that would be discriminatory for
people who are not Christian or or
non-believers or atheists and stuff. So,
you can't do it in our schools. So um so
it leaves a vacuum and that I think that
this is a real crisis for European and
American uh civilization really because
there has to be some counterveailing
force to the destructive powers of
greed, corporate greed, individual
greed, consumerism and so on which are
destroying the planet and destroying our
society. So I think there are lessons we
can learn and and things we can think
about on the basis of these general
principles including scientific
principles but I don't have a blueprint
as to how to implement these. I don't
have an educational reform policy and so
on. I do what I can and I think that the
um encouragement of pilgrimage which is
one of my main activist areas in Britain
um is is one of the things I do because
I think this can be a really helpful way
of uh changing behavior. And perhaps one
final point is that um a great friend of
mine in the United States, a
psychologist friend has a slogan where
he says, "If you want to change the
world, throw a better party." And um I I
think one of the advantages of
pilgrimage is it's a better party. It's
fun to do and it's attractive and it's
fun to do. And I think it helps in
connecting with nature, with other
people, with tradition, with ancestors,
with those who've gone before and gives
a healing sense of connection with the
land and the place. And
um and I think this is one of the things
we can do. So my own attempts at
activism um are all based on the
principle it has to be fun. You're not
going to make much difference if you
make people feel guilty, ashamed uh and
so on. I mean they are just flicked to
another channel. Uh so it what I think
the real challenge is to find ways of
making living a better life more fun.
&gt;&gt; Sounds like a like a good um a good
resolution. Create better habits, create
deeper habits and um they can be um they
can be tolerant but tolerance is also
presumes a lot of uh good habits and you
need to integrate them with a lot of
people. So yeah, I I can follow you.
That's a nice um So um uh I didn't
expect to come to con today. So that's a
that's a nice nice way to finish. Um
yeah, let's leave it there. Let there
are a few habits for people to um to
maybe click on the subscribe button
below this video if you're into these
kinds of interviews because I will
conduct some more conversations on
English. I work on my English in the
meantime. Uh and um check out the
website of Mr. Sheldre. It's
sheldrake.org or you can find the apps
there as well. Uh Mrs. Sheldrake, thank
you very much for um being with us for
this uh conversation and um well maybe
um maybe we'll speak again but I wish
you all good luck with your uh with your
experiments and your research. Thank you
very much.
&gt;&gt; Well, thank you and all the best for
your series.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. All right. Bye-bye.