Okay, let's see how is this working.
This is uh the first stream with the new
computer. So bear with me if there are
any problems, but I don't expect there
to be much uh in the way of problems
because we took a massive uh
technological upgrade and I think that
it will show even in this. So uh without
further ado, please hit the like button,
subscribe if you haven't. Uh if you hate
the content, you can unsubscribe later,
but it will help boost uh boost the
algorithm. We have a great show tonight.
Uh we are going to talk about a
wonderful discussion that was on Karen
Wong's meaning code. Uh she has a pretty
small channel. It's bigger than mine, so
you know, but uh it definitely deserves
more followers. She's had some great
discussions. I think we've talked about
uh other streams that she has done as
well. Please let me know in the chat uh
how the audio is coming through, how the
images look, um how you know the video
is, if is it if it's choppy, if it's
not, just you know trying to get a sense
of how uh things are looking with the
new stream. But let's see here.
All right.
So
guys, the uh technological upgrade that
we took cannot be uh overstated and I
think that will be evident even in just
this simple stream, let alone in the
future when we can live stream, you
know, doing 3D renders uh and editing
them in real time. You know, I'm I
honestly think that we could do that
with this kind of power, but um and that
is kind of in in the plan. So,
here we go.
Gosh, it's so fast.
So,
this is uh the stream that we are going
to be discussing.
Now, you should be able to see uh the
channel that we are going to be looking
at. uh the meaning code and this is the
stream that we are going to discuss. It
is with Wolf Gang Smith and it is on
vertical causation and uh you know
theism and science and all kinds of
different uh you know fascinating
topics. So,
see here. All right. Let me know in the
chat how that looks now. Uh, though it
should be much better. The fact that I
could even fix that in real time is a
step uh step up, but you know, I knew
something was going to go wrong wrong on
the first stream.
So, Wolf Gang Smith is somebody that I
wanted to do a review of a stream on for
a while. I was introduced to him by
watching Kchi Mungle's channel. He's
done two incredibly deep uh interviews
with him. He is a Christian. He is a
philosopher. He is a physicist. He is a
mathematician. Um he I believe went to
MIT as a teenager. Let's see here. So,
share screen. Wow, now it's working. All
right. Uh born 1930.
uh graduated in 1948 from Cornell with a
bachelor degree or bachelor's degree I
guess in philosophy physics and
mathematics all three. Two years later
he combined his um uh master's and I'm
guessing uh in physics from Purdue
University and sometime later PhD in
physics from Colombia. I think he went
to school at at like college at like 16
or 15 years old.
Um
it doesn't say here but
uh Smith's understanding of the
relationship between corprial and
physical objects extends his
interpretation of biology and uh he has
become a fierce opponent essentially of
Darwinian evolution uh as a fundamental
element in a species would be its form
not its causal history. Well, we're
going to talk about that tonight because
I really am become a a big I don't like
the word fan, but almost fan of uh a lot
of the things that he says. It's amazing
to me that someone with a PhD basically
in in degrees in physics and philosophy
and mathematics
all all of those can and can be so
decorated in academia is also completely
I feel like ignored uh by the scientific
community but I don't think that that is
going to last very long because of you
know discussions that are being had
online. So, um, let me see. Uh, like I
said, please, uh, you know, hit the like
button, comment in the chat. Uh, hey,
please comment in the chat
and hit the like button.
All right, cool,
guys. I'm amazed at this computer. I'm
going to talk about it, you know,
throughout the stream, the next few
streams probably.
There shouldn't be any more instances of
me clicking pause and then it not
pausing and then me start talking, then
it pauses and then I have to like click
it again and then it unpauses. Any of
that lagging uh should not be, you know,
an issue anymore, but we will see. This
is the first test. So first clip
uh on
scientism and uh how scientism is
misleading and uh you know how anc
ancient philosophers were smarter than
modern ones. This is uh something that I
very much agree with. But
okay, hold on.
not only what science has to offer but
how it is presently misunderstood
and thus misleading humanity. This is
something that I have been very
concerned about for a long time that in
the name of science we're being uh led
into very very serious errors which have
implications in all aspects of life. I
distinguish sharply between what I call
scientism and science. Science is the
real thing. Scientism
claims to be science but is really
ideology driven. And so in a sense
I
am interested in uh
making our society more wary of
scientism and
by the same token open again to the
great wisdom of mankind. I do not
believe that the ancients were all uh
intellectually inferior to us. On the
contrary, I think it's to a large extent
the other way around. And so I'm
interested in uh re-establishing
to the extent that it is possible some
of the ancient wisdom of mankind.
So that's about a rough summary of what
we're trying to accomplish.
Okay.
So uh we are going to get even better
with the audio um
that goes on you know on these streams.
Instead of streaming the audio from my
microphone we will stream it directly
from the video uh now that we have the
bandwidth to do it uh probably next
week. So that might help even more. But
uh this is what what he is claiming here
as his basic drive and mission and the
overall overall arching theme of you
know his intellectual pursuits is
something that I'm seeing more commonly
which is good but it's it's not that it
hasn't existed but it has changed in how
it's being done. It's not be in the past
I feel like it's been done more by
trying to enforce dogma on people
through institutions and and uh you know
I guess organized religion uh and that
has I think backfired pretty severely as
we as you know we can see um you know by
the growing atheism or identified
atheism or truly antitheism that is ramp
rampant in everyone who is going through
the education system. But
this uh this mission is is very similar
to even uh the one of this channel and I
I think that it is it is a noble one.
But one of the things that he said there
which is just so funny to me is uh I
hear this all the time that people were
just ignorant in the past. And
I think that we are so much more
ignorant today than they were in the
past. And the reason for this is a lack
especially is a lack of firsthand
experience with anything. Everything
today that causes people to feel like
they are wiser or smarter than people of
the past comes from things that they've
learned secondhand in school. It's not
coming from things that they learned
firsthand in person. And we're taking
people out of the real world more and
more, out of the meaningful world more
and more in order to quote unquote
educate them. And then that further
uh detaches them from having a a true
sense of where they stand, you know, as
far as wisdom and and I would say
smartness goes. But smartness to me,
there's intelligence and there's
smartness and wisdom. And they're kind
of smartness, I would say, is kind of
the in intersection between the two,
between wisdom and and intelligence. But
I think that people are getting dumber.
You know, it's funny. Just a side
tangent because that's what you know is
common here. But, uh, if you've ever
seen Idiocracy, I I heard recently this
week that the shoes in Idiocracy are
Crocs and they weren't popular yet, but
now they're like popular everywhere.
And, uh, I mean, I understand why
they're popular. Um, but, uh, it's just
funny because we do seem to be devolving
that, you know, people say idiocracy is
real. that you know comedy movie
basically about how the future of uh the
world is of humanity is is a you know
everybody just gets dumber and dumber.
uh which makes you know a lot of sense
when you see uh and you look around at
all kinds of birth rates and trends in
society and things like that and it just
we are definitely uh I think we reached
the the
height of human intelligence already u
probably that that's naturally emergent
I'm not saying we couldn't you know do
things genetically
I'm not saying that's a good idea. It's
not a good idea. But China just tried to
make, you know, two baby girls more
intelligent a few years ago uh with
crisper. So, uh but that's going to
backfire. But there but we we're
definitely decreasing in our
understanding of the world um in our
wisdom particularly because like I said,
we're taking people out of the real
world and we're putting them in schools
where they're just taught secondhand
information all the time. And this is a
kind of a primary focus of sentient
singularity theory uh and my work
involving you know cognition and
information is that there must be a
prioritization of firsthand information
or experience above secondhand
information that is you know just
translated and told and heard um without
actually being experienced. So
uh you know the more schooling people
have uh the less wise they are likely to
be. So that is just something to really
think about. That's just the logic of
the situation.
Next clip.
We're gonna try and move kind of
quickly, but uh because we got started a
bit late.
This next clip is about this
uh icon that he has that represents
vertical causation. I just paused the
video and it paused immediately. That is
huge, guys. But um uh and it he's going
to talk about vertical causation. And
this is something that is also in
sentient singularity theory of focus.
I've never called it vertical causation
but it's we'll explain it in a minute
but it's it is critical to understanding
the world hierarchies
and and
co are
hierarchies that are true hierarchies
are hierarchies of causation and the
hierarchies of causation are vertical
because that is what a hierarchy is. So
here we go next clip.
Yes. Um,
[Music]
in your book, The Vertical Ascent, you
talk this picture of the cosmos as
having the center and then the um
there we go, the center and then the the
margin, this the perimeter of the
circle. And one of my questions is could
we look at this from a 3D perspective
and see the center as being a pinnacle?
U well I I classify it as an icon and an
icon of course is a way of presenting
uh metaphysical truth in a very simple
abbreviated visual form. So uh I think
we should keep it two-dimensional
and uh
try to understand the ontology which it
expresses.
I I have a sense that this icon was
really known in ancient times. I have a
feeling that for example the students in
Plato's academy were somehow acquainted
with that icon.
It was never written down so far as I
know. But uh it's I don't consider it an
invention. I I consider it an icon that
is simply there and very helpful if we
try to understand the uh ultimate
ontology of the cosmos because the
cosmos has three parts. a center, an
intermediary realm and a and a
circumference. And all the world that we
know through our ordinary life, our five
senses is just that circumference.
There's this vast intermediary realm
that we normally do not experience and
then there is a center which also we
normally experience only in a very very
partial way. So it's a symbolic
representation of the integral cosmos
which is tripartite
and
the the easiest way to explain why it is
tripartite is because man himself is
tripartite. Corpus hanima spiritus are
the Latin words and so just as we are
tripartite so is the cosmos
and the
okay so lots to un
unpack there. But
we've talked about this tripartite
nature of reality we uh before on this
channel many times. It's seen
everywhere. It's seen in the triality of
the standard model. It's seen in
religion in uh you know the trinity in
Christianity. It's seen in spaceime with
past, present and future um as far as
time and then length, width and height
as far as uh space goes or xyz. there
this trialic um
this three-dimensional perception that
we have of everything is due to uh the
the dimensions of mind that uh help us
process information. So we I've showed
this on here before, but anytime that
you're processing information, there are
three actions that are taken in order to
process that information. And because of
that uh that causes the world to split
three ways every time that we go and we
look at something, you know, you look at
colors and it's like the three primary
colors and then you look at the
secondary colors and there's three of
those. And then uh you look at I mean
even your arm and it's like or your
limbs and it's it's like arms and legs,
hands and feet and fingers and toes and
it's just split three different ways.
anytime you try and zoom in on something
you're seeing this fractling
tripartide
you know structure and that's due to the
constraints of mind but uh you know even
thought speech and action how we how we
uh interact with anything with the world
is through thought speech and action so
uh but
this this interesting
icon that he has here is fascinating
because one of the things that I
realized in sentient singularity theory
uh regarding the cosmological verse
which is this structure right here
is that
it for one it is chyal which means like
you can you can't really split it down
the middle. You can see that the tip of
this of the beginning here is offset
from the end here. So, you can't split
it straight in half.
But what's interesting though is that if
you do want to uh kind of see it from
not a chyro perspective or or or a um uh
a an asymmetric perspective and you want
to look at it symmetrically, you have to
look at it from a different perspective
which is from the center out.
And if you look at this from uh the
center out, you can see that there is
this quadratic center which you know
there's four fundamental forces and
there's four primary perspectives that
are the center sentient singularity
theory inside outside separate and
oneness. uh they are the foundations of
of of
uh relationships, the foundational
relationships uh and or the foundational
perceptions that lead to you know 4D
spacetime four fundamental forces for
chord songs all kinds of things like
that but uh but this is a center and
when you do that you realize that this
is a symmetrical structure if you look
at it from the center out and so the
thing is though is it.
This is this is how the cosmos must be
examined from two different perspectives
at once. One from the center out
which is kind of the the constant uh
eternal instantaneous outside time, you
know, uh causal realm, I guess you could
say. And then there's also this vertical
causation or this hierarchy be of of
beings that
is how the cosmos unfolds basically. And
it you know with God is at the very top
and you could also say he's at the very
bottom. He you could also say he's at
the very center but uh then there if you
say he's at the very center then you
have to use a 3D model to kind of like
visualize um emergence. But if you say
he's at the very top or the very bottom,
you can see that it kind of builds these
levels where a hadron is, you know,
assembly of quirks, a atom is an
assembly of hadrons, a molecule is an
assembly of atoms. So these are each
these eight seven or eight levels
depending on how you count them. And
they're stacked on top of each other
because they are built on top of each
other. There is a vertical causation
here. The family contains the individual
organism unit like human
uh which contains cells which contains
molecules and there is a hierarchy to
this this structure essentially
and
this hierarchical aspect of reality is
necessary to understand in order to
understand reality because it is part of
truth. But the thing is is that figuring
out this hierarchy is tough for
physicists because they're so trapped in
spaceime that they're they're focused on
size. So if you see people trying to
come up with a theory of everything all
the time, uh it's like atom, molecule,
cell, organism, planet and then you know
galaxy or solar system then galaxy and
then universe. This is focused on size.
So you're not actually this is not a
fundamental theory because it is it is
built on the axiom of size already you
know existing as an axiom or as a you
know presupposition and that is not
fundamental. So you have to go through a
lineage and what a uh based you know
model instead of a size-based model and
a lineage based model is that you know
organisms come from cells an assembly of
cells are an assembly of molecules
molecules are an assembly of atoms atoms
are an assembly of hydrons etc. So, but
what this shows is it shows a causitive
chain, a chain of causality
that has a hierarchy to it. And uh you
know, whoever causes the next uh level
is ultimately has I guess you could say
dominion over them. But the thing is is
that it's it's it's multifaceted when
it's fundamental. So you know you have
you do have dominion over your cells.
You have
sovereignty over every cell in your body
and uh but at the same time you are you
are accountable to them too and that is
something that is true of the entire
cosmos. Uh you know we all everyone
needs
only God is God is the only one who
doesn't need anyone else in order to
exist. He does need us for meaning but
he doesn't need us for existence. Um so
there you this is why there vertical
causality isn't even really unders even
in the conversation in science in most
of the time because you have to focus on
beings in order to realize and discuss
the logic of an inherent hierarchy to
the universe. And we in our, you know,
contemporary scientific narratives
assume that
uh beings emerge randomly essentially
from
sludge that pre-existed beings. And
that's, you know, there's no logic to
that uh when you look at things
comprehensively, but I understand why
people do go down the road because I
did. Uh but so but you have to there's
also this other side of this and
regarding this vertical causality that
makes it kind of unappealing to people
because it means that you have someone
who has ultimate control over your being
and uh that you that yeah they are
accountable to you but you ultimately
are they are in control.
Um and that is just the reality and we
don't like that because who wants to be
controlled by others uh consciously you
know subconsciously maybe but not
consciously and there's many other
reasons why this is kind of not thought
of but it's interesting though that
there is in this structure that I mapped
there was this linear aspect to it and
then there was this center out aspect to
to it that I found eventually as well
when it when I was examining the
symmetries of it. Uh it's not
symmetrical if you're just, you know,
cutting it in half.
But it is symmetrical
if you're starting from the center out.
And
I think that
this
icon here is kind of trying to show
something similar.
And uh I thought that was very
interesting.
Anyways, uh next clip.
Uh I've talked about this uh about
psychedelics on here before. People ask
me all the time, "What do you think
about psychedelics and machine elves and
everything like that?" And uh I've
I've never had any kind of
uh intoxicated
experience with beings. uh you know,
angels or demons or machine elves or
whatever you want to call them. Um I
have had you know experiences that were
sober that uh you know once I've talked
about before on here where I had kind of
a theophony but that was not
intoxicated. uh but I know that a lot of
people want to explore
um psychedelics as a tool to you know
perceive the divine essentially and uh I
I understand why that they would want to
do that but I do think that it's there
are downsides to that and it's dangerous
and he's going to talk a bit about it
here um
but we'll talk more about it it's very
common uh today to take the shortcut and
that uh psychedelics are the shortcut.
When people take psychedelics, do you
think that they
somehow access this intermediary realm?
Absolutely. I have no doubt about it.
And all I can say is it's a terribly,
terribly dangerous thing to do.
uh because
it's real and the entities that inhabit
it are also real. I I will mention in
passing that uh at one point I met um
Father Malaki Martin, the famous author
and exorcist on a radio program and
somehow the conversation turned to the
intermediary realm. And when I said that
he knew all about it, he said, "Yes, I
call it the middle plateau because
that's where you do the exorcism. you
you actually communicate with the
demonic world from the intermediary
realm. So he knew how to access that
realm and had done it many many times in
in this exorcis.
So so the um
one of the things that fascinates me
about this icon is that this idea of the
Okay. So,
I know that's, you know, he didn't
really say anything that I didn't um I
mean, other than a personal account, but
it is important, I think, to talk about
this more because it's becoming
increasingly common to just, you know, I
don't know uh try and go the psychedelic
route when it comes to having a divine
experience. And, you know, here's the
thing. You don't need I have had a an
experience that was, you know, it was
sober and yet it was basically a DMT. It
was like the most intense DMT experience
you could ever have. It's like the DMT
experience that you could want, but I
wasn't on DMT. I was just taking a
shower. And I've talked about this
before and um and how I was visualizing
like the structure of the universe and
then I like saw it and uh then wept on
the floor. But um I was thinking about
what I I was imagining what I then saw.
It was was I wasn't
uh seeing anything that I didn't
understand. It wasn't anything new to me
that I couldn't have already imagined.
logically and thought about logically.
It was something that I had already
deduced. I wasn't shown anything that I
hadn't figured out.
And
I got a message, you know, from like I
believe a a giant glowing white light
that I believe to be God. And it just
said, you know, I'm showing you this
because you're ready to see it. And I
don't talk about this very often on
here, but I have mentioned it, but I try
and keep it like reserved to like
specific instances in which it's
relevant because you have to treat this
with these experiences with reverence.
It's not just fun, you know, to glimpse
into basically the heavens, um the
spirit world, whatever you want to call
it. It's the substructure of reality.
It's the realm of consciousness that is
not so bound, you know, physically. It's
a just a different frequency than we
normally can see. That's what I believe.
And uh it is. But it was just the
message was I'm showing you this because
you're ready to see it. That was it. It
wasn't anything like the more I think
about that message, the more profound it
is. But it wasn't anything like oh,
you're so cool and oh, check this out.
It was like and you know, here's this
message. Bring back it, you know, to the
people. There was nothing like that. It
was just like you're ready. I'm showing
you this because you're ready to see it.
And it was
it what it what it highlights to me is
just the importance of context. Always
out of context information is extremely
dangerous. It is extremely dangerous to
get out of context information in school
as we know now because tons of people
think they're educated and and
intelligent and wise and they are not.
They have experienced very little
meaningful things in the real world and
that's due to the dangers of out of
context information. If you take
psychedelics and you perceive spirits
and and you know machine elves or demons
and angels and whatever it is that you
see God, you are going to see something
that is likely out of context. There are
cultures in the world that use things
like iawaska and you know uh and other
drugs you know peyote things like that
to
that are part of their their theological
rituals. There's so much context in
those actions that they do. They have an
entire culture and tradition and history
and story and families and and
communities built around everything that
is you know uh feeding into this
experience. They have heard from every
single generation leading up to them and
uh uh about this experience and it's
usually linked to some type of right of
passage as well that is you know a
coming of age ceremony sometimes. there
there's so much context to it that is
not just I took you know DMT or I took
mushrooms or something like that and um
and I'm not saying that these things
can't have positive effects either you
know there was studies that have shown
mushrooms to have a positive effect on
people uh I know John's Hopkins did a
study on it many years ago and I will
say I took mushrooms in college a couple
times and that was it I have not really
I've not done any drugs in many years
but um and I have not done anything that
is a hallucinagen since college and um I
will
say that I had I think that it
positively impacted my mood going
forward pretty much permanently even
though I didn't have like a crazy
profound experience like the world
looked pretty but I didn't have I didn't
see God or anything or machine elves but
I'm grateful that I didn't because it
would have lacked context. I would not
have understood at all what I was
seeing. It's one thing to see that the
clouds look really pretty, but it's
another thing to see like machine elves
when you're a materialist atheist like I
was. Uh it would have probably done a
lot of damage. And that
is very easy to have happen if you're
take if you're perceiving and things out
of context. if you're getting
information outside of context and uh
you know like I I've said here before
it's kind of a I don't know how good of
an analogy it is but it's it's very
different experience to be to to sneak
into the White House and try and see you
know what's going on with the president
versus being invited in and sitting down
with them and you know them telling you
what's going on showing you what's going
on. um you know, you're going to see
things outside of context if you are
sneaking in there. And that's what
psychedelics basically are outside of
context. So if you're not a member of a
tribe that traditionally uses iawasa in
South America, then it's not enough to
just do this with a shaman or something
like that. I don't think you we don't
have the traditions and the stories and
and the social community um and the
history involved to to contextualize
that experience. I think that it's very
dangerous. Uh it's also a shortcut.
you're not whatever you do gain from it,
it's not going to be
um
very relevant probably to your life. And
also
it's
it kind of will diminish it when it does
if it could actually happen. If you
could actually, you know, have like a
theological experience, that doesn't
mean you have to see crazy things
either. You don't have to. You can have
you know feeling and that hap that can
happen constantly uh uh but it can also
happen in certain profound instances.
You can have experiences with the divine
that are much
better than uh kind of like a forced per
re you know peak beyond the wall to see
that there that there is more to um you
know this universe than just the matter
that we see. There is a a realm of
consciousness and things that go on in
on frequencies that are beyond our
normal perception. But that it's a
dangerous thing to do and uh I would
definitely caution against it. Uh you
know, I've said on here before I I
always did want to try DMT because I
would listen to these people talk about
their DMT experiences and then I
couldn't understand at all what they
were talking about. I was like, "These
people sound insane, but they're all
saying the same thing, which means
there's something real to this that I
don't understand. And I know I no longer
have a desire to try DMT cuz you we have
it in our bodies naturally and I had the
sober experience that was enough. Uh but
you know it
one of the things that I've also noticed
is that
you know when people do have these
experiences
even if they'll they'll sit there
they'll take DMT they'll be like yeah
it's all consciousness. I saw that it
was all consciousness and I saw that
there's like these machine elves and and
or demons or whatever entities um and uh
angels
um but then it doesn't change them. It
doesn't change how they act. It doesn't
change how they want to act really me
even more importantly it doesn't change
how they want to act. that if you got a
glimpse of if you understood reality on
a more fundamental level it would change
how you are would change your being
would change your desires and your goals
um and even your actions eventually but
if but I see so many people they'll take
they'll be like you know in every sense
of the word self-described atheist
they'll take uh I don't know some
hallucinogenic
drug they'll have some crazy experience
They'll be like, "Yeah, I saw uh, you
know, the divine or I saw that it's all
consciousness. We're all connected
there. There's uh, no, you know,
boundaries between us. It's all one
consciousness." And then they'll go on
living their lives exactly the same
after that. It's just a fun fun or cool
story. And that that means that there's
a lot of missing information there. Um,
this is a topic that I don't like to
bring up very often, especially when it
comes to discussing personal experiences
because like I said, you have to treat
this with reverence. You have to give
some context to it and that means like I
have to tell the whole story and or
enough of it to give it context. And you
know, if you want to hear more about it,
I will talk more about it on other
streams. But I had a theophony and uh
I've talked about it on previous streams
and maybe I'll make a video that's
specific to it uh later this year and
goes into the entire story. But it was
an amazingly profound experience and it
was sober and it's only happened once.
Uh and I don't think that anybody's goal
should be to have the same experience as
someone else had. And I think everybody
c can experience the divine in exactly
the way that they need to and it's
that's different for everyone. Um and it
changes probably throughout your life.
But
uh you want to try and make sure that
it's contextualized
um you know properly and whatever you
gain from it is in whatever you see in
that or gain from that or or perceive in
that experience is properly
contextualized.
It's not a good idea just to have want
to have a crazy experience. These things
are real as um you know Wolf Gang Smith
said uh I keep wanting to say Wolf Gang
Puck but um uh it's these are real
things and they are dangerous but I
think the main danger is out of context
information but also you could
potentially be letting things in that
you
wouldn't want to but I don't know you
know exactly what the specifics of that
would be like.
So next clip.
So in in the vertical ascent um
which this is that's one of the things
this imit comes from. It talks about um
the vertical holds primacy
um whereas the horizontal operates
laboriously. one might say by way of a
temporal progression through space. The
fact is that vertical causality derives
from wholeness whereas the horizontal
derives from parts. I wonder if you
might talk a little bit about the
difference between wholeness and parts
and how that works out across all of um
not only physics but across that whole
picture of your iconic tripartite
cosmos.
Well, first of all, I think it we we
need to realize that physics and modern
science in general by its very modus
operandi, its intrinsic methodology
deals uh incurably with um with parts.
In other words, it can conceive of a
whole only as a sum of parts. And so the
causality which with which physics
operates is a causality emanating from
the parts.
And
you can't say acting upon holes because
physics really has no con no ontological
conception of wholeness. The only
wholeness physicists deal with is a
is a sum of parts. So physics is based
upon atomization.
And
it turns out however that uh wholeness
does play
an absolutely essential role in the
economy of life whether the physicists
know about it or not. And along with the
idea of holes, there is a corresponding
causality which I call vertical
causality as opposed to horizontal
causality. And I first introduced this
idea of vertical causality in the
context of physics. The new physics came
in in 1926 quantum theory. And very soon
physicists realized that there's
something very puzzling about quantum
theory because a quantum system in its
own right is a very very strange bizarre
thing. I mean for example if you have a
quantum particle it will not be located
in general in any particular quantum
space. In fact, there's a probability
that it is in given any two regions in
space, there's a certain probability
that the particle is in that region. So
these quantum particles are very very
strange entities. You can't really
conceive of them except in mathematical
terms. But what puzzle physicists is
that when they make a measurement in an
instant as it were, this particle
instead of being spread out over vast
regions of space obtains a particular
position. the measured particle is in a
given
place in time. And so this is something
that puzzled the physicists. How is it
possible for an act of measurement to
collapse this probability wave and give
a definite position to particles which
have no definite positions before the
act of measurement. And believe it or
not, physicists have been kicking this
so-called measurement problem around for
a good hundred years almost more like
90. For about 90 years they've been
speculating on this with no actual
solution in sight. The weirdest ideas
are presented by them in order to
resolve this conundrum. But I believe
it's still open and open question in the
physics world. So this is what got me
into thinking about quantum mechanics.
And I came to a very simple conclusion.
The the reason measurement is not
comprehensible to the physicist is that
the measuring instrument itself is not
really a physical thing. It is not the
kind of thing that the physicist studies
or or describes in his equations. It is
what I call a corporeal entity. So there
is a difference between a corporeal
entity and a physical object. And the
difference basically is that the
corporeal entity is perceptible. If you
think of the visual perception, it has
color. It has qualities and we perceive
it. So I realized that what had happened
is that the physicist had abstracted
from the perceivable world. The
perceivable world is real. It's not an
imagination. The red apple is there and
it's red and we perceive it. But to the
physicist, the red apple has become a
resetance, a thing of the mind. So what
happened is that in the 17th century
western civilization became as it were
controlled by one philosopher Rene
Deart. Uh he introduced a very actually
weird philosophy and uh it gained
traction. It became the philosophy which
scientists and especially of course
physicists absorb as it were without
knowing that it is a philosophy. They
think it's just the way it is. And uh so
I realized that the reason that this
measurement problem continues to mystify
physicists to the present day and you
should see some of the theories they
evolved in order to explain it. It's it
becomes really weird. The reason that
the physicist can't resolve that problem
is that he has fallen victim to this
cartian philosophy and in the cartesian
philosophy there are no corporeal
entities because all qualities are
relegated to the mind. So they can't as
it were he cut the world into two parts
rest extens extended entities on one
side and all they are is they're
quantities there so to speak the world
as a physicist conceived of it that's on
the outside and everything else
everything that's not a rest extensor
was as it were postulated to be a rest
cogance or a thing of the mind thing of
thought so rene cut the world into these
two pieces
And this has become so to speak the
underlying philosophy which everybody
who goes into physics absorbs
unknowingly. And it is really
unknowingly because I find that when I
tried to explain what Alfred writer then
called bifocation this cutting of
reality into two pieces the mechanical
and quantitative and the rest is all
supposed to be mental.
To the physicist this is not a theory.
This is the way things are. And when you
try to explain it to him, he doesn't
really understand it because he doesn't
know any other way of of of conceiving
the world. So what I'm saying is that in
western civilization, the intellectual
class has u typically been victimized by
this cartisian philosophy. They accept
this not as a philosophy but as simply
the way things are. And uh it it's it's
a it's a very tragic thing because first
of all it makes life tragic. Just think
uh when a father or mother uh holds a
child
according to the holding a rest extensor
all that there is outside in space and
time is a mechanism. It's a terribly
tragic way of looking at life. And of
course I fully believe that it is false.
But I'm the point that I'm that I'm
making is that the world of science has
been duped by this bifocationist
cartisian philosophy. So they think of
the world as greatly reduced. And what I
marveled when I began thinking about the
so-called measurement problem is this
that as soon as you step out of this
cartisian way of looking at the world,
the solution of the measuring problem is
very very simple, childishly simple
because the measuring instrument is
corporeal. That means it is perceptible.
It owns qualities. You can see it. You
can touch it. You can hear it give
sound. Incidentally, if it weren't
perceptible, it couldn't measure
anything because measurement is a matter
of seeing say a number on a screen. So,
uh what has happened is that our men of
science and especially men of physics
uh have been duped by a philosophy which
uh is totally imaginary. is totally off
course. And incidentally, the
interesting thing is that in essence,
this cartesian philosophy was inunciated
long long by Christocratic known as
Democrus. Yes. So, Democrus before
Plato, the christocratic said that
people think there's a sweet and the
bitter. In other words, there's a
perceptible, but in reality, only atoms
and the void. So this is the philosophy
which the Plleonist and Aristo.
Okay. So that was a long clip but it was
very important.
Lots to unpack.
So I totally agree with what he's
basically trying to say and uh I'll say
why he I say he's trying to say it
because I I I
don't you have to propose a framework in
order to deal with the problem that he's
identified. You have to propose an
alternative framework that makes sense.
You can't just say this is a problem. It
that is part of it but like the next
step is to propose uh an alternative
framework that does make sense or else
you can't actually make truly make sense
or describe um them how you know how
things would make sense to others even
if you can kind of visualize it in your
own mind. So
this what he's saying is that Decart
proposed this philosophy that the world
uh is divided into
uh that which is perceived and that
which is imagined essentially that which
is in your head and that basically your
thoughts and matter. The problem with
this is is that because we're inside of
the mind of God and we are minds inside
the mind of the mind of God and we are
composed of minds. That's what a cell
is. It's a little mind which are
composed themselves by little minds that
are you know molecules and those are
composed themselves by little minds
which are atoms in sentient singularity
theory.
Basically there is no dividing of the
physical from the mental. You cannot
actually separate them. What it is is
that we perceive the thoughts of the
being that has is higher in the
hierarchy than us. God or the cosmos.
Creation you could say Christ
if you're a Christian. Um creation is a
is is the sun. You know it is the it is
the initial replicative con uh
consciousness. That is the mind of that
is the universe that is that is created
um that is the log ghost but is created
and by the initial mind and so all there
is is minds and so there is no
separation between matter and mind in
reality it's just a matter of perception
we see the thoughts of God as concrete
reality
we can't our thoughts are superseded by
his thoughts Any being above us is what
we're going to see the thoughts of as
are as constraints of us. So our
thoughts are constraints of ourselves.
That is something that I think one day
we will really understand, but it might
be decades. But I've talked about on
here before where, you know, I had an
experience once where I I thought myself
into manifesting a rash on my body once.
Like I didn't try to, but I was like
focused on something that was just a
mark. And then I focused on it and I
started thinking, investigating,
researching, and I basically convinced
myself that I had every STD known to
man. I didn't have any STDs, by the way.
And when I went into the doctor um to
get tested, they laughed at me. Um and
they were like, "That's nothing." They
were like, "Literally, you probably
manifested that now that we're going to
tell you to relax. You're going to leave
and it's going to go away basically
immediately." I manifested physical
symptoms, guys. I was peeing like every
10 minutes. I was having pain while I
was peeing. I had a visible rash that
anyone could see. But they told me, they
were like, "All your symptoms are real,
but they're going to go away as soon as
you relax." And as soon as I left, every
single symptom was gone. I was tested. I
had nothing. Nothing. And um
uh that is my thoughts
became the constraint and they created
my they add they made my my cells act a
certain way. It was it was incredible.
And um you know I don't know what the
limit to that is but they the doctors
like knew that this was going to happen
because they had seen it again and again
and again but I manifested every symptom
of what I was you know expecting this to
be which I had no idea what it was
expecting other than every it I
literally convinced myself I had every
STD and um had none and there was no
reason for me to have them either. I
just, you know, when you start googling
uh you know, health concerns, it's going
to lead you to paranoia. And um uh
that's what happened. And
uh it was it's hilarious in hindsight,
but it was not funny at the time. Uh but
it was to them because they knew that
this was not anything at all. And as
soon as I left, the symptoms went away.
And that means that my thoughts created
physical constraints for the my cells.
It's amazing. And um
uh so you know when when and but you can
you can you can prove this right now. I
can show you how you do this every
second of every day. If I go to pick up
this water bottle, every cell in my arm
now has to get to work and move a
certain way. And they are constrained in
a certain way by even the fact that my
arm is moving by the fact that my blood
is pumping to muscles that I that allow
me to pick up the water bottle. I have
created constraints, physical
constraints for the world my cells live
in by moving.
Okay? So, not only do my thoughts
influence the the my my the way my cells
uh you know act and and maneuver, my my
actions always do.
Always do. You create physical
constraints for yourselves. Every time
you pick something up, every time you
blink, every time you eat, uh every time
you fast, every time you sleep, every
time you uh you like when you sleep,
you're basically like letting yourselves
off the clock for the day. And they get
to go home and they get to clean their
apartment and they get to, you know,
take care of themselves and eat and and
you know, be with their friends and
family. And I'm being like completely
serious. And they get to recharge
and but during the day you're they're at
work. They have to do what the boss
tells them and you're the boss. You're
creating physical constraints for them
though uh as the boss. You're not just
telling them what to do. You're
literally changing their world to make
it so that they have to do certain
things. And um
uh that so this this division that he's
talking about Wolf Gang is talking about
regarding Dart where he's like divides
the world into thoughts and and and
matter basically
uh if I'm understanding correctly it
doesn't work. The matter that we see is
what matters because it is the thoughts
of the mind that we are constrained
within
that we that is above us in the
hierarchy.
And
uh that so
you need a different way of dividing the
world and in order to start categorizing
things and making sense of it because
there has to be some way of looking at
the world and and diving it up in a way
that allows you to orient properly. And
the way to do this according to sentient
singularity theory is into two parts as
well uh to start at least and that is
things and beings.
There are things
like a water bottle
that are perceived by beings like us
but they are not a being
and they they don't exist outside the
perceptions of beings.
beings are
what I believe he's calling corporal
corporal entities. Let me Google that.
So corpor
I can't say it. Um corporal relating to
a person's body especially as opposed to
their spirit.
So he's
he's saying that
this would be a corporal entity or
having a body is see but this is this in
it of itself isn't the right way to talk
about this because
every being has a body
but
it's really the body is your perception
of your in of the dimensions of
interaction that your mind is is is uh
is orienting within and navigating. So
it it's not trying to divide things up
into body body and and mind or mind and
matter which I said mind and matter but
he's saying body and mind. Uh I'm guess
I guess um that's not correct either
because there is no distinction between
mind and body. As I've said on here
before, every single stream before the
stream, I clean my desk and I try and
organize my room in here a little bit
because it literally organizes your
mind. Your mind is not your brain. You
have a brain. You are a mind. And your
mind is all is the constraints and
degrees of freedom of your mind are
influenced by the environment that you
are perceiving which is also part of
your mind. And so in cleaning your desk
and organizing your desk, you are
organizing your mind. And uh you know
when Jordan Peterson says clean your
room, bucko, like do it like it does it.
It organizes your beingness. This is
what allowing your cell going to sleep
allows your cells to do. They allows
them to like organize themselves. Um
that's why healing happens at night when
you're sleeping a lot. Um because you
can't they can't focus on healing when
you're focusing on grabbing things. Your
cells are all focused on okay we all
need to move together to make sure that
we can pick up the water bottle. They're
not being like okay everybody go do
their own thing and take care of you
know clean your house which is like
healing. And um but this is why you need
to divide the world into things and
beings though because
beings now that be beings are
fundamental. they are in sentient
singularity theory. This allows you to
start focusing on hierarchy that allows
for you to understand why we perceive
things. So this here's there's a lot
there's an issue when people say things
like um everything's an illusion or like
uh this is just a virtual reality.
It's not exactly that. It's a that's a
helpful metaphor, but it has its limits
and it's and how well it allows you to
understand the world because then all of
a sudden you're like, okay, does the
water bottle exist beyond my perception?
It's like, you know, if a
that the thing is is no, it doesn't.
But the molecules and atoms do. And the
problem is is that if you can't you
can't exist without molecules and atoms
existing
because you're built on them. So there's
a logical breakdown that happens when
you say that molecules and atoms are
just a perception of reality
like a wa like a water bottle. You know
a water bottle is too just a perception
of of it's a it's an it's an illusion.
It's a it's a you know u it's like a
virtual reality but then then you're a
virtual reality like everything starts
breaking down your being where's your
beingness then? and it just doesn't
work. Trying to separate spirit from
body is not very logical even uh
ultimately it's helpful in certain
instances but it's not it it has its
limits because it's not ultimately
fundamentally true. You are a mind and
you are a sentient being and there are
other sentient beings in a chain a
hierarchical chain of causality which is
a lineage chain. A lineage is a chain of
causality.
That's you know I exist because my
parents existed and they took certain
steps to make me exist and their parents
existed and they existed because their
parents existed and they took certain
you know actions that uh that allowed
for them to exist. So there is this
chain this lineage chain of causality
that is responsible for us being here.
You break that when you start just
saying that even atoms are just a p a
perception the same as a water bottle.
They're not. But this is why it's tough
to solve this problem because you have
to solve simultaneous issues in this
field of fundamentality. You have to
solve the lineage problem. You have uh
of causality. You have to solve the
hierarchical problem and you also have
to solve the being a versus animate
versus in inanimate uh you know uh
problem I guess you could say and you
can do that but you have to reframe
everything and and uh and build it all
at once. You can't just fix one part of
our scientific understanding currently
and then have everything make sense. You
need to basically go back to the basics
on them all. It's very um tough and
that's the re it's it's tough to to to
do that have that simultaneous change uh
across multiple
um entangled points of view and and and
assumptions and axioms that we have. And
that's why it's it's not really done
because it's one thing for one scientist
to come along and say, "Okay, we're
wrong about this and here's why and
here's a way that makes more sense." Uh,
you know, to look at it this way. But if
we're going to actually make progress
towards the next level of understanding
of our cosmos and of our of of existence
and of ourselves,
then you have to basically say
our entire our our perspectives here,
here here are all wrong simultaneously
and we have to basically change all of
them like I said simultaneously in order
to solve this issue.
Um,
and but it also has to be consistent
with observation, which there's plenty
of observations, you know, it's not like
you're saying atoms don't exist. It's
like but it is uh a fundamental
reframing to say atoms are sentient
beings and not like a water bottle.
There's something fundamentally
different. And um but this I see what
he's trying to describe here I think but
I don't think it's a very easy to
understand in the way that he's
describing it because like I said there
is no real distinction between mind and
body and and and information and matter
or mind thoughts and matter you know uh
thoughts matter are thoughts in the mind
of the being above you and uh and you're
there is no separation between mind and
body. So it's just helpful to perceive
it that way in certain instances but
it's not really there in in the physical
sense. It is in a in a um kind of like
if you're starting to look at you know
you have two souls in Judaism or in
Christianity they say you're you know
humans have original sin and they have
the the holy spirit and in Judaism they
say you have the animal soul and the
godly soul and uh that can you can
understand you know yourself when you
divide it like that but uh because
you're dividing will in a way but you're
not dividing body. There is no
difference between body and spirit
that's clear-cut. It just doesn't exist.
It's it's a matter of perspective. Um
and
uh that's that's why it's so difficult
though to to explain this problem. But
if you're going to actually like explain
it, then it's better to just say no, we
need to divide the world into two parts
or to two perceptions
uh beings and things. And things are uh
dependent and defined by beings. Beings
are fundamental,
not things.
Things come from beings. Beings do not
come from things. Okay? So if somebody
says, well, yeah, you come from atoms,
so you come from things. No, atoms are
beings. At least they are hypothesized
to be in sentient singularity theory or
they are assumed to be. But um and I
think there's plenty of evidence for
that that I have um and like I said new
video now that we have the technological
ability to do it. There will be videos
coming out that are not live that are
succinct and explanatory of a lot of
these concepts u much more
coherently than I can usually do on a
live stream. But um but
the you can only come beings can only
come from beings. They do not come from
things. Things can only come from the
perceptions of beings. They cannot exist
otherwise.
Um any other framework breaks down
logically.
So
this is my proposal for solving this
problem. There are beings, there are
things. Beings are fundamental to
things. And that's it. Things are
defined, and we'll get into this later,
by beings according to goals. Um, but
let's check the chat.
Uh, like I said, please hit the like
button if you are finding this
interesting. And, uh, if you're not
finding this interesting and you're
finding it boring, let me know in in a
comment. Uh, and then leave. But if, uh,
you have any questions, please let me
know in the live chat. But, uh, good
evening, trusted source, Babylonian
esoteric knowledge.
Um,
you know, I don't I don't like the word
esoteric. I have a video on my uh
channel on this channel about it. It's
It says like don't say the eword or
something like that. Uh, I think I think
it I don't think it helps us understand
anything. Um,
uh, but I'm not saying you're wrong in
what you're thinking. I'm just saying
that I that way of describing whatever
it is that you're trying to describe is
not helpful. Um, but thank you for the
comment. This was my idea. I had it
while on shrooms and I and you stole it.
I didn't steal your idea, but uh I don't
know what idea you were talking about
because I know that was a comment from a
while back. But um uh we trip out on DMT
every time we sleep.
Yeah.
But
it's more than that, I think. uh like we
don't I I mean I'm not going to get into
it but yeah basically if you're looking
at things in a materialistic kind of way
then yes DMT is in your mind and it I
think it is kind of responsible in some
way for adjusting the per the like the
frequency of your perception. It's like
the knob on uh in your on the radio in
your car and it can like be turned up
and you can, you know, listen to 106.3
and it's, you know, Hispanic music or it
can be turned down and you're listening
to classical music or hip-hop or
something uh on 98.6
or 95.1 or whatever. But I think that
DMT kind of has that kind of function.
It's the knob in a way um that that
controls our perception.
So, next clip.
Uh but oh yeah, not not yet. Next clip.
So, but he's talking about the
measurement problem as well in that
there was so much that he said in that
long clip, but
the measurement problem. I love that he
addresses the measurement problem a lot
because th this I hate that it is even
called the measurement problem. It's not
a problem. It what the what he says is
the issue is that it's uh what is making
the measurement. I think what he's
saying and this if he is saying that
this then this is correct is that it's a
being that is the measurement taker.
It's not a device. Okay, that's not a
being. You know, once Sabine
Hosenfelder, she said um uh on a on a
stream that I did a um a commentary on
she said that the measurement problem
regarding measurement problem we don't
need conscious being to uh to make a
measurement because we know that you can
just have a device do it. The
level of the lack of of
effort that has been put into that
statement uh or that response is is
pretty it's pretty lacking. Um there is
no device
without a conscious being to make the
device to aim the device to interpret
the information that that is captured by
the device to perceive that information
that is captured by the device. There is
no information
because there's no one to be informed
even uh by a device.
All every every possible logical
examination of this statement breaks
down almost immediately once you start
um you know trying to steal mana and it
does not work. It's a being that is
making an observation when they are
perceiving these particles these
subatomic particles. It's so simple when
you understand what is actually
happening. It's a wave
that you are perceiving a point on.
Okay? And that's it. And if you try and
take this try and try and tell me the
speed and position of a wave at the
exact same time, you can't because to
tell me its position is to tell me it
when it's not, you know, to give me a
location, which means like it's not
dynamic and moving. It's it's static.
It's fixed.
And to perceive its you know uh its
velocity or uh or its direction then you
cannot tell me its position because that
would be to fix it and you need to look
at it while it's being in a you know
perceive its dynamicness, its
movingness, the fact that it's moving in
order to tell me its direction or its
velocity. And um this is what's
happening with subatomic particles.
They're points, they're focus points or
they are uh perception points of a wa of
waves.
And um that's it. I mean it's that's it
is so incredibly simple but it involves
assuming that consciousness is the
fundamental and also getting rid of the
idea that probability has anything to do
with this other than interpretation of
of you know or predict predictive models
that we make. That's all probability has
to do with it's there is no probability
involved in the measurement problem
fundamentally. It's just, you know, when
people say, oh, you know, the electrons
orbit the nucleus, and then somebody
says, no, they don't actually orbit the
nucleus. They exist in a cloud of, you
know, uh, of probabilistic, you know, of
probability. And it's like, no, it's
you're perceiving a wave basically like
a ripple coming from
uh a, you know, a point of information.
and uh that is being perceived and
and that wave is moving. So you you can
when you look at it you're only going to
see a point like this is due to the
constraint of focus of a mind is that
focus implies only focusing on one thing
like otherwise it's not focus and um
uh but this and the idea that this they
exist in this probabilistic state
implies that probability is somehow
fundamental to the state that they exist
in. But that's not true there. If you
understood
the dimensions of interaction between
the two beings that are causing an you
know two strings of information to be
crossed basically causing an excitation
of a string which is a fiber on a fiber
bundle which is a mind that c that that
causes a point to be perceived which we
call a particle fundamental particle
then you would know that it's purely
deterministic.
choice is included in how these things
are determined, but it is deterministic.
It is not um probabilistic. Probability
is is a tool. It's not a it doesn't
fundamentally exist. It's just a tool.
And uh you know, I was quite good at
probability in in school and I'm telling
you it it's it's not a part of
fundamental reality. It's part of our
modeling of reality. It's part of our
prediction about things. Uh but it's not
about the actuality of things.
If that makes sense, let me know in the
chat. Uh but there is no measurement
problem. But you in order to realize
this, you need to cast out multiple
assumptions at the same time. That's
what I'm saying is like why we can't
solve these problems is because you need
to say okay I'm not going to just assume
that that one thing is wrong and that
maybe you're proposing something better.
I have to assume that that that that and
that are all wrong and that in our
understanding of them at least even if
they are perceptually true they are
fundamentally
you know wrong in our we are
fundamentally wrong in our
interpretation or in our understanding.
Good luck getting the scientific
community to do that um beyond until you
can prove it, you know, experimentally
or that your perspective is is uh
is more complete.
Um, but they they say, you know, in this
clip as well, you know, they're talking
about artificial life and
uh how scientists are trying to create
artificial
life of the physics and their
abstraction process, right? Versus a
biologist who's going to literally like,
you know, kill something and try to
analyze its parts and figure out how to
put the parts back together and make it
alive again. And it's not possible,
right? And in science today, you hear
all kinds of conversation about
emergence, right? And emerging
properties, right? Like artificial
intelligence. I worked in artificial
intelligence for years. This was part of
what my PhD was in. And I studied at the
Santa Fe Institute. I studied complexity
science. I was involved in the field of
so-called artificial life. How do we
create the right, you know, um
algorithms and conditions in a computer
with metabolic attacks and growth and
reproduction and look for emergent
properties, right? Right. And in this
whole thesis today in the world about
artificial intelligence and technology
that where this is an emergent
intelligence is all you know coming out
of this philosophy that says let's get
rid of the most important things you
know go down to this level of
abstraction and then try to recreate all
the most important things. And that is
what we fundamentally reject. And that's
this idea of wholeness and parts which
is what you originally asked about and
vertical causation, right? It's actually
consciousness and life and corporeality
that affects the lower realms. And it's
not the other way around. And you cannot
reduce, you cannot abstract and reduce
your way back to creation and to life.
Amen. You cannot do that. Uh and they've
never shown anything that gives any kind
of indication that that would be the
case. And yet it is still assumed. And I
think that there's multiple reasons why
that is the case. And that's why it's so
hard to break out of this because there
are multiple
u
causes that are feeding into this
perspective uh as the becoming the
dominant narrative in in academ academia
and science.
this anti-theistic
uh
materialist,
you know, perspective,
random perspective.
It's funny when uh Wolf Gang Smith said
um that uh
I always expect him to have a more like
sophisticated last name than Smith, so I
always forget his last name, which is
funny. But um uh you know given Wolf
Gang it's like Smith but uh um he he
stated that there they physicists just
come up with the craziest theories to to
kind of explain and and deal with these
issues uh that keep arising in this
perspective that is you know the
dominant perspective in science and they
totally do. I mean Sean Carroll's many
worlds is insane. And I don't know if
it's just Sean Carroll. I know that it's
not. But he is one of the people who
pushed this theory in uh you know the
physics world today. Um and he's a very
prominent voice, very good teacher, very
wrong about the fundamental nature of
the universe. Um but that's a dangerous
combination. But uh he
his his whole the theory that he pushes
I know it's not just his but of many
worlds that there's just you know all
these different universes um that that's
why we just happen to exist in the one
that has life in it and uh has things
the way that it that it um you know the
way that they are that allows for
consciousness to exist. It's just
there's it's just nonsense. There's
nothing backing that whatsoever other
than just probabilities. But the thing
is is that probability isn't
fundamental. So you can't rely on
probability as your axiom on a
fundamental theory. You just can't. And
uh so again, there's just so many issues
with this that arise. Um but that's just
one of them.
But there's countless.
Um,
but this has implications on our on our
on us and our well-being. It's not just,
you know, this detached information.
People talk about quantum physics and in
some ways we kind of just assume the
public just assumes it is the epitome of
of understanding of the world. You know,
when people say things like, "You're
actually a vibrating string dancing in
11 dimensional hyperspace and uh you
know, string theory is the god
equation." It's people listen and
they're like, "Oh, wow." Like the cat is
dead and alive at the same time. That's
amazing. The wave and particle collapse
into this according to this wave
function. It it's just I'm not saying
that these things can't be perceived,
but some of them can, some of them
can't, but it's it's just it's turned
into an idol where that nobody
understands. Nobody understands it. And
it also isn't consistent. At the same
time though, it's something that's like
super detached from us. You know, if I
tell you the cat is dead and alive at
the same time, if it's in a box and
you're like, "Oh, wow. That blows my
mind." You don't get it. Nobody gets it
cuz it doesn't make sense. And then um
uh and neither does the wave and
particle collapse thing. it as a true
you know in the way that it is described
it does make sense
but
this uh this is also even though it's
it's thought of it's kind of this idol
of you have the ultimate understanding
and if you're a quantum physicist then
we can ask you questions about
consciousness even though it has nothing
to do with consciousness according to
quantum physicists and uh and we can ask
you questions about politics and
everything because you just have the
ultimate understanding
At the same time, none of the stuff
seems to impact us in our in our life.
If I tell you that you're that you know
a cat in a box is dead and alive at the
same time. It doesn't change how we can
act at all. If I tell you about particle
wave collapses, it doesn't impact us. It
doesn't make us think about ourselves
differently in any kind of meaningful
way. It doesn't change how we live our
lives. The ultimate understanding of
reality would definitely make you know
you understand the world in a way that
was enough to make you change your life
to orient yourself in certain ways to
try to set new and different goals than
you would otherwise have. And uh so we
in one sense we see quantum physics as
the ultimate and this other sense we see
it as completely useless and and and
uh you know detached from us and um you
know that's because there's multiple
things that are feeding into this
perspective that are wrong. That's why
you're having this weird superp position
of nonsense.
But uh he says this this is Wolf Gang
talking about this.
Let me know in the chat if the uh notice
I just can pause the video. It's
amazing. It doesn't I don't hit pause.
it doesn't pause, then I hit pause
again, then it it does pause and then
unpause. That is not happening anymore.
Um, but let me know in the chat how the
quality of the stream is and uh you
know, just so I'm aware of how the uh
new equipment is working. But here is
the next clip.
And this has of course has had a
tremendous cultural impact upon the
contemporary western civilization
because the dominant force in
contemporary westerni civilization is
science and the basic science is
physics. So the fact that the fact is
that modern western culture has as it
were
eliminated all the higher levels of
being and I mean we've become sort of
creatures of the mud. We're crawling
around on the earth thinking that's all
there is. So the blessed thing about
modern physics is that nobody really
believes it. I'm sure that no parent
when it holds his child thinks that it's
holding a bunch of molecules. I mean not
even the physicists go that far. But yet
in a sense that would be the logical
consequence. So the reason we founded
this foundation philosophia initiative
foundation is because we recognize that
this reductionism of contemporary
science is not only wrong but it is uh
dangerous. It is destructive of all
higher culture.
I mean it really shows the resilience of
mankind that it has been able to
withstand that absolutely poisonous
philosophy coming in the name of science
and still attain humanity with with all
the the limitations that we see daily.
We are still human beings and that's
that's a marvel because if we would
fully believe what quote unquote science
tells us these days we would be its
factor dehumanized.
this is his uh philosophia initiative.
Maybe we will
you know get more into this uh stuff at
a certain point and now that we have um
you know upgraded tech uh I will be
seeking to do some interviews with some
of the people that we have uh you know
whose ideas we have discussed on this
channel. One of them hopefully being uh
Wolf Gang Smith. But um you know his uh
philosophia initiative I will link it in
the description below. I do have a link
to their full discussion um on uh
um the meaning code uh YouTube channel
below and if you click on that in the
description of that video you will see a
link to the philosophy initiative. Um
but
I I very much agree with what he's
saying here. Um, but I also think that
there's more to it. And you know we
don't when he says we don't believe what
physics tells us because we still feel
things that physics has not explained or
that is contrary to what is the
narrative in physics which is that
there's something
beautiful about you know even physicists
they'll say oh I'm guided by beauty all
the time and uh you know it's like okay
so there's beauty is fundamental here
like your go and your quest for a
fundamental theory is that basically it
is assuming as its axiom or it is
presupposing beauty the existence of
beauty yet it's not presupposing the
existence of consciousness explain that
to me because you can't but um uh that's
just a ridic I mean the more you think
about that the just more ridiculous it
gets but um but it is dangerous though
and you can see though that we are
losing our humanity you know he says
it's amazing that we've retained it. I I
don't think that the people who have
truly like
assumed the opposite of what
um
or who have assumed kind of the
fundamental narratives of of uh of what
is taught in science and extrapolated
from those fundamental narratives. I
don't think that they have really
retained their humanity. I think they're
losing it. Um, you know, you see that
stuff with a lack of meaning fe feeling
meaning in the world. You know, there's
the meaning crisis that everybody talks
about constantly. And uh, you know, we
we for for how hard life was in the
past, nobody talked about meaning crises
like 2,000 years ago the way that they
do now or even 200 years ago the way
that they do now. people knew that they
were mattered to others in a way that we
just are losing sight of today. And
we're losing sight of our fundamental
constraints and we are assuming that
they don't exist even though they are
part of our fundamental being and our
experience like gender
and uh we'll get more into that uh
eventually but I mean gender is a it is
a fundamental component of of reality
and it is it is intrinsic to our uh
realization and manifestation and and uh
and execution of our meaning and
I mean it's not being explained well and
there's lots of reasons why it's the our
language with it is totally off on all
sides of that discussion too. So
nobody's got it right in you know the
modern discussion of not advocating for
exactly one side over the other. But I
will say that uh you know we are losing
we are losing our connection to
anything
as a as a as an assumption of truth.
And um you know people I like I've said
on here before I've had PhD philosophy
PhD students come into my discord and
try and argue with me for you know hours
uh that their thesis is correct and
their thesis is that consciousness
doesn't exist and it's an illusion.
To who? Who is an illusion is a
perception. So who is perceiving? Like
it just it they they're literally
writing this into their thesis. But
who's writing this into their thesis?
You know, it's like all I have to do is
ask them who wait who's who's writing
this, you know, uh this this thesis.
It's like I am. Oh,
you are. I am. is you can't navigate the
world without presupposing certain
fundamental truths. You can't navigate
your interaction with people without
presupposing certain fundamental truths.
consciousness, gender, beauty, a meaning
like
uh responsibility
like these these morality like these
things hierarchy like you can't navigate
the the world you can't navigate
yourself without assuming
fundamental truths to exist if they are
fundamentally true. If you reject them,
you're going to lose your humanity.
You're going to end up a cog in the
system, a responsibil
lacking any responsibility, gender,
meaning uh you know and and
you know, beauty. I mean, you're going
to just become a tool of the
corporations. I mean, it's and it is
happening. It's very very concerning.
And it is because we have broken
uh from true
structures our our connection to true
structures
um as and they are no longer
fundamental assumptions um you know by
wi within academia especially but by
people who are you know increasingly
um constrained by academia And you know,
you need to
perceive your own and feel your own
constraints and abilities in the world.
And if you're sitting in a classroom all
day, then yeah, like what are you going
to check? What firsthand experience are
you going to check against that
secondhand information that ends up
being totally wrong? Um you if you're
going to it's like if I if I tell you
that boiling water is is cold,
you don't know that I'm lying until you
burn yourself and you need to be allowed
to burn yourself. But the problem is is
that in our schools when we're
outsourcing our parenting,
we are uh causing an issue where the
avoidance of of um
of having you know responsibility or or
where liability is is ruling or uh what
is allowed and what what is you know
permitted in uh and then what therefore
what is experienced in that state. And
Wolf Gang goes into that um kind of in
this next clip, but uh
he says,
well, it's not the next clip, but
um
we will in in a future clip.
This is him st he's talking about uh
um
in this next clip he's talking about
intelligent design is a dangerous thing
and I don't think
is
I don't think that it's amazing I can
just hit pause. I'm just saying like you
I don't know I have had viewers tell me
that it is incredibly frustrating to
watch me struggle with getting the video
to pause and unpause when I want it to.
Um, and I'm telling you, it is it is uh
incredibly frustrating on this side,
too. And to not have that,
guys, we haven't even started making new
videos and and 3D renders or anything
yet. It's just I can pause when I need
to. Very nice. Um,
okay. Uh, this next clip though is on
intelligent design. He's saying is
actually dangerous to assume and he's
going to get into it. We'll we'll try
and talk about it a bit. I kind of think
I see what he's saying.
Is saying something about vertical
causation and that we believe that there
is a designer and that all of this
beauty and complexity comes from
someplace outside of us. But at the same
time, it also
kind of puts us back squarely into the
realm of the physicist again if we rely
on intelligent design.
So um
if you might want to say something about
that
in chapter nine I think of um ancient
wisdom.
I think we'll what Karen is speaking to
is kind of the density theorem versus
the generalized density theorem right
and how the demi theorem as it is
presented focuses you know on
mathematics and on information theory
and it kind of reduces everything to the
level of information theory whereas
clearly that's not what your philosophy
uh would say. Well, one, if I could just
quote here, he says, "The the
intelligent design movement threatens to
plunge us into an error worse than
Darwinism. Whereas design theory has de
facto disqualified the Darwinian
mechanism, it has in no way discredited
the Darwinist concept of common
disscent, which thus remains entrenched
as a scientist's dogma. And common
dissent obiates metaphysics in a domain
which happens to be incurably
metaphysical." Um I just thought it was
a marvelous argument and um I mean maybe
it's too complex to get into here but he
says it only compounds bad science with
heretical theology for authentic
evolution is indeed an unfolding.
Wherever there's an outside there also
has to be an inside and the picture that
you gave is um we could think of the
center of that icon as being everything
and then as it unfolds out it becomes
the circle. what's unfolding out are all
those infinite axes all folded into that
center that can then unfold. Um because
we tend to see only the outside and not
the inside. But an inside must always
precede an outside.
Yeah, you raise very interesting
questions here. First of all, let me say
that I was very happy when Bill Densky's
book came out in 1998. I had written my
book the quantum enigma in 1995. So and
in 1995 when I wrote the quantum enigma
I showed that the measurement problem
cannot be resolved on the basis of
horizontal causality the causality known
to the physicist that in order to quote
unquote collapse a wave function you
need a different kind of causality which
I call vertical and which acts
instantaneously. So this is what
happened in 1995. In 1998 when Bill
Densky came out with his book, he it
turns out that he rediscovered what I
call vertical fality from an information
theoretic point of view. And he Okay,
first of all just to make this try and
make this make a bit more sense.
I mean this might not be the right time
to say this but uh when he says that um
collapsing the wave function can only
happen um not horizontally but u
vertically and that it um what did he
say? He said uh it can only happen when
causality is happening instantaneously.
I think he said something like that.
Really what it is is that on the realm
of causality on the level of of like God
because God exists outside of spaceime
he he is space he he he maneuvers in
time he can't maneuver in space so he
maneuvers through the um connecting of
in of um you know assembly time
basically which is like entanglement
relationships he's managing entanglement
relationships
um and they are built on previous ones.
So you have to know the possibilities
and have a goal when setting up the
previous ones uh as the you know with
the end. This is one of the arguments
for scriptures being divine is that it
appears when you really examine them
that they were written. It was like
whoever wrote the beginning knew the
end. Whoever knew the end who wrote the
end, you know, it was like it was
written simultaneously. And I do see
that even in the math in in scripture
which is just incredible. But um uh but
it's not from our perspective because
we're inside of creation, we don't see
things uh instantaneously. What we see
is simultaneously. So causation happens
uh yes from God's perspective you it
better it's and from our perspective as
well it's probably better to say
causation is happening simultaneously
not um rather than instantaneously which
which is both in contrast to what um is
the opposing viewpoint that he's giving
but because the p uh p the collapsing of
a wave function into the perception of a
particle or a point um is is an
interaction between two strings of
information
uh that forms matter which means like
there's information coming from above
and being perceived uh below and also
you're you know you have a hand in in
the manipulation of that as well. It
means that we're acting and the universe
is acting or we're acting and God is
acting uh or like our cell is acting and
we are acting simultaneously. we can do
what our cells allow and our cells must
do what we you know uh kind of allow
them to do in in uh in our according to
our goals and things like that as well.
So um this is a simultaneous
cause causal
um it's this simultaneous causality
because there's two interacting
entities at minimum um and it's that
they're they're interacting and they're
experiencing moment simultaneously and
that is causing you know the collapse of
a wave function. I hope that made some
sense, but we'll get more into it in
future produced videos, but we'll listen
to what he has to say here.
Proved that you cannot produce complex
specified information by means of the
causality known to the physicist by
means of what I call horizontal
causality. So in in that sense, Densky's
work is a partial verification of what I
said three years earlier, the quantum
enigma. But now getting back to the
intelligent design movement which came
out of that rediscovery of vertical
entanglement happens on the level of
simultaneity or instantaneousness.
That's why you can if you quantum
entanglement
can be observed by you know when you
flip the charge of a particle it
instantly sim or aka simultaneously
shifts you know a particle that would
even be on the other side of the
universe like you know people say that
at least and um that's because
entanglement is u happens outside of
spaceime and it's it's a simultaneous
or instantaneous
um
causal
construct
relationship.
I I have problems with it because uh
instead of denying the idea of evolution
which is upside down things evolution
says things come from the circumference
of the circle and uh all the world's
great philosophy and theology says just
the opposite things come from the
center. So there is this inversion and
uh instead of correcting that inversion
they simply say yes evolution is a fact
but it requires uh a different kind of
causality and uh so this is unfortunate
they missed a great opportunity to help
straighten out our civilization. They're
not doing that but it is a partial
verification of what I arrived at in
completely different ways. And then I
should say one thing further
a few years later and quite a few years
later in fact it was in the year it was
about three years ago I discovered that
Densky's theorem which is closed in the
language of information theorem theory
is just a very very special case of
something incomparably more general and
it is very very simple
the idea of vertical causation is that
it were paired with another onlogic idea
and that is the idea of an
irreducibleness
and once you these two ideas together,
vertical causation, irreversible
coordinates, you uh can intellectually
prove a number of very basic I call them
a call facts and one of these onlogical
facts is this that you cannot it it
takes vertical causation to produce
irreducibleness.
So that the horizontal causation the
causation known to physics cannot
produce irreducible coordinates and so
build theorem is just a very very
special case of this basic onlogical
theorem and
okay so what is he saying this is great
this is great what he's saying is
something that's very much part of
sentient singularity theory as well he's
saying that there is this irreducible
wholeness about existence about you know
beings in existence is what I'm get I'm
guessing he's stating consciousness has
an irreducible wholeness to it. You are
you. I think this is related to prime
numbers. Prime numbers are divisible by
one and themselves and that's it. Like I
think prime numbers have a fundamental
relationship with consciousness. But um
I don't have an ability to prove that
yet. But um
uh and or explain exactly how that is.
But another time we'll try and get into
it. But um this if you if you read
you go to
sentients singingularity.com
the website has been updated uh by the
way um to work better uh you know
depending on the dimensions of the
screen and stuff. There's no more video
here because I just couldn't get that to
work. But if you go to writings and you
go to the technical description of
existence
uh you can see that it is it descri
sentience singularity theory describes
the totality of existence as a
singularity of sentience that is
creating additional sentient
singularities within itself. Sentience
is the phenomenon of feeling sensations
and emotions. Singularity is defined as
something that is one distinct unit or
something that is especially unique.
Sentient singularity theory also denotes
a singularity as a structure that has
the property of infinite oneness such as
a moia strip or one being that it is
that is composed of many beings such as
a multisellular organism. Sentient
singularity theory can therefore be
understood that everything that exists
is part of a single universal sentient
being that is producing an infinitely
growing number of other sentient beings
within itself. These additional
singularities of sentience or self-aware
beings are arranged into a nested quasyp
periodic fractal pattern of stacked
holonic structures. This pattern forms a
single self-reflective knot of
perception heading and assembly body
that integrates multiple entangled
strings of information. Okay.
And then uh this is a poetic
description. It says beyond the
beginning sentience exists. Existence is
sentient and sentience is one. sentient.
The sentient one is sovereign and
eternal and alone and wills to create
another. It divides you know their
singular beingness to multiply and
manifest meaning. And so uh and you can
see in here it just says you know it
just says one a lot. The active one, the
active one, the reactive one, the two
judge each other. The two decay, the two
hate, the two perceive, the two forgive,
the two merge. like it's which two is
just two ones like it's not you know
it's not separate from ones. So there
are distinct units of the universe and
that are irreducible. Those units or
those those parts are holonic structures
which are if you look up a holon in
philosophy
holon
philosophy
a holon is something that is
simultaneously a whole in it of itself
as well as part of a larger whole
are understood as the constituent part
holes of a hier hierarchy. Okay, this is
exactly sentient singularity theory.
It's just more like explan uh you know
comprehensive um in sentient singularity
theory but uh as to how that unfolds but
it does it's unfolding
this partitioning of reality happens
through this folding process this
reflective process of you know one
perceiving inside outside separate and
oneness and uh and that is how you know
a being is is able to self-reflect on
itself and therefore be a whole. And so
this is what he's saying though is that
there are these
indivisible parts of reality really. I
mean yes you are divisible and that
you're made of many cells but you your
body is made of many cells but you are
really not. You are you and that's it.
This cell is it and itself and that's
it. It it's not you don't you can't
really take into account the molecules
in it or you can't take into account the
cells in me. I am one and uh the cell is
one
but
uh
whereas you know you can do that with a
bicycle you know you can start cutting
it up and it's uh but you can't really
do that with a a being and um but you
have to have that and you also can't
have and I this is what I think they're
saying is that this this narrative of
intelligent design where basically there
is no common lineage to all beings
because philosophically metaphysically
beings can only come from beings. They
cannot come from things which is true
according to sentient singularity theory
as well. If you read that poetic
description of existence or that um you
know uh technical description of
existence on my web page both of these
show
the exact same message which is that
beings come from beings. These
indivisible holons come from other
holons.
You cannot get a being from non-being.
And
uh
but that is consistent though with the
with the narrative of a of a common
ancestor.
Okay.
And that is inconsistent with the
dogmatic narrative that is often thought
of as intelligent design where there
isn't a common ancestor.
But there is a common ancestor. That
common ancestor is the
primary prime sentience of existence in
it is God. We all come from God and
there is a nested hierarchical lineage
structure that is responsible for
uh you know unfolding the multiplicity
of sentience um these individ
indivisible whole sentient beings whole
sentient beings that fundamentally make
up reality. So there isn't an issue with
God created the universe because that's
true. But there is an issue with the
idea that God
um
created a universe in which there is no
common ancestor of sentient beings. In
fact, you know, Darwinian evolution
takes it so far back as uh okay, yeah,
we all came from a single cell at some
point.
Sentient singularity theory says that's
correct. But more than that, not only do
we come from a a shared cell at some
point, we came from a shared atom,
you know, we came from a shared
molecule. We have a lineage
that is uh responsible for growing the
tree of life and that goes further back
than cells. Life did not start at cells.
Life as defined as sentient beings have
always existed.
There has never been a beginning of
life. There's a beginning of
multiplicity of sentience, but there's
no beginning of sentience where there
was no sentience prior. There's always
been sentience. It's a logical
inevitability for so many reasons that
we cannot get into on this stream. But
um but he's right. in I think what he's
saying and uh you know I didn't read the
books his book so uh I don't know for
sure if I'm completely correct so I'm
you know I apologize to everyone uh in
the stream that I'm giving my commentary
on if I'm misinterpreting anything. Um
but and that goes for any future streams
or past streams that I've done. Um, but
I I believe what I'm I understand what
he's saying, which is that you can't
throw out the idea that we have a common
ancestor because if you do, you're going
to destroy the logic of the system. But
at the same time, you must not take the
dogma of Darwinism that sentience or or
consciousness evolved from
unconsciousness.
You have to take the idea that
consciousness can only come from
consciousness from creationism
or theism
uh or create I guess creationism
intelligent design whatever you want to
call it. I would say creationism is
better term for it. And then you also
have to take the idea of a common
ancestor from Darwinism and you actually
have to extend both of them and and
double down on both ideas
simultaneously. And here's another
reason why we're having issues is
because you know these are seen as two
sides of two opposing ideas when in
reality there are certain aspects of the
dogma of these that that gets lumped
into the the label that is attributed to
these ideas and um that's wrong on both
sides. So we can't be like this side is
right and this side is wrong because
they're both right and wrong. uh we have
to deconstruct them completely and start
again from first principles and
you can't get it's very hard for one
person to do that let alone you know it
to become an institutionally accepted
you know direction.
Um, you know, he talks a lot about
Darwinism and how incomplete it is and
how much uh science clings to it. And I
will tell you, you know, as somebody who
breeds snakes and geckos and goes and
studies with zoologologists and
biologists, the top herpatologists and
zoologologists and biologists in the
world, I've studied under and gone into
the field with and worked in, you know,
with captive animals uh with. I'm have a
very good understanding of the you know
of her the hereditary nature of traits
and of uh you know natural selection and
selective pressures and and also uh you
know selective breeding. Um, I'm I'm
working on making white snakes from
non-white snakes, but because I
understand heritability and recessive
genes and pet squares and I get all that
and um, but there are also aspects of
how things evolve in our in the animal
kingdom alone and the the the you know,
plants and and if you really wanted to
think harder about it, molecules and and
atoms as well that are
beyond just
explainable through selective pressures
in a in a in a constrained moment. They
can only be explained by kind of a
simultaneous
intentionality
to uh to the
existence of certain features.
So, you know, they'll explain eyes as
this way and and you know, they evolved
because there was just some cells that
were just sensitive to light. It's like
you really dive into the logic of that
and
even if that's true, it's not it's not
fully explanatory.
Um,
here
I'm trying to go fast.
Next clip.
As a civilization, we seem to have
is uh this next clip is uh on good and
evil.
Pray to counter addiction.
something like
one of the one of the big problems with
ideology of any kind is and there's
there's another thinker in this corner
of the internet named Johny he talks
about um things being reciprocally
narrowing and ideology is like that the
more complete and tight that the
ideology becomes the more that it
narrows your and then you're narrow your
focus just gets more and more narrow
until all you're left with is this tiny
little world that you inhabit because
your ideology is so tight around you and
that can happen with political
ideologies it can also happen with
scientistic ideologies right
but it's also important to acknowledge
what Wolf King is saying here that there
is good and evil, right? That there are
and these aren't just this this isn't
just a couple of ideologies, right? Like
reducing the conversation to ideology is
again kind of another um crutch, if you
will, to not have to really wrestle with
the tough questions that we all have to
ask ourselves and face today culturally,
right? Which is this kind of reduction
of everything, you know, to a relativism
and a reductionism and and kind of an
avoidance of well, hey, if there is a
god, right, what does that mean? And
well, wouldn't you say though that the
evil is not something out there? Is not
some entity or well, okay, let me let me
let me verify that a little bit. But the
evil resides in me just as much as it
resides out there. I mean, I'm just as
capable of evil as anybody is capable of
evil. And then there is an entity who's
obviously trying to drive us all towards
more and more evil. So, um I I think
that sometimes we want to say, well,
there's this idea out there and that
idea is evil when a lot of it is our own
um our own desire to believe something
that's going to take us down the
direction that we want to go. And I
think that happens in scientism is that
um our desires can guide us along a path
that leads us in an evil way, but it's
because our evil desires are also
connected up with that. It's not like
it's just that thing out there, it's
also me.
Uh they're kind of talking past each
other. I just wanted to make the point
though that they are. It is true though
that if there is a hierarchy, if there's
a if there is a lineage which there is
that evolution says that and so does uh
you know reli organized religion says
that
if there is a lineage then there is a
hierarchical causality. If there's a
hierarchical causality then there is
uh morality responsibility. You know, if
you're going to say that you matter at
all or anything matters, and I know some
people say that that's not true, but
that's not really what anybody feels.
Even if you do feel meaningless and like
that nothing matters, the fact that that
makes you feel not that's not a good
feeling
uh doesn't lead you to to prosperity
like means that that is uh
it's probably, you know, not true. I
mean it it isn't true but I'm just
saying like from a the perspective of
somebody who's skeptical uh to this idea
but also you know you can't even say
that it's the idea that there is no good
and evil is is consistent with Darwinism
be uh or this Darwinian evolution
narrative of the the idea of survival of
the fittest. It's like you're you're
even you're putting a value on survival
already, which means like there is some
good to not just dying, you know, like
there is something good about that.
There's something successful about that.
And um we don't
we don't use the same words in a lot of
these discussions. We change the words
even though the the message is the same.
And that kind of ends up causing a lot
of confusion. Um, but you know this
leads to a lot of it leads to a lot of
problems. But there is a good and evil.
What she's talking about is whether or
not it comes from within you or whether
or not it's outside of us. It's both.
Um, you know, but
it's more important to just first know
that evil exists. You know my fir when I
first started down this journey of
trying to understand the world
philosophically and and you know what is
the nature of reality and mind and polit
which came from pol my political
investigations and technological um
investigations and uh you know that led
me to trying to understand AGI and then
you know consciousness then fundamental
reality but before that it was politics
and politics.
Uh
I what I first realized in when I was
realized politics had could negatively
impact people, you know, like laws can
be passed that actually forbid you from
from exercising not just your your
rights of things that you know you would
want to do because it's fun like smoking
weed or drinking, but also to do certain
things that are your responsibilities,
which is actually much more severe. Like
if if parental sovereignty is being
undermined uh or overrided or if um you
know your ability to defend yourself is
being forbidden like these the ability
to speak your mind is being uh
restricted like these things are where
your responsibilities are now being
forbidden not just your rights to to
enjoy yourself. Um you know and I'm not
saying that those aren't important but
they're not as important. uh some of
these things are are it's not a
requirement that you smoke weed or drink
alcohol. And in fact, you probably would
be better off not doing those things.
And I say that as somebody who's done
plenty of both of those things in my
life. Um but at the same time, I do
think you should have the right to do
it. And uh and that, you know, life is
usually about context. There is a time
and place for most things, not all
things, but most things. And uh but
but that even then none of those are
responsibilities. But the ability to
defend yourself, the ability to speak
what you think is true, these are your
responsibilities. Uh the ability to take
care of your children the way that and
parent them the way that you see fit,
that is your responsibility. Um and if
that's being forbidden by politics,
that's a problem. And I I realized this
and I had like a political awakening and
I wrote something and I only wrote the
first page but it was going to be a book
and it was titled we are all evil and it
was about how
we our lack of context and our lack of
firsthand understanding of issues but
can lead to problems when we are given
power to make decisions on those issues
that we don't have firsthand experience
over. And it restricts people's
abilities to to enact uh their and
exercise their responsibilities. And
it's evil even though it doesn't seem
like it's evil because it's usually done
with good intentions. But they say, you
know, the path to hell is paved in good
intentions. That's very true. And um uh
but it's also there's more to it than
that. But we
we are all capable of doing evil actions
when we are doing when we don't have the
enough context to know the
big the the environment and big picture
of the uh that that is contextualizing
most fundamentally of the issue in which
we are uh examining. You have to
understand it firsthand.
um usually in order to understand an
issue well
but and this is you know I think it was
I forgot who who said it but someone
I've heard people mention that
like Jordan Peterson says you know first
sometimes to see that good exists you
have to realize that evil exists. That
was definitely the path for me. Uh, I
remember when my boss, I've said this
before, at my first job out of college,
said to me something about how he he was
Mormon, and I was self-described
atheist, but really an anti-theist, and
he said that he thought morality was not
relative. And I was like, that's crazy.
The Nazis thought that what they were
doing was good. But the thing is is that
we were talking past each other.
Regardless of whether or not they
thought that what they were doing was
good, doesn't make it good.
Um he wasn't saying that people don't
think that what they are doing is you
know good and that there isn't a
relative relativistic nature or to our
understanding of what is good. He was
saying that there was an absoluteness to
what is actually good. And uh I would
have not I would have disagreed with him
in while trying to think about it
because I'd be like what is good for
someone is maybe not good for another
person. That's actually not true. If you
see the big picture of things I don't
think that's usually a false perspective
due to you are looking at it from a very
very limited viewpoint. But um
the
the reality is that
um
I would have felt that he was right
because I would you know as a as a human
being and as a Jew I would not have
argued that what the Nazis did were was
good. I would have said that that was
evil. But like I would have just felt
that. I wouldn't have been able to
explain it at the time. Now I can but um
it's
it's uh
like sometimes to realize that there is
actually a good which means like there
is an affirmative thing that you should
be doing um meaning like you have
certain responsibilities it all first
you have to see that there is like an
evil and I think politically a lot of
people are these days at least you know
half of the people in politics maybe
maybe a third of them probably less le
than half, probably a third, um, are
seeing that there's real evil uh, in the
world, even if they have yet not yet
realized what is truly
like the to I don't want to say the
totality of what is good because I don't
I'm not claiming that I know that, but
that uh, they haven't realized
I don't think the political narrative of
even those people has shifted to
responsibilities yet. It has shifted.
It's still on that's my right. It's not
like that's my responsibility and that's
more important than whether or not it's
my right. But um uh yeah there is good
and there is that which is not good
which is emergently evil. But it is
there is fundamentally only that which
is good and anything that which is not
good is emergently evil.
Um
so they say you know they talk about how
science should be valueless and it's
assumed to be valueless. It doesn't
place values on things. That's not
possible. And um uh it's just not
possible to make sense of the world and
do that. So you know if science's job is
to try and make sense of things like you
cannot make sense of the world without
assuming that there is value.
So this is the last clip.
Ask any final questions in the chat and
uh I will get to them before we leave.
Ideology plays into the equation plays
into the into the picture.
So the the great catastrophe of
contemporary western civilization
resides in the fact that the educational
system has been taken over almost
locktock and barrel by people of a given
ideological bent and they will tell you
well we are only interested in the truth
and so on and so forth but it is the
truth as they see it and heaven help you
if you don't see it too. So there is a
kind of takeover of the educational
system in the western world by people of
a basically atheistic uh bent and this
is not a good thing. It's a very
dangerous thing and I'm I'm reminded of
the words of Christ when he said that
the children of this world are wiser
than the children of light. Uh I think
there's a great deal of truth in that
that um the people who are identified
with a scientistic religion. It is a
religion.
uh the people who are involved in that
movement uh are in a sense wiser than
our the representatives of our churches
and so on because over the past 100
years they have succeeded in taking over
all the educational institutions except
a handful but all the uh universities
and uh big publishing houses and so on
they have control of it and this creates
a great great problem because we are
losing our youth. Our youth, I mean,
what chance does a 18-year-old young man
or young woman have to stand up against
the professor of whatever it may be? Uh,
I tell you that just as much as
information, just as much as information
is being channeled into these young
minds, disinformation also is going
along the same channels and in a sense
um may often prove to be the more
powerful of the two. So this is a big
big problem and I must say that the west
has not been wise in the name of freedom
and all these wonderful sounding things.
They have as it were permitted a certain
segment of ideologies to take over the
entire educational system. How this
problem will be resolved I have no idea.
But it's a major problem and uh
it's not good.
No it's not. Um and I talk about this
all the time on here. Um, whoa. Okay.
Come on. Come on. There we go. Um, how
this is it's it's not just causing
political and moral problems. It is
causing it is it is hindering our
scientific abil our ability to advance
our scientific understanding of the
world. Um, that we have anti-theists.
There is no such thing as an atheist. I
used to call myself an atheist for 24
years. I was an anti-theist. You can't
be you can't be lacking an opinion on
the nature of the universe. You either
think it's a sentient being with goals
and intentions or you don't. And if you
don't, then you're an anti-theist, not
an atheist. Um there is no such thing as
agnosticism about that question.
Everybody interacts with the universe.
You all, we all have an assumption. Now,
you can be more confident or less
confident, but you do have kind of a
best guess. Um, if you aren't sure, even
if you aren't sure, is the universe a
sentient being with feelings and goals
or is the universe not? And, um, that is
what it comes down to. But,
um, the institutions I don't believe are
easily going to be able to be swayed
into moral theism. Even when we had
organized religion and the Catholic
Church in charge of science and things
like that, yes, we made much more
progress because it was more grounded in
reality. But at the same time there was
still so much sin human sinfulness and
ignorance and and issues that infected
it as well. you know same thing the
temple be that that Christ uh you know
criticized
um was was the same thing you know was
focused on God but it was also corrupted
by man and I don't know if there is a
way out of that other than you know God
resolving it through what religious
people call the messianic era or what
Chris Langan would or some you know
people in the in the uh space of
fundamental theories call like the human
singularity. Uh I don't think that it's
possible to really solve that problem
without the without that. But um it has
to be solved on a level that's not us.
But we can improve things in certain you
know locations and while acknowledging
that yeah there's going to be issues
that are persistent until that time
comes until we unite into a single
sentient being again. um there is going
to be limitations and and lack of
context and and therefore
misunderstanding and sin and all kinds
of things. But um uh that are evil. But
uh and also there's a rewarding system,
reward system to for telling people
exactly what they want to hear and um
and not being exclusionary, but
statements about absolute fundamental
reality that are affirmative, not um uh
not dismissive, but affirmative.
Uh they're not well, you know, it's
possible, but it's like no, it's this
way. The universe is a single sentient
being with goals. This is its goal.
These aren't your responsibilities
because of you know who you are and it
and the goal of this being uh those are
very affirmative statements.
Uh and the institutions are governed by
liability and and inclusivity. But
really what that means is a um an
avoidance of making exclusive statements
about
uh meaningful truths that actually
matter. They'll say things that don't
matter about things that they claim are
true and maybe are, you know,
relativistically true but also don't
matter. Um, you know, they'll tell you
math equations and things like that and
um
but that doesn't matter. You don't need
to know the Pythagorean theorem,
you know, mo for the most part. And if
you do need to know it, then you will
figure out a way to learn it on your
own. You don't need to be taught it in
school. Um, but you need to know what
your social responsibilities are, your
family responsibilities are. Um and
you know these these are things that you
can either have you can either outsource
the par your parenting and and the uh
the the steering of of
your lineage to the state which is going
to guide it to oblivion because it's not
going to guide it towards anything. it's
going to avoid making you know a
decision on where is north
or you can take it uh on yourself which
means not sending your kids to the
institutions and kind of building new
ones which for a time will be better and
then they will get corrupted as well and
this is just something you have to uh
you have to
accept but that doesn't mean that you
don't try and improve things
um but yeah we are in a conundrum and
you know that has been a fundamental
message of this channel. The very first
video on this channel is called escaping
our academic institutions and it is
about how atheism quote unquote um which
is really antitheism is destroyed
science.
Most of our scientific brided
minds in science today were all theists.
Even Einstein was more of a theist than
than people admit. Uh with that um
huge thank you to uh Karen Wong, Richard
Smith and um and Wolf Gang Smith for the
stream. It is a wonderful talk. Link is
in the description below to their whole
discussion. Give the meaning code a
follow. It deserves more uh more
subscribers for sure. There's so many
great discussions on there. Um but very
grateful for their talk and grateful for
you. Please hit the like button and uh I
will see you next week. Peace.