- Good evening and welcome.
I'm Stephanie Browner.
I'm the Dean of Eugene Lane college.
And it's my pleasure to welcome you to the last event
of a week long residency with Bell Hooks.
For many in our community this has been a remarkable week.
I've seen many of you at many events.
We've had radical conversations about radical pedagogy.
About I confess I transgress.
We have accelerated 20 years
since the publication of "Teaching to Transgress."
We've explored radical thinking, radical thought,
decolonizing the imagination.
But I think most of all, we've had radical honesty,
radical openness, and from Bell Hooks, radical generosity.
That doesn't mean it's sentimental, never.
It doesn't mean it's casual and sloppy.
Radical generosity is an act
of taking every person seriously, ideas seriously,
and entering honestly and rigorously
into nuanced conversations.
Tonight Bell is joined by Arthur Jafa.
He's an artist, filmmaker, and cinematographer.
He is the director of "Slowly This" in 1995,
"Tree" in 1999, and "Disheartened 1.0" in 2009.
His cinemagraphic work includes "Daughters of The Dust"
1991, for which he won the cinematography award
at Sundance film festival.
He also worked on seven songs for "Malcolm X" in 1993
and "Kirkland" in 1994, directed by Spike Lee.
He writes on black cultural politics
and his writing has appeared to many publications,
including "Black Popular Culture"
and "Everything But The Burden."
His most recent work is, "Dreams Are Colder Than Death."
It's a short documentary.
It includes conversations and words and thoughts
from Kara Walker, Hortens Spillars, Fred Moten,
Kathleen Cleaver, Charles Burnett, Wangechi MuTu,
Saidiya Hartman, and Melvin Gibbs, and others.
And it asks, what does it mean to be Black in America
in the 21st century?
And Bell Hooks, one last introduction.
For more than three decades,
Bell has been recognized internationally as a scholar, poet,
author, and radical thinker.
Dozens of books, and many, many articles
that she has published, span all these genres.
Including cultural and political analyses and critiques,
personal memoirs, poetry collections, and children's books.
Her writings cover topics of gender, race, class,
spirituality, teaching,
and the significance of media in contemporary culture.
It is my pleasure to thank Bell for a week of conversation
with our community.
And to welcome all of you to the final conversation
and for the celebration after the conversation,
food and champagne to honor this week of work
and conversation and the generosity and radical thinking
of Bell Hooks, and all the colleagues she has brought
into conversation.
Thank you.
(audience claps)
- I can't think of anyone more relevant to end this week
of conversation with, than my friend, comrade,
and fellow creator of decolonized thoughts, images,
representations than AJ.
From the moment I met him and saw the images
that he produced in the words of Jackie Wilson,
I was lifted higher.
And I always use him as my example
of what the decolonized gaze can produce.
Now, last night, those of you who were at our
wacky sexual transgression panel
know that the question I kept asking is,
who's looking, who is looking, and what do they see?
And in many ways, every work that AJ does
poses that question in a radical critical way.
Through sort of, you know the phrase back at you?
Well, his images come back at us,
forcing us to think about, what is it I'm seeing?
Why am I seeing it this way?
This isn't the conventional way of looking.
So hopefully we can begin by him talking a little bit about
where his vision comes from after we see a couple of clips.
- Are they ready?
- Yeah?
Or should I just, okay, cool.
So talk.
Yeah, I know, at a certain point, I guess,
the sorts of things that Bell is raising,
I guess the word is obsess.
You know, you obsess about these things so long
that at a certain point it almost ceases to be, not holy,
but ceases on a certain level
to be an intellectual proposition almost.
It's almost like you end up feeling it
on your nervous system.
Speak into my mic.
I'm gonna show two things.
And in a way, I think they're interesting
just 'cause they bookend two polls in a sense
of my practice, so to speak.
One is not properly speaking of film at all.
- Can't show them until 06:30.
Is that okay?
- It's fine with me, yeah, okay.
- And why is that?
- It's a complicated system.
- Oh, okay.
We can't see the images until 06:30.
- What time is it now?
Cinderella, gonna turn into a pumpkin or something.
But in any event,
it's alright for me to still talk about it?
- Oh yeah.
- But anyway, they sort of bookmark two poles, I guess.
One is a thing called "Apex"
and it's not even properly speaking of film even.
I was just in Scotland a week and a half ago,
and I did a conversation with the sister, Kara Keeling.
I don't know if you know her.
She's at USC, she's a film theorist.
She's really smart, interesting.
She has a book called, "The Witches Flight,"
which is a consideration of how the Black figure,
the queer figure, the film figure,
and into the origins of cinema,
how, she has some fairly radical propositions about...
But anyway, and then I met Kara about a year ago
and this group that we were doing this thing with
in Scotland, Arrochar,
said they wanted us to do a presentation about
where Black cinema is, is going, what not.
And where maybe queer cinema is, is going, is not,
and how they sort of dovetail or intersect.
And it's funny.
I found myself showing a lot of things
that weren't properly speaking cinema at all.
I mean the most interesting thing to me going on right now,
one of the most interesting things.
Something I'm obsessed with is Instagram.
Instagram is deep.
It's really, really deep.
There's a sister who is in Finland.
I don't know her last name, her name is Frieda.
I know it's her first name, you might wanna check it out.
Her Instagram is Nemie, N-E-M-I-E, Peba, P-E-B-A.
It's pretty phenomenal.
I mean, it's a series of images that she's quote unquote
curated across time.
It's hard to describe it actually even, radically personal,
implies certain narratives,
but it's nothing obvious, you know?
In the beginning,
I think she's been doing it for about two years now.
And she generally tends to post three or four images
every four or five days.
I found myself trying to figure out who she was,
trying to identify.
There was a woman in there I thought was her for a while,
but it turned out that it was a friend slash girlfriend.
That's what I was told as I started to get more information.
I have a really good friend in Atlanta, named Sadaji,
who is the most phenomenal, genius organizer of images
that I know period, flat out, Tumblr, Equinox, 1,600.
Now, to me, this is the most interesting stuff
that's going on right now
in terms of people organizing images.
What I did was actually, I took their images
and I put them on the timeline.
And I told people in Scotland,
well, this is not the way you really see 'em
'cause you see 'em across time.
But I'm making a time lapse of them in a sense.
So I gave people a compressed three or four minutes.
The piece that I'm gonna show "Apex" is a piece
that for people who've known me for a while,
know that I do these picture books.
I don't really do 'em anymore
because it's sort of all migrated to my computer in a sense.
But I had these files
and there was a project that I was working on,
a big science fiction project,
one of these impossible to do films.
And I just started throwing these things in this file,
just pictures, like a look book kind of thing.
But I worked on it obsessively for about five years.
I mean over and over, there's a software called Bridge,
that's part of Adobe Suite.
I just over and over organize these things, over and over.
I'd be talking to friends on the phone,
and I'd be organizing this thing.
I've never done anything in my life
that's calibrated to this level.
I mean, it is to my mind,
it's not like the totality of it,
but the truest manifestation
of anything I've ever done in film.
Now, and on the other hand, there's this documentary,
which is really just a gathering of people
who I think are smart.
And I felt like had something to say.
Now, back to the whole thing
that Bell was saying in the beginning about the gaze.
That is super central, one of the strategies
that I used in the documentary
was something that had evolved over years.
There's this book by John Gwaltney called, "Drylongso,"
an oral portrait of Black America.
Really a phenomenal book with oral testimonies
of regular folks, whatever that is.
And I was always struck by his introduction when he said
one of the reasons that he felt like he was able to elicit
these really incredible testimonies from people,
was the fact that he was blind, that he couldn't see,
he thought that freed people up.
And I thought about that for years
in conjunction with this other idea,
which is that Black Americans have a series
or a set of emotional or expressive modalities
that are completely tied to the proximity
of the white gaze as such.
I mean, I think there are equivalents for women,
there are equivalents for LGBT,
I always get the numbers wrong.
But there are equivalents,
people who find themselves in structural positions
of relative powerlessness, tend to develop these ways
of being in relationship to power
that are about surviving and how you manage power.
With Black folks I always like to say is like,
how do you control a situation
when you're bolted to the wall?
You know, if it's a SNM dynamic
and you are always in the fixed positionality of the bottom,
sorry, and the other person is the active
and you're the passive.
How do you control in action?
When you're in the fixed positionality of passiveness?
I like to say Black people do this thing I call glamoring.
We glamor.
It's like you're chained against the wall,
a person is acting on you in violent ways, or maybe not,
but you're not consenting.
They're acting on you, how do you control that person?
Well, I think what Black people tend to do
is we tend to mesmerize the person who's acting on us.
So a lot of what we do, everything from shucking and jiving
to Michael Jackson, moon walking,
it's all glamoring you know?
So my film in the sense took this basic idea.
Okay, if, because I extended it to this idea
that if you point a camera at Black people
on a psycho analytical level,
that camera's also functioning as a white gaze,
even if a Black person is standing behind the camera.
So I said,
I'm just not gonna point cameras at people at all.
So the whole film is structured around having conversations
with people, audio only,
oftentimes the camera would be turned away
so that they could see it,
and then we would shoot them afterwards
or before in some instances, all depending on the schedule.
So there's no talking heads in the whole thing.
- But can you say more about that?
The idea that even if there's a Black person
behind the camera,
it's still embodying a white gaze?
- Well, I mean, I think it's about surveillance
and the whole idea that the way power's structured
is it always drifts upwards.
So even if there's a Black policeman
knocking you in your head, at the end of the day
that policeman doesn't have authority.
There's gonna be a judge, or a Supreme court justice,
or a president, or whatever,
who is presumably gonna be a representative of white power.
Whether they are Obama and he happens to be black
or whatever he is or whatever, you know what I'm saying?
So it's just this idea that,
one of the things I think that it's really necessary,
well, two things, since I evoked Obama I'll say two things.
One, I think it's really important for us
is not lose sight of how he made the impossible possible.
I mean,
above and beyond whatever you think about his presidency,
I didn't ever think I would see that.
I think that's important to remember.
A lot of times when I say, okay, I wanna make Apex,
it's gonna take a hundred million dollars
that's impossible to do.
But I have to remind myself that it's very possible, okay?
Just like Black people imagine themselves outta slavery.
It was very, anything is possible, okay?
But the other thing that I would say is I would hope
it would disabuse us of very crude identifications
with people.
Just because he's black, we think he's necessarily
gonna represent the interests of Black people
or the best interests of Black people,
as opposed to do doing what he generally is doing,
which is representing power and status quo.
So I think it's very much related to this idea
of it doesn't necessarily matter if a Black person
is behind the camera.
Because, you know, if your image is recorded saying X, Y,
and Z it can be used as evidence.
And I think on some primal level,
I think that's what's happening.
Now, I don't think ultimately it's the solution
to Black people making cinema.
We can't very much go forward with this whole idea,
we're never gonna point cameras at people.
But I thought for that particular project,
because I wanted to privilege the idea of Black people
being able to speak freely, as freely as possible.
I mean, I told people a lot that my operative figure
for myself was a usher.
You know, my godmother was a usher in the Black church,
and I was always fascinated with ushers
and their white dresses, and their white gloves,
and their hats, and the formality of it.
You know, often times when we think of Black expressivity,
we think of one pole of it as the Cole Train,
Jimmy Hendricks, you know, a lot, we do a lot.
We do somersault and then we dunk the ball,
that kind of stuff.
It's like, I call it speaking in tongues.
It's like speaking in tongues.
But there's this other pole that's the opposite of that.
I termed it, holding your tongue.
My grandfather was very much a person who held this tongue
and then it elicits a certain kind of power.
So in this project, I decided I want to be like a usher.
So as a person who does speak somewhat freely,
I would say I had to really discipline myself to not talk.
So a lot of it was an exercise
in terms of setting up my audio gear,
starting a conversation up and just letting people talk
without interrupting them as much as possible.
Is that a, I dunno, that's a start.
- I'm just thinking about a lot of the connections
between conversations we had last night
about whose booty is this, and about the whole idea
of the question of the decolonized Black body.
Can our bodies speak?
And I think that's tied into what you're saying
that our bodies cannot speak freely
as long as they are under surveillance,
because surveillance is the key to colonization.
And that if you've colonized well,
people enact rituals of surveillance themselves.
You don't have to have cameras.
You don't have to have spies because people will internalize
and act from that position on their own.
So the question we talked about,
which is so key to AJ's work was question of framing.
How do we reframe?
If that's our model and that's what we're socialized
and imprinted into, how do we break free of the frame?
And you've just given us an example of a strategy
that aims to take us out of the frame of bondage,
of domination and submission
and give us a way to speak freely.
- Definitely.
And you know, we talked just really briefly earlier
about "12 Years A Slave," it just came up.
You know-
- Both AJ and I really just didn't care
for "12 Years A Slave."
Some of you may remember that when I was here
with Melissa Harris Perry, I said that I don't need to see
another image of a Black woman naked, beaten, raped.
I mean, that is the old frame.
And it's still the lens through which our bodies,
as Black females are looked at through
and which we look at ourselves through that lens.
And when you don't wanna look at yourselves
through that lens, people get upset.
Of all the films that I've written about
my critique of, "12 Years A Slave" really angered people.
And especially my saying that
I don't need to see this image.
And people tried to persuade me,
well, people need to know what slavery was like.
And I was like, but this is not what slavery was like,
the camera posing this naked body in certain ways,
the humiliating brutality that the camera shows us,
is that what slavery was like?
Or is that the imagination of the estranged filmmakers
vision of what slavery was like?
- Yeah, I mean, I've gone on record.
I think, "12 Years A Slave" is an abomination.
- That's deep.
- I mean, for a lot of reasons, but mostly I would say,
I just don't recognize my family in it.
I don't, as I said to Bell earlier,
I feel like the problematic of how we render slavery
is complex.
It's not something that
any individual talented genius person is gonna solve.
It's gonna be solved.
I don't know if solved is even the right word,
but we're gonna get at a more complex rendering of slavery
from trial and error.
And I think that-
- Or is it a mistake to even try to image it
if we are still in the frame?
There's no authentic image of slavery.
If our obsession is with domination and subordination,
how is the frame really gonna give us
any authentic understanding?
Remember those of you who were there last night,
and I talked about the white males who fell in love
with slave women,
that they were involved in unequal power relationships with.
And we only know about these through the legal documents
where the family would say, the white family
would try to declare that person insane.
So, first of all, I think it's fascinating
that we don't know what his love looks like
because inside the frame, there's no room to even imagine
that he can love the Black slave woman.
There's only the image of what we get
in a boring little film like, "12 Years A Slave,"
which is the image of him as rapist predator.
And as I was saying last night,
how does it in any way liberate us as Black people
to be inundated by these images that just,
they're like a loop that continually plays us back to us,
a victimized image of ourselves?
And yet, would we really be here today?
If the slave people were that victimized
and how is it that we can't then imagine them
outside the frame of that?
- I mean, when I first met
or became aware of the British filmmakers.
Good friends like John Akomfrah and Isaac Julian and stuff.
One of the first things I think I ever read with them
was a panel that they were on
with this British white bred (indistinct) filmmaker
named Peter Goodall.
Peter Goodall is a unrepentant Marxist materialist filmmaker
who really had arrived at a film practice,
where he basically said, "The process of representing
anything is inherently negative."
So he had a film practice that was basically
constantly trying to negotiate the problematic
or showing anything.
And I remember Isaac and those guys,
they were a little angry.
They were like, okay, as soon as we find ourselves
with the means of production,
we're gonna trot in this whole new paradigm
about the mechanism being invalid.
So to a certain degree,
I would agree with you about this question.
I would say as a person who very finally has settled
on being a filmmaker after bouncing around for quite a bit,
I just accept my impulse to render certain kinds of things.
And I try to encourage or assume that people
will then critique those things intelligently,
you know what I mean?
My cousin, who's very, very close to me,
he's never seen, "12 Years A Slave"
'cause he has his position, he's in the nation of Islam,
of course, but he has the same position as you.
That doesn't serve me, I'm not even really interested.
He said, "I'm not even interested in the complex rendering
of slavery at this point.
I'm just, I wanna move forward," you know?
But I do feel like there's something to be gained
on some level from seeing these things.
Like, say for example,
one of my critiques of, "12 Years A Slave,"
was again, specifically around Patsey.
Lupita's beautiful, she's a great actress.
Yeah, it's undeniable on a certain level,
but the characterization is flawed.
I think is a profoundly flawed characterization.
And I have a close friend who really got angry at me
when I said this, when I said, well,
I don't really think the way she's responding
to her brutalization, it doesn't ring true to me.
Like even in the film that I think is poorly made.
And I don't think he's as talented a filmmaker,
"The Butler," it has a rape scene.
And what I like about it,
if you can like anything about a rape scene.
But what I did like about it is it's a scene
where Mariah Carey plays the slave, I guess she's enslaved.
And she has her husband there and her kids
and the master comes out and he is very low key.
It's not extravagant, there's nothing operatic about it
like in "12 Years A Slave."
He just comes and takes her hand to rape her, right?
Now, the thing I liked about that rendering
was it made clear that this is a everyday thing.
This is no super dramatic thing that's happening.
I'm not saying it's not dramatic,
but I'm saying it's a everyday thing.
And what I saw in Mariah Carey's performance in that moment
that I thought was interesting, was the way in that moment
where she had been raped, was about to be raped,
and assumed she was gonna be raped again in the future.
That what she was doing was thinking, she was thinking hard.
She was managing the situation.
- And what film was this?
- This is, "The Butler."
It's a horrible film.
- Oh the Butler.
- It's a really horrible film.
But in this one scene, I liked it.
I said, well, this is a person saying,
well, this is gonna go down.
And what she's doing is managing the survival of her husband
in that moment.
She's like, I'm gonna be raped.
He can't stop me from being raped.
I can't stop me from being raped,
but I can try to spin the situation,
so it doesn't spill over into him doing something
that's gonna have him killed, have me killed,
and have our kids unprotected to whatever degree
you can protect your kids under the circumstances.
And I like that compared to Patsey
who I thought was infantalized.
- Well, yeah, totally passive.
- With the passive and with the dolls.
By the time they cut to the dolls, that's not in the book,
they made that up.
It don't say nothing about Patsey combing dolls hair.
And I said this to a friend of mine and she was like,
"You don't get to tell her how she responds to slavery."
I said, "This is not the real person.
This is a character.
The dude made that up."
And I said, "Unless Patsey in that film is supposed to be
literally retarded or mentally handicapped,"
which I'm sure there were some Black people in slavery
who were mentally handicapped, but by and large,
I think Black people had to think themselves
outta that situation.
So I'm not, so, if you're gonna say
this person's mildly mentally retarded.
Then I want that to be acknowledged in some kind of way.
Because, and so I said, "Now she seems
kind of retarded to me basically."
And then I saw one interview.
It's the only interview I've seen with Steve McQueen
around the film, it was at the Toronto film festival.
And it's outrageous, I've never seen anything quite like it.
It's what's his name?
Elvis Mitchell, Steve McQueen, Chiwetel, Lupita,
Alfre Woodard on the far end, and somebody else.
And I mean, you have to see it to believe it.
You can Google it, but at a certain point,
they, well, they asked initially Lupita,
well, what did Steven McQueen tell you?
She said,
"He only told me one thing that Patsey was simple."
She said, "That's the only direction he gave me
that she was simple."
Now I don't think that exists.
I don't think there's a such thing as a simple person
who's enslaved.
I think that's an impossibility.
Unless we talking about medically,
there's literally something wrong with your brain.
- But I think that that whole notion
that people have had a hard time understanding that
it's that this film was a fiction.
- Yeah.
- I had so much trouble with people who would say to me,
but he's showing us the real thing.
He's showing us and the book this and the book this.
And I was saying, but you know,
even if it really followed the book like some kind of map,
it's still the imagination of something.
It is not a real rendition of something.
And I think this has been a troubling issue
around Black images period.
The fact that we're constantly caught up in a notion
of reproduction of the real.
- Yes.
- And being judged by reproduction of the real.
Now I would throw out that, for example,
the film, "Belle" was much more-
- Which film?
- "Belle."
- Oh, right, right.
- Was much more interesting around a discussion of slavery,
and what slavery is, and what happened.
And it doesn't show us any of those kinds of scenes.
- Absolutely.
- I mean, because it problematizes
something we're all involved in right now.
Black people, immigrants of all colors,
the whole notion of who is a citizen
and who has a right to life.
- Exactly.
- And I think that, I mean, I felt like, wow, you know?
It's always interesting what movies' PRs tell you,
you should go see this, you should go see this.
We were all told we should go see "12 Years A Slave."
Everywhere I turned, there was somebody telling me,
but nobody told me to go see "Belle"
because it was just assumed that "Belle" was a nothing film.
And again, contrast those two images of Black femaleness.
In "Belle," don't have the beaten, raped, downtrodden,
unable to function on her own behalf, Black female.
We have a Black female who is making a choice to resist
and to use whatever strategies she can use
to be an active resistor.
Being disloyal to Western civilization,
being disloyal to whiteness, all of those things.
But nobody ever mentioned that at all.
And in fact, from the trailers, I just thought,
oh no, is this another movie of the tragic mullato?
The yearning to be a part of whiteness.
And it was so much deeper than that.
So much deeper than, "12 Years A Slave."
And yet it did not get that kind of invitation,
people didn't get that invitation to come into this film,
come into this film that problematizes
master slave relationships, you know?
I think that because we're gonna see the film clips at 06:30
we might just stop for a minute
and see if there's a question and answer some questions.
'Cause we're shaking up the normal pattern of things
where we would've seen the clips.
AJ's film is called, "Dreams Are Colder Than Death."
I want you to talk about that title before.
- It was a joke, honestly.
No, no, the original title of the film was,
"Gla Nega's Supreme."
- Hmm, I'm glad we got to, "Dreams Are Colder Than Death."
- And at a certain point we realized that the film was,
I started referring to it as a redacted version
because they were telling us at a certain point,
what we could include.
And there was just a time thing
'cause we did it very quickly.
And my lawyer basically just said,
"Well, you should change the title
so that when you come out with your unredacted
new extended version of it, there won't be a conflict.'
And we were editing one day and they said,
"AJ, we gotta have that title now."
It was for Germany.
It was funded by ZDF and Fast Bender has a film called,
"Love Is Colder Than Death."
So it was a joke basically that kind of stuck
and seems the apropos too given...
You know, when we first we finished the film last summer
and people who saw it initially, everybody was saying like,
"Wow, you need to get this film out now
because Trayvon Martin has happened."
This is the time for, this film is right right now.
You need to rush and get it out," you know?
And at a certain point it became,
it's like a very dark joke,
but I was like killing Black folks
is just not gonna go outta style anytime soon.
So we didn't really have to rush for Trayvon Martin.
'Cause there's gonna be today, tomorrow, tonight.
There's always gonna be another Black person
that's murdered. - Yesterday.
- Yeah, that's what I'm saying.
So, there was no rush for that, you know?
And that was a sobering realization.
- A question from someone, your name, your question,
don't go along, okay.
It's hard to see.
I apologize, brother.
- Hello.
Thank you for inviting us.
My name is Tyrone Nero and my partner and I,
my business partner and I, we started this website,
"Black Diaries: You Don't Know My Story."
And as I'm listening
one of the conversations that we're having,
'cause our plan is to go and take all kind of dialogues
from Black folks.
But one of the problems that we're having
is should it end in a positive ending.
When you tell stories that people are going through
and you tell what people's experiences are.
Sometimes it's just crappy, it just ends crappy.
And I think when you tell stories
and you end it with something positive,
you don't give the ability to work through that hardship,
the conversation to work through the hardship.
So I'm just wondering, when I think about teaching
and learning moments, how do you tell a hard story
and end it with life sucks sometimes?
- I think you just tell it beautifully.
You know, I personally,
I'm not interested in positive images, or positive endings,
or any, I'm sorry,
I'm not interested in positive images, or positive endings,
or anything like that personally.
I'm interested in complexity.
I want things to be complex,
but I mean it's the oldest thing in the book, you know?
I died when she left me, but you just,
if you got Aretha Franklin's voice, you know?
It's something about the inherent tension
between ascending it, elevating it, rendering it powerfully,
owning it, I think.
And so that's the thing to me,
it's not so much about a positive ending.
'Cause first of all,
if you say you gotta have a positive ending
that even if it was a positive ending,
it loses its power because it's overdetermined, you know?
- But I think that our very notions of negative and positive
always keep us trapped in the prison of the binary.
So what is it instead to say,
if we tell stories that have to do with trauma
and painful hard moments that have happened to us,
what can we do in the rendering of that story
that also shows us what elements people use to survive?
I've been reading Lawrence Gonzalez's books.
One is called, "Deep Survival."
And it's about on a surface level, "Deep Survival"
really looks at people who do high risk sports and things.
Who let's say you get trapped at the top of the mountain
in the snowstorm, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
How do you survive?
Or it looks at people like, I forget the year
of the plane crash where 274 people died
and one young white female teenager
walked away from the crash and walked to safety.
And so he talks about what are the skills
that are demanded of us in extreme situations
that enable us to survive?
I don't really feel like there's any of us in this room
who have experienced trauma that didn't have some moment
within that trauma that allowed us to shift.
That doesn't mean that that moment
will feel like a positive moment,
but it will reflect a different kind of image
than searching for some, (indistinct)
way to have the hallmark card ending.
And I think that that's really a difficult question again,
of reframing, how you see what you see.
- I mean, one of the things that Fred Moten,
a friend of mines, talks about in the film.
And he references Saidiya Hartman and Frank Wilson.
And as he says, we have to resist the impulse
to not be in the hold, like being the hold of the slaveship.
That there's something really important
about staying in the hold of the slaveship.
He said, "Even though on a certain level
one's impulse is to evacuate that space."
And he said, "Flights a fantasy."
But the thing about the hold in that is he says is that,
"It's precisely being in that space
that produces these radical notions of what flight
and freedom would look like," you know?
So I think it's something like that.
That's one of the central conundrums of Black being
is that you see it all the time.
It's like so many of our most important political figures.
They came into their evolution in prison.
So does that mean we should actively be going to prisons?
Should we be pursuing, going to prisons?
It's just a conundrum, you know?
It's a conundrum that we have to understand.
- But again, here's the situation of trauma.
I say to people that all the time, look at Malcolm,
look at all the different Black males, for example,
who came to their critical consciousness in prison.
But it's not prison
that produced the critical consciousness.
It was the fact that,
I was thinking about this the other day
in terms of intellectual life and contemplation,
they had leisure for the first time.
And not a leisure where,
oh, I'm gonna take my time off and go partying.
So that space being denied.
Then what is the active space for somebody
that's in solitary?
Or the active space...
I mean, part of what's becomes the active
and the activated space is the mind.
Because the mind is also key to the survival whole
in that kind of situation that produces brokenness,
which is why I get so annoyed at, "Orange is The New Black,"
because it doesn't really, again,
we talk about what does the camera show?
It doesn't really show prison as this space
that is capable of breaking and shattering people.
But I think that that is a key to how we do the work
of decolonization and deframing that we think about.
So, I've been talking a lot about the James Brown movie,
which I thought was such a bad movie on some levels,
but then it had these moments.
And one moment for me,
as I've mentioned all week is the moment when James Brown
goes and thinks he's gonna get top billing.
But top billing is really going to the Rolling Stones
and we see this moment of anguish
and it's the slavery moment.
It's the moment where you can just see him thinking
I'm never gonna get out of this prison of whiteness
and white domination.
And then he gets this flash and he says, we have to flip it.
And to me that's the moment of critical intervention
where he reimagines himself.
And so his reimagination, his flipping it,
is he comes on so strong, so powerful,
that no one can deny his presence, his visibility,
his power as an artistic genius in that moment.
And I think that that sense of it for me
after I saw the film in terms of what we take from films,
that's a critical pedagogy, is I was charmed by that
because I was thinking about how so much of my life
has been about flipping it.
You know, saying I wanna write books
and people saying nigger girl, who do you think you are?
Thinking that I can have sexual freedom
as a young Black woman, and having a group of Black men
pull me off the street and say that to me,
nigger girl who do you think you are?
And that constant sense of basically they're saying to me,
"Get back into the frame."
And me having to make a decision,
Am I gonna get back into the frame
or am I gonna invent a way for me to live my life freely?
Somebody else with a question?
It's a little hard to see in here,
so stand up if you need to.
Don't be shy about it.
- Yeah, really.
- Or is it just, okay.
Your name?
- David.
Yeah, David, that would be good.
- So I live in Canada.
I'm a full time student there.
And people always see Canada as, within and without
they see it as this bastion for queer rights,
and people always assume that it's this great place
to be gay and stuff like that.
And you were talking about like the notion of the white gaze
and how when you're put in that situation,
you have like a different way of acting about it.
I personally have experienced having this straight gaze
where I'm scared to act a certain way
or I'm scared to express myself in a certain way
just because people always have that judgment.
And I'm never really sure if I ever come out to anyone,
how they're gonna react to it.
And it's always been something that's in the back of my mind
something that I worry about sometimes.
It's obviously different being like a visual minority
or a visually different person, how you interact with that.
So I was just wondering what you think about
how people react with that white gaze or that straight gaze
in real time and how people get around life every day
just dealing with that?
- I mean, well, my first thing is that, I'm constantly,
as a person who is very unapologetically preoccupied
with what I term Black being, my specificity.
I'm really interested in my specificity.
But I also am constantly it's like,
why would this matter to anybody else, you know?
I mean, I think it's a very real question.
You know, why does Blackness matter to anybody else?
If you're not Black, why would it matter to you?
Well, I would suggest something like,
given the length and the degree
of Black people's oppression.
And this obviously could be said just as assuredly
about women.
There's some specific things that we can learn
that everybody should be able to learn.
Like I know one of the basic things say with cinema
is that as a Black person, I grew up looking at films
that didn't have Black people in them.
But what it really forced me to develop
was a different kind of Oregon,
an Oregon where I could project myself
into somebody else's skin, you know?
Outside of the premises of who I supposedly am
as a Black person, as a man.
I could project myself in that and learn to identify across
these so-called limits, right?
This is important.
I think white men, just because of the structural situation,
don't get to develop that muscle as much,
straight people aren't able to develop that muscle as much,
but I think it's like a real cornerstone of a civilization.
Being civilized, being social, being a social being,
it's the ability, it's empathy, really,
at the end of the day.
It's like having a highly developed sense of empathy.
So that's what I would say it's like,
I don't want to have to, I don't necessarily want to diffuse
my specificity in the quest for some universalism
or something.
Because that to me is, that's a false path to go down.
I mean, I can never understand, which is what I always say,
how come some Greek or Roman sculpture,
which is first of all, accidentally white.
And if it's pointing at the stars,
it gets to be mans ambitions.
But if I just spray paint that same thing, black,
all of a sudden it got narrowed down.
Why did it get narrowed down?
Why can't that black figure be just as representative
of man's, humankind's aspirations.
So that's how I-
- Yeah, we have one question there
and then isn't it about 06:30?
So we'll listen to your question and-
- Oh, no, I'm just passing the microphone on to someone.
- Oh, okay, so...
- She's watching the clock.
- Oh, I see.
- Do you have a question?
- Oh no, I was passing the mic.
- They're holding the mic.
- Hi, my name is Erida.
I'm a student.
I was wondering if you could talk more about our obsession
with the reproduction of real?
Because I feel like as Black people and as Black artists,
our way of expressing ourselves has been through fiction,
and through films, and through fictional literature.
And that's how our expression of truth has come to be.
Like the only way we can, Junot Diaz said,
"The only way I can express my reality is through fiction
because it's so unbelievable."
But I think this obsession with the reproduction of real
is something that the white gaze puts upon us
in order to prove our suffering, or to prove our oppression.
And so I was just wondering
if you could talk a little bit more about that.
- I'm hesitant again with binaries where we'll say,
I mean, I use the phrase white supremacy a lot
because I feel like white supremacy affects us all
and it's in us all.
So back to earlier, we were saying
that a lot of the surveillance we do as Black people
is self surveillance.
And so I think part of,
I mean, think about how much in Black lives,
the question of what's real comes up.
You're not really Black, you're not really this.
And so that whole question is that's our fascism
of control, you know?
The oppositional frame says Blackness cannot be controlled.
That Blackness is multidimensional
and infinite in possibility.
So that the question for me again, becomes,
how do we move away from the frame of that,
our representations have to be real?
And move into the frame of our representations,
have to honor a kind of charismatic humanity
in which much is possible.
I mean, in AJ's film, when you see it,
Martin Luther King's voice and his discussion of dreams
is like a palimpsest that's moving throughout.
But I always think about Martin Luther king,
in terms of that charismatic voice
that is lifting you up to another plane, you know?
When he says, "I've been to the mountaintop,"
it's different from if I was just be saying to AJ,
I've been to the mountaintop.
I mean, I feel in that moment that,
wow, this person is really speaking a profound,
ecstatic experience that he's had.
The root meaning of the word extensity,
is to stand outside oneself.
So in those moments, I think particularly with Dr. King,
many of us recognize that he was transported.
He was transcending.
He was not Black maleness
speaking on behalf of Black people.
He was holy spirit anointed and anointing his own Blackness.
And by that self anointing,
anointing the rest of us to be free.
Not just Black folks,
but all the other people who would be touched
by that level of charismatic spirit.
Can we see our clips now?
(upbeat techno music)
(audience claps)
- It's in another clip?
- Two minutes, maybe?
- Yeah.
Two minutes of the...
So it's from the new film, "Dreams Are Colder Than Death."
- I know.
- I have a dream.
- We are going to lose this gift of Black culture,
unless we are careful.
This gift that is given to people who don't have a prayer,
frantic Douglas people, black people 200 years ago,
didn't have a prayer.
Beat our skin off our bodies.
Kill and rape our mamas in front of us.
We didn't have a prayer.
Now we are the head of international courts,
president of the United States,
sitting on the United States, Supreme court.
Presidents of universities, CEO of American Express,
you name it, some black person is it.
But the price of that,
is to lose this precious insight that connects you
to something human and bigger than white folks,
or I don't give a fuck what color the folk is,
something bigger than that.
We are losing that connection
because we are buying this other shit.
I know that.
- 50 Years after Martin Luther King's,
"I Have A Dream" speech.
We asked a collective of African Americans...
- Okay. (audience applauds)
- We have time for a couple of more questions,
and then we're going to enjoy a moment of fellowship
and celebration.
Yes, your name?
Yes, please.
- Hi, I'm Alex.
So there was an article published a couple weeks ago
that had an infographic that explained the opinions
on race relations in America,
before and after the initial Ferguson uproar.
And it explained that people of color increasingly believed
that white supremacy existed, and that white people
actually increasingly denied that white supremacy existed.
And so that, the Ferguson documentation,
we would consider something real.
And then when you're talking about fictional representation
in media and in cinema,
if neither fiction and real documentation
and everything in between, outside of the binary.
If neither work, where does a movement go from there?
And how do we move from there?
And what do you think about the psychology and the ethos
of American people in terms of white supremacist America?
- Well, the first thought that came to my head was
the revolution will not be televised.
Because I don't think Ferguson has changed anything
about Black experience in the United States.
Because I don't think there was anything about Ferguson
that was unique to what Black people experience
in this culture.
And for anybody to act as if Black people are just realizing
that white supremacy is real.
I think we do acknowledge that Black people
live with certain degrees of cognitive dissonance,
but I don't think I've ever encountered any Black person
of any class
who doesn't believe that white supremacy is real.
They may even think racism doesn't exist,
but racism and white supremacy in many people's minds
are not the same thing.
- Well, I would just say that, I dunno,
this is question of believability,
which I think is connected to this idea of the real,
whether people or speaking truly or something like that,
I don't know.
I used to teach at Bart in the summer
and when the Abu Ghraib images came out,
they were like maybe, between the students
and maybe one or two staff.
There might have been five people in the auditorium,
not quite this large, but it was full.
And I think David Leventhal was showing a series
of the images and it was like the history of those images.
And he said something like, the thing that struck
the American public about these images
is that nobody could imagine them, you know?
And I sort of gulped or laughed out loud.
And then everybody turned and looked at me
and I was like, oh God, you know?
And on a certain level I felt a little,
I was a little irritated because I was like,
why is everybody looking at me like I'm the only person
who can speak to the absurdity of this.
I said, "I'm hazard to speak for black people
in some big generalized sense,
but I don't think any Black person
is surprised by those images at all."
I said, "They didn't shock me at all."
I was like, "Yeah, if they had been digital cameras
during slavery, there would be enough drives
or folder images of those things."
So there was nothing that shocking about it.
It was more like they were so idiotic that they got caught,
but it wasn't like anything about the images themselves.
But I think it does go back to this whole space of,
who's trying to convince who, you know what I mean?
Like people get caught up in this stuff.
I don't think, whether it's Abu Ghraib or like I said,
the next Black person that's gonna be killed.
It doesn't mean I'm indifferent about it,
but it's just like they say on the slaveship,
many thousands gone.
This is a tough situation that we're in
and it's gonna require a lack of sentimentality.
There's a certain sentimentality around certain
of these things, you know?
And I think also too,
sometimes a lot of these structures of protests
are exhausted, they or fatigued.
And I'm not trying to say people shouldn't go out
and protest and stuff, but the last big rally I went to
was maybe 10 years ago.
And you know, how they have those metal gates
that connect together in a certain way.
I mean, this is an implement
that didn't exist in the sixties.
Those things were developed specifically for public unrest.
And the whole way everybody was corralled, you know?
I was like, "Wow, this is like some sort of ritual
that we are doing.
It doesn't seem to be disrupting anything."
I think people lose sight that when people protested
in the civil rights movement,
it's not so much what they did.
It's less what they actually did than the fact that
it was a wide term,
sometimes a radically alienated artifact,
meaning it was something that the system hadn't seen before.
But once it sees it, it just incorporates that.
So at a certain point, we have to invent new ways
of resistance, I think.
And we always are.
I'm very optimistic and positive about that,
but I'm not so sure a lot of the stuff that's paraded
on television is that, you know?
If it's real resistance or just, you know?
- Another question.
- Hi, I'm Melanie.
And I wanted to ask, what is your take on movies such as
"Exodus: Gods And Kings," where black and brown bodies
are not represented properly as they should be?
And I wanted to ask, secondly,
is the white wash dynamic of Hollywood that pervasive,
that they're really so unsettled in 2014
to play black and brown characters
by black and brown people?
- I didn't quite understand-
- Yeah, I didn't either.
- The questions, sweetie.
- Well, in the movie, "Exodus: Gods And Kings"
you have basically white characters.
- I didn't see it myself.
- Yeah, I didn't see it either, so.
- I didn't see it as well,
but I saw a lot of articles for it online.
And basically the long and short is that you had white folks
playing, the Kings and all the pharaohs.
- Oh, right about the pharaohs and stuff.
- Yes.
- All right, I saw the trailer.
- I just wanna know what your take is on that dynamic
of them using white characters
rather than black and brown characters to play the pharaohs
and stuff.
So yeah, that's really it.
- I mean, I was surprised to hear when,
when you said there were certain parts,
you liked the James Brown.
I refused to pay for it, you know?
But that's very easy to get around.
I mean, honestly I looked the,
and I think this has some bearing on that.
I looked at it before I knew anything about the narrative
or anything.
I just saw the lighting and the art direction.
And I was like, "I've seen this movie before."
It's like the after school special treatment of Black folks.
It's like James Brown is such a fucking incredible figure.
I mean, even Chad Boseman, who is a fine actor
and he's quite beautiful to look at,
but he just is come on, he just does not have,
they needed to cling on prosthesis or something on his face
to give him the weight and the density.
James Brown is one of those once in a century
kind of figures, man.
Between the sound, his image,
the way he activated space, you know?
So I guess I just for me, my whole thing is
we go back to the sisters' thing about that.
I just saw that and I was like, okay,
white people is Egyptians.
I mean, I've seen it.
I'm really not even interested
in having a position about it.
- Well, some of you've heard me talk all week
about the choice of the little fair skinned,
fairer skinned black boy to play James Brown, right?
There with the counterfeit.
- It was insane.
- I Mean, it was this it's again, who is this?
Who's gaze is this for?
And I mentioned white people who actually said to me,
well, if it had been a dark skinned black boy,
we wouldn't have been able to identify.
And then, but then again, that we tells you
who people feel this film is being made for.
- Yeah, and that's why it's important, I think.
Like when my good friend, Carrie James Marshall,
who, I don't know if people know his paintings,
but he always has these jet black figures.
And yeah, he thinks they're beautiful,
but it's just a point of resistance.
It's like the paper bag test.
If the paper bag test say,
you gotta be this complexion in order to get in.
Then that means I don't know how much sector
of the Black community can't come to the party.
But if the paper that bag tests is as dark as Miles Davis
and anybody who is darker than that,
then that means we all get to come in.
So it's a little like that.
That's why Black figures,
and I don't just mean literally Black figures.
I mean, Black figuration is important
because I think when we make radical renderings
of Black figures, living, struggling,
striving, you know?
Living, then I think it's an emancipatory image
for everybody should be, I would say.
- And notice that when I talked about the flip it,
it's not in an image.
It's not in the image, in the idea because the images
are all corrupt in the James Brown film.
But that idea, which if you read about his memoirs,
and his autobiographical and biographical stuff,
the idea is a part of a real frame of his life.
- Right?
- What propelled him?
Do you have a question?
- Yes, I do.
My name is (indistinct) from Liberia.
A little bit of what AJ said.
I remember I attended a Eric Garner protest
and the slogan was, what do you call murderer?
N-Y-P-D.
And I remember the following day,
I looked at the newspaper and there was a officer
handing a protestor, a bottle of water.
And it was a complete fallacy.
And it seemed like they co-opted this, I won't say radical,
but this lively, even when Al Sharpton came on,
when he started to speak, this critical consciousness
just seemed to have disappeared because he started talking
something that wasn't relevant.
So as I watched your film,
my question for AJ and I would like Mrs. Bell Hooks
to tell me her opinion as well.
What, where does violence play?
(indistinct)
Where does it play at, in our era to liberate Black people?
- You said violence?
- Yeah.
- Violence.
No, because, and it goes back to a few days ago,
I was on a train.
You had some young guys about, black, about 14,
about 15, 16, 17.
And they was rapping and they was talking
and I looked around, I saw the faces of Black people.
They felt as if they were being surveilled,
some surveillance.
And you saw the white people was looking at it.
And I was looking at it like, these were little kids.
It was young men that they were just doing something normal.
But it all comes back to, as I look in your film,
I see violence somewhat like Miles Dayton
revolutionary violence.
So I'm wondering what into the cinema, into all of that.
How does violence play a part?
- I mean, to me, violence is a given.
I mean, I just say conflict, you know?
People having differing agendas
come in conflict with each other.
I don't like, this is sort of awful of me,
but I think it's a little related.
Like one of the things, like I said,
I'm really about research.
I like to try things.
I try not to go in where I think I already know
where it's gonna land.
I try like to try things.
And one of the things I was struck by, like I said,
in the beginning, we said,
okay, we're not gonna point the camera at people.
Because we think the camera does a certain violence
to people.
So we're not gonna point the camera at people.
And I was even shocked.
I said, "wow, these things are powerful."
I think what people were saying struck me as being powerful.
And then I would look at CNN or something,
and quite literally, some of the people I know on CNN,
I know some of the people going as pundits,
they're not any less intelligent
than the people that I know.
So it made me start to think
that there's something about the structure itself
that actually evacuates people's power or something.
And so now my question is like,
okay, so we tapped on something with this.
How do we intensify?
And what is it really?
I mean, I have speculations about what it is,
but what is it really?
Why is it that when we hear Hortens, or Fred,
or something to people, or my father, or my cousin,
people speaking in the film,
why does it seem to have so much more weight?
I remember seeing Harry be Lafonte right afterwards too.
I think, it's a brother he's marched,
he's made a lot of intents in his life
and he just seems so empty, you know?
So I'm really curious.
'Cause I do think this, I mean, to me,
I guess what I'm just trying to get at is like sure,
physical violence is one thing,
but we know the larger part of what we experience
in the day to day is another sort of violence.
It's the violence of do we know we have the space
to pursue our dreams and our fullest actualization
of ourselves?
I used to use this term a lot, Black potential.
And what I meant by Black potential was I would say,
inside a Black being, there's an inherent tension
between whether as a Black person, you will,
or you won't fully actualize your potential.
Somebody said, well, that's just human.
I said, not quite to the same degree when this whole idea
that the inability to actualize your full potential
is a default state.
I think that's something new
and that's something very specific to our circumstance.
And that's a really intense kind of violence, I think.
- Well, I think too,
that systemic violence that is happening all the time
is very different from the spectacular violence
that the camera does love.
It's like when you think about the Black Panther party
and one of their most powerful, critical interventions,
was the breakfast for children.
That isn't how most people think of the Black Panther party,
because that image doesn't fit the frame again.
The Black violent man that's criminalized or what have you.
So that I think that,
but we have to think about the Panthers who we're seeing
this sort of primal violence,
that how can our children learn if they're hungry?
I mean,
that was a critical intervention of enormous weight
and yet it doesn't become the remembered, struggle,
the remembered success.
We'll have one more question and then break.
Your name?
- I'm Juliet, I'm a new school student.
I've been thinking a lot in the course of this panel
about images of violence.
And I think that's been a theme throughout,
starting when you were talking about, "12 Years A Slave."
And about the uselessness of those images of violence.
But watching your film, AJ,
there are a lot of images of violence
and of static moments of violence being done to bodies,
or already done to bodies, and to black bodies, especially.
And you were talking about the images of Abu Ghraib also,
and that no one was surprised by them,
or that at least you weren't surprised by them.
And I was wondering if you could shed any light
or any insight on when those images are useful,
and when they can be useful, and when can we turn away?
- I mean, I don't think, I'm sorry.
I don't think images are ever inherently useful.
It's how you use them, or you try to use them.
I guess I don't attribute those to things.
I mean, I think value is something we create.
I was just in Chicago and I got to meet Theaster.
Have you met Theaster Gates?
He's interesting.
I like him though.
- We're meandering our way towards one another.
- Oh, yeah.
He's interesting.
But the thing I liked, we were at this thing,
the Black artist retreat and people made their presentations
the first couple of days and at certain point
there was these series of round tables and stuff.
And we got into this really not me and him.
He was listening 'cause he was just float from,
got into this real conversation about
a lot of the artists there.
They were operating under the impression that any art
has any inherent value, which I just, I personally,
I don't believe that.
Like, for example, I know most Black folks,
if they're in a boat that's crashing and sinking
and they're going to a desert island
and the Mona Lisa is here and Frankie Beverly and Maze
record is here.
They gonna grab the Frankie Beverly and Maze record.
I mean, you know what I mean?
And it's because I don't think the Mona Lisa
has any inherent value.
The only value it has is the value that's assigned to it.
Because that value is tethered to all these other structures
around the ideas of civilization, all this kind of stuff.
So I was really shocked that the artists,
they were holding onto this fantasy that it had.
So I guess I feel the same way by images.
It's like George Clint said,
"There's no such thing as a bad note.
It all depends on the note you put before it
and the note you put after it."
So, something like that.
- That seems to me to be a good way
to begin our celebration, to go to a note of pleasure.
It's been a very compelling experience to me this week
to hear so much testimony from many of you
about the impact of my work on your thinking,
on your life practices.
And I can only say thank you.
That I feel tremendous gratitude
because like AJ, my work is my passion.
It is my calling.
And, but it is not just like it's all about me
or all about celebrity or fame or something like that.
As I was saying earlier today,
it's about what the work does.
And when people,
I said that my feeling of ecstasy
is not in the writing itself or the thinking itself,
it's about hearing from people about what the work does.
And then I know that yes,
I am responsive to my calling
to what I'm put on this earth for.
And so I say thank you to Stephanie,
to Jennifer, and Heather, and all of you.
And a special thanks to AJ for coming to us
without a lot of notice.
And also AJ, thank you always for your work.
And that AJ has given me,
I know images that light up my life.
Thank you.
(audience claps)