Millions of planets similar to our own.
The discoveries of exoplanets over the
past few years have been absolutely
extraordinary, and many could soon be
within the grasp of our technology.
Think about it. Civilizations over
billions of years could have risen and
fallen even before the Earth was formed.
But if we can reach out in pursuit of
life on other worlds, might they also be
reaching out to us? And have they been
doing so for thousands of
years? Could it be that ancient
civilizations, ancient aliens from far
away migrated from their home worlds and
they found Earth? The implications for
humanity are enormous.
There is a doorway in the
universe. Beyond it is the promise of
truth. It demands we question everything
we have ever been taught. The evidence
is all around us. The future is right
before our eyes. We are not alone. We
have never been alone.
[Music]
Cape Canaveral,
Florida. April 18th,
2018. At 6:51 p.m., a Falcon 9 rocket
blasts off on a mission to deploy NASA's
newest space telescope into orbit.
The transiting exoplanet survey
satellite or TESS. TESS is like a survey
of the whole sky. A survey of the
nearest 100 light years or so of planets
that would be around these stars.
Over the next decade, scientists expect
that TESS will fulfill its primary
mission to discover thousands of
so-called exoplanets.
Exoplanets. There are planets that exist
outside of our solar system. We're
certainly in an exoplanet golden age of
discovery. 20 years ago, we didn't know
if there were other Earthlike planets in
the
universe. And now we can't imagine how
we could discover things at a higher
rate and still try to make sense of it.
It's such a struggle just to keep up
with the discoveries that we're making
right now.
It is only recently with the development
of deep space satellites and high-owered
telescopes that a more accurate
understanding of nearby planets,
especially planets capable of supporting
human life, has been
possible. But it wasn't so long ago that
the notion of Earthlike planets existing
in our galaxy wasn't simply unknown. It
was considered
blasphemy. when the 16th century Italian
philosopher and cosmologist Jordano
Bruno expressed his belief in an
infinity of worlds and raised the
possibility that other planets could
harbor life. He was charged with heresy
and burned at the stake. It was
heretical revolutionary to believe that
there could be alien life out there.
Giodono Bruno was burned alive in the
streets of Rome. And what was his crime?
To say that they are aliens out there on
other
planets. We weren't allowed to think
like that. It challenged all their
predispositions and their power
structure. No, there are no other
worlds. There's nothing out there. But
there is something out there. There's no
question about it.
As recently as the early 1990s,
astronomers were still unable to detect
these distant
planets. Even with high-powered
telescopes, it's hard to see an
exoplanet. Imagine trying to look at a
firefly next to a
spotlight. It's incredibly difficult
because stars shine by their own light.
They give off their own light, but
planets reflect light. A typical star is
about 10 billion times brighter than a
planet.
Thanks to remarkable advances in
technology, astronomers made the very
first discovery of an exoplanet in 1992
using an Earth-based
telescope. But that search kicked into
high gear in 2009 with the launch of
Kepler, the first space telescope
specially designed to find exoplanets.
And in 2018, Kepler was replaced by the
even more powerful
TESS. So, one of the really cool things
about TESS, the new satellite that
NASA's put up, is basically it was
specifically designed to detect
exoplanets by what's called the transit
method, which is where when a planet
goes in front of a star, it blocks the
light briefly, and you really see the
light blink on and off.
That telltale dip is what tells you
there might be something that's passing
in front of it. The regularity tells you
about the orbit, which is the easiest
way to actually start looking for new
planets. Although the initial objective
in the search for exoplanets was simply
to determine how many stars in our
galaxy might have planets in orbit
around them, the actual results were
staggering. Our galaxy has around um 400
billion stars. From what we've seen so
far is on average every star has at
least one planet. So that means that
there are 400 billion at least planets
in our
galaxy. 400 billion planets in the Milky
Way galaxy alone.
The discovery of such an extraordinary
number of exoplanets represents a
radical change in our understanding of
the
universe. But even more radical is the
notion that millions of those
planets might actually be capable of not
just supporting life, but generating it.
And to that end, astronomers and
astrophysicists actively search for
planets in a region they refer to as the
Goldilock zone.
The Goldilock zone is exactly that range
for a given star of where water is going
to be liquid on a given type of planet.
We want a planet that is not too close,
not too far from the mother of the star,
but just right. planets that may have
oxygen and H2O, water, that may make
possible an
atmosphere and maybe even life.
Based upon current observations,
scientists are astounded by the number
of potentially habitable planets that
exist in the Goldilock zone. With at
least 400 billion planets in our galaxy
if you just look at 1% of that, you're
still talking about billions of planets
that could potentially be
habitable. This is exciting cuz we once
thought that we were the only game in
town that could only exist on the planet
Earth. The discovery of exoplanets, I
think it's really changed our view of
the potential for life in the universe.
Fundamentally, I think most scientists
would now agree that there is some form
of life elsewhere in the universe. But
in spite of the abundance of habitable
exoplanets, many scientists still cling
to the notion that the only kind of life
likely to exist outside of Earth is
microbial or bacterial. They are
resistant to what they claim are
far-fetched notions that these planets
might not only contain more
sophisticated or evolved life forms, but
intelligent life forms, some much more
evolved or technologically advanced than
our
own. Think about it. The universe is
about 13.8 billion years old. The Earth
is 4.6 billion years old.
Civilizations over billions of years
could have risen and fallen even before
the Earth was
formed. Although the realization that
the galaxy is teameming with Earthlike
planets has triggered a revolution in
conventional scientific thinking. As far
as ancient astronaut theorists are
concerned, it merely confirms what they
have believed all along.
The discoveries of exoplanets over the
past few years have been absolutely
extraordinary. I remember that the first
time they discovered this first
exoplanet and me and my colleagues were
like were saying okay this will be the
first of
many and now apparently as many as three
exoplanets are being discovered on a
daily basis. So what we've said all
along that Earth is not unique in this
gigantic universe turns out to be
correct. This raises the question that
we've been bringing up that for
thousands of years there's evidence of
some type of visitation from other
civilizations. Hopefully our sciences of
able to now detect exoplanets will allow
us to pinpoint some of these actual home
worlds where aliens have been visiting
us.
I propose that most of those planets
that are in this Goldilock zone have
life very similar to
ours. The only question is, was it them
who came here thousands of years ago?
But while a growing number of mainstream
scientists do admit that intelligent
life can theoretically exist elsewhere
within our galaxy, they also argue that
the distances between those planets and
our own are too vast for any
extraterrestrial visitation to take
place.
It is a position that puts them in
direct conflict with ancient astronaut
theorists who contend that the keys to
extraterrestrial space travel can be
found in Albert Einstein's theory of
relativity and that a voyage to a
distant star could take not centuries
but seconds.
The Ottakama Desert, Chile, August
2016. At the Lasia Observatory,
astronomers searching for exoplanets
announced the detection of an Earthlike
planet orbiting the closest star to our
solar system, Proxima Centauri.
They named the planet Proxima B and
describe it as both Earthlike and close
enough to its star to be capable of
supporting
life. One of the more interesting
exoplanets we've found recently is
Proxima B. This exoplanet is about 1.3
times the size of Earth. So scientists
think that it might be rocky, which
means that it could be quite similar to
Earth.
Proxima B may be habitable. We'll be
able to study it in more detail with
large telescopes and in the next 10
years we may even be able to get
pictures of the
[Music]
planet. Proxim is located just over four
light years from Earth, a distance of
about 25 trillion miles. Despite the
immense distance, an ambitious program
is already underway to send spacecraft
to study
it called Breakthrough Starshot. The
program began as the joint brainchild of
philanthropist Erie Milner and famous
cosmologist the late Steven Hawking.
For the first time in human history, we
can do more than just gaze at the stars.
We can actually reach them.
The goal of Breakthrough Starshot is to
send tiny probes mere centimeters thick
to the nearby
planet. We take a computer chip,
energize it with laser beams and a
parachute. The laser beam inflates the
parachute and shoots a chip to the
nearest star.
You deploy this and you basically just
cruise. you can possibly accelerate them
fairly high, 20% the speed of light. And
now getting to the nearest star becomes
very reasonable.
But even traveling at such high speeds,
the probes will take 20 years to
complete their journey.
Light travels at a finite speed. A very
simple example of this is the sun is 8
minutes away. by the way light travels
and most things are millions of light
years away or thousands of light years
away. If we pick up a signal from
another civilization,
um that's a big thing, but it's very
distant. They may never get here. We may
never meet them indeed because of
interstellar distances. If as ancient
astronaut theorists believe, Earth has
been visited by alien entities coming
from exoplanets only now being
discovered. Such entities would have to
overcome the primary obstacle to space
travel, the vast distance between
objects. You talk to many scientists and
they'll say the same thing over and over
again. The distances between stars is so
great impossible that these aliens can
visit
[Music]
us. Think for a moment if they're a
million years more advanced than us.
Just realize that modern technology with
all our wonders is only about 300 years
old. In recent years, a growing number
of astrophysicists have proposed that
mankind's ability to unlock the
mysteries of interstellar space travel
might be much closer than previously
thought.
And they believe the key is by using a
theoretically possible structure known
as a wormhole. A bend in spaceime that
was first proposed by Albert Einstein,
which could make travel times between
stars not only shorter but nearly
instantaneous. From the perspective of
ultimate space travel, from my point of
view, wormholes are simply you take
space, which can bend in our theory of
general relativity, the modern theory of
gravity. You bend it around on itself,
so you have two layers that are apart,
and you connect them with a tunnel. That
tunnel is a wormhole. They're commonly
referred to as stargates because it
gives you a way to get faster than like
space travel across large distances.
In theory, spacecraft that can create
wormholes would be able to travel to
distant exoplanets in just hours,
possibly even
seconds. If extraterrestrial
civilizations far more advanced than
humans do exist, could they have
discovered the secrets of space travel
hundreds or perhaps thousands of years
ago? And if so, might they have even
traveled here to planet Earth?
Mount Palomar,
California. October 6th,
2013. A massive red star in the
constellation Pegasus, 10 times larger
than our sun, explodes in a colossal
supernova. For the first time,
scientists are able to witness the death
of a giant star in real time.
But perhaps even more profound is the
fact that because the dying star is 160
million lighty years from Earth,
astronomers are actually witnessing an
event that took place 160 million years
ago.
So one of the things to realize about
astronomy is almost everything we are
looking at is in the
past because the light doesn't travel
instantly. And a supernova is basically
a star exploding. If it had any planets
around it, those are wiped out. So if
there was a civilization or if there was
life there, what we're seeing happen now
happen very far in the past.
The violent death of the star in Pegasus
provides dramatic confirmation that the
universe is both ancient and
dynamic. But ancient astronaut theorists
believe such discoveries also provide
reasons why an advanced extraterrestrial
civilization might need to leave its
home planet in search of other worlds.
When astronomers look out into the the
galaxy for dying
sons, if there were beings who had an
advanced civilization around this dying
sun, they would in theory want to
migrate to another solar system, to
another planet that they could
inhabit. And it's quite possible that
they did that and came to our planet. In
fact, we know that billions of years
from now, our own star, our sun, will go
supernova. And we are very close now to
being able to venture out or migrate to
another habitable planet. We can
extrapolate that to ancient
civilizations as well, ancient star
civilizations who knew that their own
star was ready to go supernova and they
embarked on a plan of planetary
migration. Has the story of the cosmos
been in part a story of the
extraterrestrial migration of various
advanced exoplanet life forms? As far as
ancient astronaut theorists are
concerned, the answer is a resounding
yes. And they claim the proof can be
found by carefully examining everything
from ancient
carvings to the religious beliefs of
ancient cultures from across the globe.
[Music]
Lassia Observatory,
Chile.
2011. Astronomers announced the
discovery of a large Earthlike planet
orbiting a star in the constellation
Orion. The planet is located in the
Goldilock zone, and the star it orbits
is very similar to our own, making it an
ideal candidate for extraterrestrial
life.
This is exciting because we want to have
a stable solar system like the planet
Earth. That's the goal. As far as
ancient astronaut theorists are
concerned, this may be the most
compelling exoplanet discovery yet.
Because throughout the world, numerous
ancient cultures have told stories of
other worldly visitors coming from Orion
and even built their most important
structures in alignment with that
constellation.
All around the world, there are these
ancient structures that have been built
in the form of
Orion. One example that comes to mind is
the Great Pyramid of Giza, where the
three pyramids are aligned according to
the belt stars of
Orion. But also in the American
Southwest, there are structures that are
in reference to Orion. Native American
myths talk specifically about visitors
who came here from the Orion
constellation. The fact that Orion's
constellation exists in magnificent
archaeological monuments on Earth
indicates to me that someone at some
point taught our ancestors where and how
to build these structures to illustrate
where they are from.
Is it possible that the exoplanet
discovered in the Orion constellation is
the same place where extraterrestrial
visitors to Earth came from thousands of
years ago. For ancient astronaut
theorists, such an audacious notion is a
very real
possibility. And they also insist that
Orion is not the only star system from
where aliens may have come. All over the
world, we have different cultures who
identify with certain star systems as
their
origins. The Ketwa people of Peru, they
believe uh that we're from the the
Pletes. In Africa, we have the Doon who
are saying that uh our origin is
actually with the Sirius star system.
Various cultures have imagined they have
come from specific places. uh the Pletes
or or Sirius. Well, that would be a
planet near the star system, suggesting
that at least in mythology, there are
planets there that could be inhabited by
creatures like us.
While many ancient cultures pointed to
distant star systems as the homes of
their gods, ancient astronaut theorists
suggest that one of the oldest human
civilizations, the Sumerians, left
records of other worldly beings that
came from a planet right in our own
solar system. A planet that until very
recently was thought not to exist.
[Music]
New York City,
1976. Author Zechariah Sitchin publishes
his landmark book, The 12th Planet, the
first of over a dozen books based upon
Sitchin's translations of ancient
Samrian texts. The 12th Planet
ultimately reshapes the way millions of
people view the history of life on
Earth. In it, Sitchin claims that
ancient Samrians wrote about an
extraterrestrial race that once visited
Earth, the
Anunnaki. The term Anunnaki is
essentially interchangeable with
extraterrestrial because the word
Anunnaki itself means those who from the
heavens
came. There's a whole pantheon of
Anunnaki. Basically, there was Anu, who
was essentially the king of all the
Anunnaki, and then his two sons, Enel
and
Anki. When we look in a lot of the
Sumerian tablets, they seem to have come
from a much larger planet, a reddish
glowing
planet. One of the great questions about
the Anunnaki is where did they come
from? Well, Zachchariah went back into
the ancient texts and began to build a
theory that the Anunnaki came from an as
yet undiscovered 12th planet in our
solar system that he called
Nibiru. Nibiru is described as a much
larger planet than Earth. And it has a
very elliptical orbit, more like a large
egg-shaped orbit. The kicker here is
that it goes once around the sun every
3600 years. So a solar year for them is
3600 of our
years. Sitchin believed that there was a
time during this 3,600year orbit when
this planet was actually relatively
close to the Earth. And Sitchin then
theorized the Anunnaki would then fire
their rockets and then they would come
here to Earth and that this was how they
were interacting with humans.
For decades, astronomers claimed that no
such planet could exist in our solar
system. But in 2016, Caltech astronomers
Constantine Betigan and Mike Brown made
a discovery that could prove this theory
wrong.
Betigan and Brown were using an
interesting method of looking for other
planets in the solar system. Namely,
they were looking at dwarf planets and
distant Kyper belt objects to see how
they move.
if they exhibit any strange behavior,
astronomers can use that to theorize new
planets. And what they found was a
theoretical planetized mass orbiting in
a hugely elliptical orbit around the
sun.
Astronomers have often suspected because
of certain gravitational anomalies and
things that there is still some other
planet far out in our solar system uh
beyond Pluto. Astronomers call this
other planet Planet X and it could be a
very large planet. Astronomers cannot
see it, but I would suspect that
astronomers will eventually discover it
and and prove that it
exists. Betigan and Brown estimate that
planet X has a highly elliptical orbit
and takes it thousands of years to make
a single trip around our sun.
This matches exactly what Zechariah
Sitchin found in his translation of the
ancient Samrian tablets concerning an
extra planet in our solar system. The
thing about it is is that if we discover
planet X, then we will also discover the
Anunnaki. So they're absolutely
entwined. The idea of the Anunnaki and
the discovery of Planet X will prove one
another. Could extraterrestrials have
come to Earth from a planet within our
own solar
system? And if Earth has in fact played
host to alien visitors from multiple
worlds, what brought them here?
According to the ancient Samrian
tablets, the Anunnaki valued one thing
above all else, gold.
Los Angeles, California, June
2019. The Trans Aastronic Corporation
announces a partnership with NASA to
develop a new venture in space, asteroid
mining.
We incorporated Trans in 2015 when we
saw that SpaceX and Elon Musk and Blue
Origin, Jeff Bezos and other
entrepreneurs were developing lowcost
really effective ways to get into orbit.
Once we have rockets that can get into
orbit inexpensively, then it makes sense
to start building real industries in
space. And one of the first industries
is asteroid
mining. Precious metals that we really
value on the Earth, things like gold and
platinum, they're called precious metals
cuz they're not around much. The
question is, where are they? And the
answer is
asteroids. Metals like gold, copper, and
zinc have been mined on Earth for
thousands of years and are vital to
civilization. But their supply is
finite. in part because they are not
native to this planet.
When the earth was originally being
formed, it was
molten and a lot of the precious metals
were drawn towards the center of the
earth and through this molten process
all the heavy elements went down to the
core of the earth where we can't get
access to them. Then the earth started
to cool and form a cool crust which was
made of lighter materials. It is widely
accepted that without access to metals,
both technology and civilization would
not have been possible. But luckily for
mankind, some 3.8 billion years
ago. It is estimated that trillions of
asteroids crashed into the Earth and
deposited a layer of heavy metals into
the planet's now hardened crust.
These elements weren't actually from
Earth originally. All of these elements
came to Earth via comets and asteroids
that impacted our planet long ago and
early in its
history. So all the precious metals that
we mine on the Earth actually came from
the
asteroids. The bombardment of asteroids
seated Earth's crust with enough metals
to make possible the Bronze Age, the
Iron
Age, and today's technological
civilization.
But many metals, including rare earth
elements needed for high technology, are
in increasingly short supply. Because of
this, many experts believe the asteroid
belt may once again come to the
rescue. You get a typical asteroid at a
few hundred meters in diameter, it will
have more of those rare earth elements
that have been mined on Earth in all of
human
history. Of the more than 6,000
asteroids in NASA's database, it is
estimated that even just the 10 easiest
to reach and mine would yield an
astonishing $1.5 trillion in resources.
The asteroid belt could provide for the
needs of our civilization for many
centuries, maybe thousands of years into
the future.
The natural thing to do is to build
spacecraft to go out to the
asteroids, mind them, make goods out of
the asteroids, and we presume that other
intelligences, if there are other
intelligence, would think the same way
we would. And so, anything that seems to
make sense to us could make sense to
others.
If other intelligent life forms exist on
nearby exoplanets, might they too be
aware of the vast resources that exist
in the asteroid belt and also on planet
Earth? Ancient astronaut theorists say
yes and suggest that Earth is rich in
another
commodity that would be of great value
to any advanced civilization looking to
mine for precious metals, liquid water.
[Music]
If aliens wanted to mine the asteroid
belt, they'd need a base, somewhere to
regroup and refuel. As it happens,
there's one pretty close, and it's
called planet
Earth. Why would aliens come here? Might
well be because we're mostly water on
planet Earth.
They stop here because they could break
down water into hydrogen and
oxygen as
fuel. So if you have a craft that
somehow uses hydrogen power, you have
all the hydrogen you'll ever
need. It well could be that this is a
way station for extraterrestrials.
Is it possible that extraterrestrial
civilizations have come to Earth not
only as refugees from planets orbiting
dying stars, but also to mine precious
metals or abundant natural resources
like
water? And if so, would that indicate
that these Earth visitors might be
physically very similar to ourselves?
Placia
Observatory, Chile,
2009. Astronomers identify a potentially
habitable planet orbiting the star Biza
667C. It's a large Earthlike planet
located firmly in the Goldilock zone.
While evidence of life has yet to be
discovered, scientists are able to
speculate as to how life on this planet
would evolve.
When we imagine life on other planets,
we have to imagine that the environment
on those planets will determine what the
creature may look
like. In considering planets larger than
Earth, the increased gravity will likely
result in shorter complex life forms.
This results in a more stable um life
form and protects against falls. So life
forms on larger planets would likely be
smaller than those on smaller planets.
Like Earth, a major evolutionary force
on the planet is the strength of its
sun. Galiza 667C is a red dwarf star, an
M star that's about 1.4% as bright as
our sun. Because M dwarf stars are much
smaller than our sun, they're much
cooler and they give off a lot less
light. Because the star gives out such
low light compared to our sun, any life
on those planets would look much
different. Let's assume for the sake of
argument that there is life on Glee
667. Such life would be living in kind
of eternal
darkness. In order for life forms on a
planet like that to see, they'd be like
owls on planet Earth. They would have
very, very large eyes to capture as much
light as possible.
They are going to develop eyes that are
perhaps more like insects eyes where
you're seeing different light spectrums
and heat
signatures. Something completely
different than the way we see.
For ancient astronaut theorists, these
descriptions share a curious similarity
to accounts reported by alleged alien
abductees.
Alien abductees give very consistent
accounts of some of the types of aliens
they
see. The most consistent account is 4T
short gray big headed bigeyed aliens.
And this would fit what we might expect
with gravity so intense that you
couldn't grow to 6 feet.
short gray aliens with large black eyes.
Is it possible that the habitable planet
orbiting Giza
667C is the home world of the beings
known in the UFO community as the
Grays. As far as ancient astronaut
theorists are concerned, the planet
orbiting Galisa
667C is just one of a number of recently
discovered worlds that could represent
places of origin for extraterrestrials
encountered both in modern times and in
the distant
past. Mountain View, California.
April
2013, NASA scientists at the AS Research
Center announced that the Kepler Space
Telescope has discovered two new
exoplanets that seem highly promising
for life named Kepler 62E and 62F. They
are so-called water worlds planets
covered by an all-encompassing global
ocean.
The planets 62E and F are very exciting
because they are oceancovered planets
and in the habitable zone. So if you're
an oceancovered planet, it increases the
chance that there's actually life on
that planet. If there is a water world
with an atmosphere with water, the
creatures that may inhabit there are
waterborn creatures. They wouldn't
necessarily look like human beings
standing up on two legs and two arms.
They might look more like mermaids.
Ancient astronaut theorists point out
that many early civilizations reported
sky visitors with amphibious fish-like
characteristics. Considered to be gods,
they were seen in China, subsaharan
Africa, Central America, and Egypt, just
to name a few.
These amphibian beings were said to
interact with humans by day and retreat
to rivers or lakes at
night. Could such entities have come
from so-called water worlds like Kepler
62E and
F? Creatures like that, if they existed,
would evolve on water worlds, planets
with a global ocean. And it just so
happens that in the ongoing search for
exoplanets, many such worlds are being
discovered.
These halfh human, half fish type gods
that are like us, but are still aquatic
and are coming from these water planets.
Extraterrestrials may be very attracted
to planet Earth because the oceans are
huge and vast. So aquatic
extraterrestrials could find a a very
happy home here on planet Earth.
So when we encounter alien life forms on
a space, are they going to look like us?
No. They could look completely different
from us and have a different pathway to
intelligence.
In their search for habitable
exoplanets, could mainstream scientists
be discovering the home worlds of
extraterrestrial visitors to Earth? For
ancient astronaut theorists, the answer
is a resounding yes. And they suggest
that the search for life is about to be
revolutionized once again as NASA
prepares to launch an extraordinary new
technology into
space. Geneva, Switzerland, October 8th,
2019.
Astronomers Michelle Mayar and Ddier
Qualos are awarded the Nobel Prize in
physics for discovering the first
exoplanet in
1992. In the years since, more than
4,000 have been examined and
categorized, and more are being found
every
day. Let's do a science experiment
tonight. Go outside, look up, and see
all the thousands of stars you see.
Every single one on average has a planet
going around them. And about in one in
20 has an Earthlike
planet. And so when you look at the
stars tonight, realize that somebody
could be looking back at you from out of
space. In
2021, NASA will launch the James Webb
Space Telescope, a satellite that can do
something once thought impossible. take
detailed color images of an exoplanet.
[Music]
The James Web Space Telescope is um a
different type of telescope than we've
had in space before. It will give us the
ability to look at the reflected light
from exoplanets in the infrared part of
the spectrum and to search for the
potential for biology being present.
But when we look upon the images of
other worlds and possibly even the
beings that inhabit them, what will we
find?
I think that what's really lying in
store for humanity now is that we will
prove that there are these exoplanets
out there that they have life and quite
possibly intelligent life capable of
coming to our solar system.
This will cause a sea change all over
the world within scientific communities
and within the religious communities
too. If astronomers discover exoplanets
with intelligent alien life forms, will
they appear eerily
familiar? Could they find amphibious
humanoid beings like the gods depicted
in ancient times? small gray aliens like
those reported by alleged
abductees. And is it possible that some
visitors perhaps coming from worlds very
similar to Earth might look remarkably
like us?
Within established ancient astronaut
theory, it's generally thought that
these extraterrestrial beings coming
from outside of our solar system were
interacting with our society and they
were manipulating our DNA and in a sense
creating people on this planet, us who
look like them and are similar to
them. As we discover more and more
exoplanets, the implications for
humanity are enormous. I think it's very
possible that we're on the verge of
discovering our home planet, the place
of our
origins. The big revelation will not be
do they look like us, but we look like
them cuz we are their offspring.
As scientists continue their search for
habitable
worlds, are we on the verge of
discovering not only alien life, but the
very extraterrestrials that came to
Earth centuries
ago? And will we find that the strange
gods depicted by our ancestors as
mythological creations were very real
flesh and blood entities, not so
different from ourselves.
Perhaps one day soon, we will look at
the satellite image of a distant
exoplanet and see not only mankind's
future home, but one that could have
once been inhabited by our ancient alien
ancestors. Currently, there is a race to
get off the planet. This is what all of
human history is about. this present
moment where we migrate into space. It's
a special two-hour ancient aliens event.
This is very much about humanity setting
up a permanent outpost on another
planet. Either we prepare to leave the
Earth or we prepare to die. When humans
become the alien visitors on other
planets, what or whom will they
encounter? What if we arrive on Mars and
there are artificial structures?
There is alien intelligence and our
government knows about it and that has
to break out if we're going to go beyond
Earth as a new generation of astronauts
prepares for life on other worlds. Are
they simply realizing mankind's future
or returning to its extraterrestrial
past? We're very near a discovery where
we're going to understand that
everything that ancient astronaut
theorists have been talking about is
true.
[Music]
The Mojave Desert, California, May 29th,
2018.
Virgin Galactic spaceship 2 Unity lifts
off from the Mojave Air and Spaceport
under the power of a carrier jet named
VMS Eve. 3 2 1 release. At 50,000 ft
above the Earth, the Unity is dropped
from its mother ship and rockets upward
to an altitude of
114,500 ft before descending back to
Earth.
The Unity is the brainchild of
billionaire entrepreneur Richard
Branson. It represents a new era in
space
exploration as it is designed to carry
not only astronauts but
civilians. Right now is an amazing time
to see what's happening with the world's
space uh
exploration. We have commercial entities
that are building rockets that we're
actually using to get to the space
station and maybe even to Mars in the
very near future. We've got people
talking about putting colonies on the
moon and on Mars. And we also are now
talking about a space force that's very
similar to what you might have heard in
the old days of uh like the Starfleet
Academy and Star Trek and other science
fiction stories.
Within a few short generations, we're
likely to have people that are being
born as Martians. We will soon be the
Martians. So, we are really reaching a
point where space is right there, right
for us to reach out and
grab. Today, a new 21st century space
race has captured mankind's collective
imagination.
Not since the Apollo program's
history-making moon landings has there
been such interest in and hope for a
return to manned missions to explore
other places in our solar system.
Although only the United States, Russia,
and China currently have human
spaceflight
capabilities, dozens of other nations,
in addition to well-funded corporations,
are committing unprecedented resources
to join this exclusive club.
I'm old enough to remember that first
small step that Neil Armstrong took. And
at the time, I think we all believed it
was the first step on a stairway to the
stars. That's one small step for man,
one giant leap for mankind.
And then after a few years, everything
seemed to stall. People lost interest.
What we're seeing in recent years is
other nations getting into this and so
particularly China and also India with
the prospect that we'll be blazing a new
trail to the
stars. We're entering the second golden
age of space exploration. Even Silicon
Valley billionaires are jumping into the
game funding their own fleet of rockets.
TS is ready for launch.
Elon Musk shot that Falcon Heavy rocket
from Cape
Canaveral. Millions watched it online.
Why? Because that was a moon rocket. For
the first time in 50 years, a moon
rocket capable of putting astronauts on
the moon took off from Cape Canaveral.
And now Jeff Bezos, the richest man on
the planet, has funded his own private
space
port in Texas with a fleet of rockets,
one of which we think is designed to go
to the moon. Lift off. Many experts have
suggested that space exploration slowed
down after the initial Apollo moon
missions because of the staggering
costs.
So what is driving humankind to once
again undertake such an expensive
endeavor? It is a law of nature that
organisms have to either leave, adapt or
perish.
99.9% of all living forms on the earth
have gone
extinct. Extinction is the norm. If you
don't believe me, simply drill right
under your feet until you hit the
bones. Backing up the biosphere, so to
speak, backing up humanity into a
multitude of different locations, makes
a lot of sense. One of the quotes I love
comes from uh Silkovsky, who's one of
the Russian founders of the whole space
movement. He goes, "Humanity was born in
the cradle of Earth, and we should not
always remain in the
cradle." I think that it's an
inevitability. As humans, we love to
explore. We started in the savas of
Africa and moved out throughout the
entire planet and that made us a robust
species and so that will continue as we
move off the planet.
[Music]
It would appear that there is a genetic
survival mechanism we have which says
that we must explore and we must move on
beyond the next horizon. I think that's
built into
us. For humans to thrive on alien
worlds, they must first learn to
overcome profound technological,
physiological, and even psychological
challenges. But they must also face
something even more daunting. What if
they encounter other intelligent beings?
[Music]
The idea of intelligent life, of
sentient life being confined to the
earth is just a human- centered
anthropocentric idea that we got to get
rid
of. In our Milky Way alone, there is
reckoned to be 140
billion planetary systems that are not
too dissimilar to the Earth than the
solar system.
The Kell satellite has allowed us to
create a census of the Milky Way galaxy.
We now know that on average every single
star has a planet going around it. And
of them, we know that a fraction of
them, maybe one out of 20 or so, have
Earthlike planets going around them. In
other words, the Earth could have a
doppelganger. The Earth could have a
twin in outer space. And how many of
them? Billions. billions of Earthlike
planets. And so for us to assume that we
are the only game in town, I think is
ridiculous. As far as ancient astronaut
theorists are concerned, evidence that
there is other intelligent life in the
universe has already been found on every
corner of the globe.
They believe Earth has been visited by
intelligent beings for thousands of
years and that it most likely began
during the time of the ancient Sumerian
[Music]
kings. Corsabot, Iraq, March 23rd, 1843.
While excavating for archaeological
treasures, a group of men led by French
scientist Paul Emile Bata came upon the
remains of a huge Assyrian palace and
within it an abundance of Sumerian
cuniform
inscriptions. When translated, the
inscriptions told of what archaeologists
believe to be the world's oldest
civilization and a group of powerful
beings called the Anunnaki.
The Ananarchai was a term of the gods
used by the ancient Samrians, but the
original form of it, it simply meant the
sky people. It meant those that were
connected with the stars.
The Ananarchi were seen to be the givers
of civilization to mortal kind and they
are described as having these shining
eyes and having a radiance and an
otherworldly feeling about
them. Based on 30 years of studying the
Sumerian Cuniaform tablets, in
1976, author and researcher Zechariah
Sitchin published a book called the 12th
planet in which he proposed that the
Samrian gods were in fact refugees from
another
world. According to Sitchin's
interpretation of the tablets, these
alien visitors, the Anunnaki, created
humankind.
[Applause]
that appears to be that gods came down
and literally started a colonization
project here on Earth, creating us in
their image and after their likeness. It
also might stand to reason then that
they've infused us with the desire to
then spread this colonization project
beyond
Earth. I think if you look at what we've
been doing in our space program, it's a
blueprint for what may have happened
here a long time ago with
extraterrestrials. But I think we're on
the same path.
We're beginning to understand that the
Anunnaki gods that were actually ETS
could be still out throughout the
universe. that we could now, as we are
starting to head out into space, be
encountering the prime intelligence that
originally had
civilizations on Earth and were working
throughout this solar
system. Are today's astronauts simply
repeating an ancient pattern, that of
exploring the universe with an eye
toward future colonization?
But if so, what will become of the
planet they leave behind? Perhaps
further clues can be found by taking a
closer look at our most likely
[Music]
destinations. Houston, Texas. June 7th,
2017.
At Johnson Space Center, Vice President
Mike Pence announces NASA's 2017
astronaut class. As American astronauts,
you may yet return our nation to the
moon. You may be the first to travel to
Mars. You may have experiences that we
can only imagine, those of us who walk
on terrairm. These 12 men and women were
chosen from a record
18,300 applicants, more than doubling
the previous record of 8,000 set four
decades earlier in
1978. Today, humankind's desire to
travel to space has never been greater.
And establishing colonies off Earth is
not only a possibility, but a priority.
The only question is where will we go
first? In the near term, there are three
basic
locations. There's going to the moon,
there's going to Mars, and then there is
free space. This is going to the
asteroids and using the asteroidal
materials to build
colonies. I think you can look at all
three of those as options in the near
term.
I firmly believe that um a single planet
species is not long to survive and that
we really have to be able to move out
into the solar
system. Early on in the evolution of the
solar system, we believe Venus, Earth,
and Mars had a significant amount of
water. And they all evolved differently.
Venus went through a runaway greenhouse
effect. The water evaporated and now the
temperature is so high and the pressure
is so high. It's a place we just can't
inhabit. And when you think about that,
what is the next place for humankind to
go? It's
Mars. It's smaller than the Earth, but
it's got a lot of the basic
characteristics. And it's a great place
to start and work from. I think the most
common misconception about Mars is that
it's going to be easier than it actually
is. Right now, the International Space
Station is orbiting 250 mi above us. The
moon is 250,000 miles away, a factor of
a thousand. The trip to Mars will take
you on a trip that's 250 million miles
away. This is not a simple rocket trip.
Wernern von Braonn built the Saturn 5
rocket to get astronauts to the moon.
We took 3 days to go there in the Saturn
5. Going to Mars is at least 240 days
given current technology, and that's not
an easy trip. While a manned mission to
the red planet will be a long and
perilous journey, experts say Mars has
many advantages for human
colonization. Temperature fluctuations
are less extreme than those of the moon,
for example, and its gravity is more
Earthlike. People don't seem to be
terraforming the moon. Mars is a little
easier. Mars already has an atmosphere.
There's a lot of real estate. I mean,
you could do this.
For thousands of years, Mars has
practically been a human obsession.
Even before it was known to be a planet,
it was distinguished from the other
nearby stars by its deep amber color.
Mars was referred to as Nurgal by the
Babylonians, the great hero, also a god
of war. In Greece, they referred to Mars
as Aries, the god of war. The god Mars,
the god of war, the god of aggression,
comes from this particularly visible
heavenly body. Then I wonder if the
desire, the quest, the yearning to
explore Mars has an aggressive or
competitive element to it. If Mars
himself is not somehow involved in the
project, the ancient Egyptians had a
very particular interest in Mars. Cairo
was named after Mars. Alahara, it means
the vanquisher or the conqueror. Even
the Sphinx itself was believed to have
originally been painted red, perhaps in
homage to
Mars. Over the centuries, humans have
conceived numerous and often humorous
notions of what Mars and its possible
Martian inhabitants might look like up
close. It has been the subject of
countless books, motion pictures, and
even video games.
But what if some of the creative
depictions of our interplanetary
neighbor don't come from human
imagination, but from human
memory? Carl Young theorized that
mankind had a collective consciousness.
And this is a kind of genetic memory or
inherited memory. For instance, if our
ancestors perceived that lightning was
dangerous, uh we might inherit then a
fear of lightning. And so it's possible
in this same way that our ancient
associations with Mars are actually
within our genes and embedded in our
neurons as part of our DNA. If our
ancestors experienced something, it goes
into our genome. It goes into our
DNA. What if humanity originated on Mars
and we are still answering to that call
unknowingly? Could there be a profound
connection that links humans to Mars
deeply embedded in our subconsciousness?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
suggest the answer is slowly being
revealed as we get closer to colonizing
the so-called red planet.
A private Dutch organization known as
Mars 1 announces a global mission to
establish a permanent human settlement
on Mars. The following year, they begin
accepting applications from wouldbe
colonists for a manned expedition
scheduled for 2023.
But while the opportunity to be among
the first humans on Mars is an exciting
one, one aspect of the mission seems
certain to turn away many wouldbe
applicants. It will be a one-way
trip. Nevertheless, thousands of people
apply. By the time I heard about Mars 1,
I've been telling all my friends, I
don't care what it's going to take. I'm
going to make it to space in my
lifetime. And it felt like there was a
calling, a destiny there. I get asked if
it's worth the sacrifice of leaving
everything I've known on earth, family,
friends, sunshine, rain, the beach. And
I think to live the first half of my
life as an earthling and the second half
as a Martian, what an amazing way to
kind of give your life to the greater
cause of humanity.
This is a defining point in the human
timeline.
So, I suppose the biggest thing that
draws people to Mars 1, the thing that
kind of hooks their attention is the
fact that it's a one-way mission. This
is very much about humanity setting up a
permanent outpost on another planet. And
that's I suppose the thing that drew me
to it in the first
place. Mars and Earth have to be in a
very synchronous place in order to make
the shortest trip to Mars.
When you get there, Earth and Mars are
going to be very far
apart. And you will not be able to leave
and come back for at least 400 days. In
fact, it would take you longer to get
back if you left right away than if you
waited 400 days to come
back. So once you get there, you're
stuck and you have to stay there. And
the truth is that it's so expensive to
get people to Mars and to establish the
first colonies that this is always
always going to be a one-way trip. I
don't like the idea that we do the same
thing that we did with the moon 50 years
ago where we go there, walk around,
explore it a little bit, and then come
back and then sort of ask the question,
why bother going there? We've been there
before.
The most common attribute through all of
the candidates is this idea that we're
all interested in serving something
that's bigger than ourselves as an
individual. It's very much about doing
something for the
species. The journey to get to Mars is
very similar to the first settlers
arriving in the Americas.
Mars One plans to send teams of four at
a time and every two years afterwards
there will be a new team to arrive and
join the
community. Eventually, probably we're
going to see tens of thousands of people
arrive. I think for us right now, if we
make the leap and start to create
colonies off planet, we're looking at
the next giant leap of humankind.
Are current efforts to leave Earth and
travel to Mars simply based on a desire
to explore and colonize a new world? Or
could it be based on something even more
profound? Is it possible that we wish to
return home to humankind's place of
origin? As far as ancient astronaut
theorists are concerned, further clues
still need to be examined, starting with
recent discoveries made on Mars that
point to evidence of
life. July 20th,
1976, NASA's unmanned Viking 1 orbiter
and lander touches down on the surface
of Mars. 3 weeks later, it is joined by
its companion, the Viking 2. For the
first time ever, humanity has
established a presence on another
planet. The Viking landers actually
landed on Mars and took a sample, but
they landed in one spot and they stayed
in one spot. We've since sent the
Pathfinder sojourer. For the first time,
we have a system on Mars that if we see
something shiny over there and we want
to go check it out, we'll send the rover
and get a very close look at it, take
samples, get high definition video from
it, and uh that is a very good start for
figuring out where people need to go
when we get ready to send them
there. In 2012, the Curiosity rover
landed on Mars's Gail Crater.
It was the most ambitious Mars mission
flown by NASA to date. Touchdown
confirmed. Received on Mars. One of its
objectives was to gather data that will
help scientists determine what is needed
to make the planet more habitable for
human exploration.
[Music]
In June
2018, scientist and aerospace engineer
Dr. Travis Taylor traveled to Johnson
Space Center in Houston,
Texas. There he met with NASA
Exploration Mission Scientist Dr.
Elizabeth Rampy.
Dr. Rampy analyzes data obtained by the
Mars Curiosity Rover, which 6 years into
its mission is sending back some of its
most extraordinary findings yet.
Uh so there was very late breaking news
recently from the Curiosity rover and
some interesting information came out of
the sample analysis at Mars or SAM
instrument. Okay. So SAM can measure
gases in the atmosphere and it can also
measure gases that are evolved from
samples. So basically we drill a
rock, deliver that powder to the
instrument and then that instrument
heats up the sample and measures the
gases that are coming off whatever out
gases. It can tell you what this what
that is. Right. Exactly. So, a big piece
of information from the atmosphere is
that we've been tracking methane over
the last few Martian years. And what we
see is that there is a cycle to it where
it spikes late summer, early autumn and
then dips again. Wow. Yeah. So, the big
question is why?
So, that could possibly be due to an
organic material, right? Or biological
source. Exactly. So, that's right. I
know. So huge. It's not the only
hypothesis out there, but you know,
there is the possibility that there is
extant life on Mars that is creating
this methane. Wow. The fact that NASA
has now released information that
they've measured a cycle of methane that
goes up in the summer and down in the
winter. It sounds very similar to how
biological processes create methane here
on Earth. That could be evidence that
there's life right now on
Mars. Life on
Mars. According to NASA, such a profound
notion is a distinct
possibility. But although the space
agency is still working to confirm their
findings, ancient astronaut theorists
remain confident of the outcome.
They have maintained for decades that
not only does the red planet contain
life, but that it was once home to a
highly advanced extraterrestrial
civilization. And for their proof, they
point to the existence of possible
structures found on its
surface. There are lots of claims of
photographs showing different features
on the surface of Mars. These are the
come from the orbiters that are
obviously taking pictures as they go
around all the time. And some people
would find different features and
interpret them as geometric or
rectalinear structures that suggest
civilization. You see everything you
would expect to see if you went to some
place on planet Earth 50,000 years from
now when the human race had been wiped
out. They clearly are technological
objects that have become fossilized.
While the notion that an ancient
civilization once existed on Mars may
sound
far-fetched, NASA has continued to make
discoveries that could reveal something
even more incredible. That life on Earth
actually originated on Mars.
So, what is this? Tell me what this is.
Okay, so this is a Martian meteorite.
So, this is a rock that came from Mars.
How long ago? The rock itself is about
180 million years old. So, that's when
it crystallized on Mars. And to give you
some context, 180 million years ago,
dinosaurs were roaming the Earth, right?
Well, we know that this rock came from
Mars. So, if there was organic material
on Mars 3 and a half billion years ago,
something could have caused that organic
material to go from there to here.
Right. Right. And what's interesting
about, you know, 3 and 1/2 billion years
ago is that's when life was taking hold
on Earth. So, and and Mars was once very
Earthlike with uh rivers and lakes. So,
why not Mars? We've got all the building
blocks for life on Mars. So, why
couldn't it's very possible that we're
descendants of Martians. I it I'm not
going to rule that out.
There have been a lot of changes in my
lifetime about speaking about life on
other planets. Is it possible that
humanity evolved from Mars? If I would
have said that 10 years ago, people
would have thought I was crazy. And what
that tells me though is the conversation
has changed.
While NASA's most recent findings
suggest that there may be life on Mars
and that life has potentially existed
there for billions of years, is it also
possible that Mars was the original
source of life here on
Earth? Since
1974, Dr. Chandra Wikramasinga has
advanced an intriguing theory known as
panspermia.
He maintains that carbon-based matter
exists amid space dust and can be
carried via asteroids and
comets. The standard position is that
life started on the earth in a very
small primordial soup and the earth is a
very small place in terms of cosmic
distances and cosmic sizes. It's a speck
of dust. So to argue that the most
complicated system that we can ever know
about which is life started here on the
earth is almost a travesty of common
sense. I think the first life is
certainly there's no question that it
came from
space. The first thing to say about the
origin of life on earth is that we
really have no idea how where or when it
happened. But there's one scenario that
does work in my view very well and that
is impact ejector. Mars takes a hit.
Mars rocks come here to Earth. The Mars
material that's raining down on Earth
all the time. If there were any life on
Mars, it would be conveyed to Earth in
this impact
eject. And so it's entirely possible in
my view that life started on Mars and
came to Earth only later when conditions
here settled
down. In
1953, British geneticist Francis Crick
along with American biologist James
Watson discovered that the shape of
human DNA resembles that of a
three-dimensional double helix.
But as Crick learned more about our
genetic code, he came to the conclusion
that it was so complex it could not have
developed by mere evolutionary
chance. He also believed it did not
originate on Earth.
[Music]
So when we hear terms like panspermia,
this really resonates with the ancient
astronaut theory because it confirms the
idea that life has arrived on earth
whole and complete and that the
evolutionary process for life even to
begin would take a much longer lifespan
than even earth was able to provide.
This raises the question is it possible
that life doesn't just randomly arrive
but is actually sent here to earth.
If, as ancient astronaut theorists
believe, life on Earth was seated here
by extraterrestrials millions of years
ago, did they have a plan for
humanity? Perhaps further clues can be
found by examining the ancient Samrian
stories about the earthly activities of
the gods.
In 2017, NASA's Advanced Exploration
Systems Division asserted that
identifying and extracting mineral
resources in space, such as iron,
tungsten, and titanium, would be
essential for future space exploration
and colonization. The moon and the
near-earth objects that are not too far
from Earth, they're loaded with minerals
and and raw materials. You can look at
the moon and where the Sea of
Tranquility and the other seas, they
have a different coloration because
there's titanium oxide covering the
surface. We know there's uranium there
because we've detected radon gas. So,
there's all sorts of materials. One of
the companies I'm proud of having
co-founded is a company called Planetary
Resources who's got a vision of going to
near-Earth asteroids to mine those
asteroids for fuel and ultimately
precious metals, platinum group metals
or construction
metals. But as NASA makes plans to mine
essential space minerals, is it possible
that other advanced civilizations came
to Earth centuries ago for the same
reason? As far as ancient astronaut
theorists are concerned, the answer is
yes. And they believe the evidence can
be found in the Samrian stories of the
Anunnaki written more than 5,000 years
ago. When we analyze the story of the
Anunnaki's creation of humanity, some
very interesting nuances come out that
might lead into understanding what
humans might face in their own eventual
colonization of another planet.
When famed ancient astronaut theorist
Zechariah Sitchin studied the Samrian
tablets in the
1970s, he not only reached the
conclusion that the Anunnaki came to
Earth to escape a dying planet, but also
noted that while here they used humans
to mine for
gold. When we look at the creation
stories of biblical tales, we understand
that God created the earth in seven
days. It turns out that this
consolidated version of seven days can
be translated to a much earlier story in
Sumerian form called the Atraasis where
there's actually seven tablets of
creation telling how the Anunnaki came
to earth and genetically engineered us
in their image and in their likeness to
mine the gold for them here on earth.
Is it possible that when the ancient
Samrians wrote about giant beings coming
down from the sky and digging for gold,
they were in fact documenting a
visitation by extraterrestrials who were
mining for resources, just as NASA is
planning to do in the not tooistant
future. June
2018, scientist and aerospace engineer
Dr. Travis Taylor is at Johnson Space C
Center's Building 9, the astronaut
training facility. He is meeting with
robotics engineer Lucen Juncan, who is
eager to show him the latest in
extraterrestrial transportation. I see
this is a rover. And tell me a little
bit about it. Yeah, this is basically a
off-roading RV for moon and Mars. And
what what is it that makes this so much
better than say the lunar rover? It can
go out and explore. So the concept is if
you have a habitat, you're going to take
two of these rovers and they'll go out
for a week to two weeks and explore.
Come back, refuel, and then we'll be
back out. Can we look inside or maybe go
for a ride? Let's go for a ride. Oh,
that'll be awesome. Okay, just put your
foot there, jump on up. All right,
pallet's on. Power's on. Go to low gear.
Low gear. Push forward on the stick.
The planetary analog test site, also
known as the rockyard, is a multi-acre
simulation of lunar and Martian terrain.
It is here that the space exploration
vehicle endures rigorous testing to
determine its readiness for eventual
off-earth deployment. Let's go through
that crater first. Okay. Just go up and
over. Yeah.
Can it handle that kind of a Yeah. If
you put your foot right up there,
that'll brace you in your seat.
So, like on a tank, you would typically
feel it tip over. Yeah. So, active
suspension, each one of the wheel
modules, it senses it, right? I see
that. How about that?
All right. To ride across the drive
across anything.
Wow. This is amazing. When it sees a big
rock like that, it just goes right over
it. Yeah, just go run over it.
Let me show you something. All right.
So, you're going to pick out a rock and
we're going to explore the rock in this.
Okay. Yeah. Let's look at that rock
right over there. So, look at this rock
right here. Uh-huh. You can bow down to
it. And then another cool feature, you
twist this way.
Oh, and crabs. Yeah. Yeah. I got you. I
got you. Crabs.
See how we can just rotate all the way
around the That's amazing. You're doing
perfect.
And then we're going to shoot straight
up that hill right there. The big hill.
Straight. Yeah. Okay.
So, it is a rock climbing pool. Climb up
a wall in this thing. See? Yeah. And we
want the vehicle to go places where
they're like, "This is my life support
system. I'm not going there." Yeah.
Right. But the vehicle would go We'll do
it if they have to. We'll do it if they
have to.
If ancient astronaut theorists are
correct and extraterrestrials came to
our planet thousands of years ago in
search of gold and other precious
minerals, wouldn't there be evidence,
some telltale sign that the Earth was
once the site of a vast global mining
operation? There was a place in Peru
called Kaha Marqueia. And at this spot,
there are thousands of shallow pits that
are going up the ridge of a mountain.
And they're in line. They're quite
uniform. They're only, say, 2 3 ft deep,
these pits. And they are baffling.
What these pits might actually be is the
result of some kind of mining probe that
was going up this mountain, digging
these holes, and then sampling for
valuable minerals. Today, Kaha Maria is
mined for zinc, a mineral used in metal
alloys and electrical equipment. But if
Earth may have provided a treasure trove
of raw materials for extraterrestrial
space travelers, what resources would
Mars have to offer? Recent NASA findings
suggest the red planet could be capable
of supporting human life and in ways
never before imagined.
After decades of searching, scientists
believe they have recently found
something incredible on
Mars.
Water. On July 25th, 2018, the European
Space Ay's Mars Express spacecraft
reported the discovery of a subglacial
lake located a mile or so beneath the
planet's otherwise arid
surface. If confirmed, it would be the
most significant evidence yet that Mars
either did or perhaps still does provide
a habitat for living organisms.
We know that evidence for life occurs
almost as soon as you have a liquid
water environment on Earth. We could
anticipate that, you know, there would
be scenarios where people could have
seated the Earth with life so that life
would develop very similarly on Mars.
The existence of water on Mars would
also be of huge benefit to colonization
efforts. And while scientists are still
confirming the presence of this
subglacial lake, they are now certain
that in the distant past the red planet
was once blue and boasting a more robust
atmosphere.
One of the most fantastic things that
we've discovered with our orbiters and
our rovers on Mars is about its
history. And a number of really
spectacular surprises have come out. The
first one is that Mars at one time in
its past looked more like the Earth. It
was a blue ocean world with a
significant amount of water.
We know for a fact that billions of
years ago when we were first getting
started here on Earth then Mars was a
much more cle place. We know that it had
a thick atmosphere to shield and blanket
the planet. And it would have had
organic molecules, the building blocks
of all life as we know it. So it stands
to reason that maybe Mars had its own
genesis, its own origin of life. Was
Mars a fertile planet teameming with
life? thousands or perhaps millions of
years ago? And if so, could the planet
be modified in such a way that it could
sustain human
life? It is NASA's stated goal to send
astronauts to Mars in the 2030s.
But while humanity's efforts to colonize
space are well underway, there is still
a tremendous amount of planning and
scientific groundwork to be done before
we can truly begin to populate alien
planets with large numbers of
humans. Right now, we're we're basically
just tourists in the in in
space. We take everything we need with
us. And in order to make the next giant
leap, you're going to actually have to
start using the materials that you find
in space to help you explore. Okay? As
soon as you make that step to use the
materials that are available to you on
the surface, now you're truly a pioneer.
There's a number of resources that are
already available to us. And then of
course, we're going to want to start
planting things. We're going to have to
grow food. We're going to have to live
off the land the best we can.
live off the land on
Mars. According to NASA, innovations in
technology will be able to make the
Martian landscape more hospitable to
humans than was previously
believed. But could this same adjustment
to a planet's environment be similar to
what extraterrestrials could have
accomplished here on Earth centuries
ago?
Ancient astronaut theorists say yes and
suggest that stories from nearly every
ancient culture prove this audacious
notion to be true.
One of the strangest traditions in South
America is with the Chaopo people in
Brazil. And they have this legend of the
Beep Cororoti who came down from the sky
in a lot of noise and wind and landed
his craft. He then taught to people
knowledge of civilization, of herbs and
medicine, and building and agriculture
and
crops. And today the Caopou people
celebrate him every year. And a priest
dresses up in this outlandish outfit
that looks like a spaceuit. So you have
to wonder where are they getting these
ideas of people in spaceuits? if not
from some extraterrestrials who landed
there in the distant
past. Today we are on the verge of going
to other planets and seeding them with
life. And it makes complete sense that
something like that happened on our
planet in the very distant
past. At Johnson Space Center in
Houston, Texas, NASA Exploration Mission
scientist Dr. Elizabeth Rampy introduces
Travis Taylor to John Gruner. Nice to
meet you. A space scientist with NASA's
Astromeaterials Research and Exploration
Science
Division. Gruner is working to determine
what humans will be able to grow and eat
on Mars so that they can live off the
planet's resources.
So, what is this? It's weathered
volcanic ash or terra, and it's very
similar to what's on Mars. Everybody
thinks of Hawaii as his paradise, right?
Warm beaches. You get up on top of these
volcanoes and it's cold, it's dry, and
so we've been using this for a number of
decades. It's kind of our general
purpose Mars simulant. Uh we've tried
growing plants in it. Well, have you
been able to grow plants in it? Sure.
Because people grow in volcanic soil all
over the Earth. It's full of minerals.
All right. But what we're lacking on
Mars are those biological things that
are those organic. Well, at least we
think we are, right? At least we Yes.
Maybe not. We finding this methane, but
will we need some other things like
bacteria or something that you have to
mix into the soil before seeds will
germinate and grow? Yes, cuz those those
roots in the in the soil don't just suck
up the minerals by themselves. And of
course, that makes the planetary
protection people go crazy because we
want to bring bacteria and fungi and
microbes to Mars. And of course, we're
trying to understand if they're already
there or if they ever were there. Ever
was. So, I have a theory about that. And
I believe that we've already
contaminated the rest of the solar
system the way Mars has contaminated
Earth with its organic material because
we've had major meteor impacts on Earth.
And it's likely that an impact meteorite
that ejected from Earth with enough
escape velocity to achieve an orbit that
would bring it to Mars. And absolutely
if a comet had impacted Mars and Earth,
we all have the same stuff. So, we're
all I think whatever we find here, we're
likely to find there and vice versa.
Yeah. And so, the stuff's just sitting
there waiting for us to use it.
If many of the minerals that exist on
Earth already exist on Mars, is it
possible that not only did the planet
once support life, but that it does so
even
today? There are scientists who believe
the answer is yes. And they are even
willing to go one step further. They
suggest we might be able to use
sophisticated terraforming technology to
transform the Mars environment so that
it more closely resembles that of
Earth. When we go off Earth, whether
it's to the moon, to Mars, ultimately we
have a choice. We either evolve oursself
to meet that environment or we turn that
environment to an earthlike environment.
So as we have evolved on the planet, so
has the biosphere and indeed that's what
will happen on Mars. We'll be using the
resources there and changing that
environment. It's fascinating that right
now there are active talks by scientists
who are proposing the terraforming of
Mars. It means that we know that Mars is
a great candidate to over time develop a
similar atmosphere like here on Earth,
which is incredible because a planet
that can sustain life is a rare thing in
the billions and billions of celestial
bodies that we have in the universe.
When the first Earth pioneers arrive on
Mars, what will they
discover? A barren world devoid of life?
Or will they confront a profound
reality? One in which they encounter
evidence of an advanced alien
civilization which once existed
thousands of years
ago. As scientists face the enormous
challenge of colonizing space, it is
widely believed that robots equipped
with artificial intelligence will play a
critical
role. Even now, AI technology has been
used to find alien planets, classify
galaxies, and even create spacecraft
capable of dodging space debris.
Robotic probes like NASA's Cassini, for
example, explored space for nearly 20
years and was instrumental in the study
of Saturn and its
rings. We always send robots out ahead
of the humans to find out a lot of those
unknown things like uh is the radiation,
you know, hazardous to us. When we get
there, rather than astronauts going out
in space suits by themselves, it's going
to be astronauts and robots going out
and exploring together.
Most experts agree that before travel
into deep space can take place,
artificially intelligent robots will
need to be able to harvest mineral
resources to keep operating. A version
of this idea was first proposed by
Hungarian scientist and mathematician
John vonoman in the 1960s.
He came up with the idea of a
self-replicating robotic probe that
could be built and rebuilt from
materials found on asteroids. Vanoyman
envisioned the idea of self-replicating
automatons using asteroidal rubble as
source material.
machines could be sent to another planet
and it would start making copies of
itself and perhaps evolve from just the
original copy to something more complex.
From one probe you get a thousand, then
a million, then a billion and a trillion
and pretty soon you have a sphere of
trillions of probes colonizing the
galaxy at near the speed of light.
NASA has proposed the idea of
self-replicating automa to be sent out
to the asteroid belt which is a place
rich in minerals and materials that are
easy to get to because they have low
gravity. Uh you don't land on an
asteroid, you dock with it. Is it
possible that we are looking at in the
future such self-replicating autonomy,
building spaceships out of asteroids, uh
going different places, doing
exploration for us? It's quite
conceivable.
But if intelligent space robots are
mankind's best hope for exploring the
galaxy, is it possible that Earth was
visited by extraterrestrial robots
hundreds and perhaps even thousands of
years ago?
If so, are we likely to encounter them
again?
If we go to other planets, we would
first send mechanical probes down to
evaluate the climate and the minerals
and the temperature and everything. You
would think the extraterrestrials would
do the same for our
planet. When you think about it, it's
got to be one of the most fundamental
things that they would do first. sending
out intelligent robotic systems to
probe. They're expendable and you can
send them everywhere. And perhaps we
should be looking for those systems
first as aliens.
According to ancient astronaut
theorists, evidence that
extraterrestrials sent robots to Earth
can be found in the stories of ancient
cultures.
In the story of the Argonauts, that's an
old Greek mut. We for the first time
hear about Talos. Talos was today we
would call it a kind of robot. Talos was
always surrounding the island of Create
and whenever someone went to come close
to the island of Crete, he shut it down
except they had a certain code on which
he did not shoot anymore. So for us,
Kalos was like a robot.
[Music]
An important figure in early Greek
mythology was Cadmus, a divine
character, the first hero, fifth in the
lineage from Zeus of the Greek
gods. It was Cadmus that started
agriculture, who brought civilization,
and he brought the making of bronze. He
knew how to make alloys, special metals,
which in the early days of civilization
was the beginning of technology. He was
a slayer of monsters. And he killed a
water dragon and took the dragon's teeth
and planted them like seeds. And great
fierce warriors grew out of the
process. We have to wonder if a lot of
this is again depicting machines being
powered by some type of extraterrestrial
energy.
When you look at the planet, you try to
hypothesize what came here in terms of
extraterrestrials and what came here
first. Look at what we do to Mars. We
send little rovers all over the place,
electronic things. Did they do that to
planet Earth, too, or did they come here
directly and then come down with
occupants?
I think what probably happened was the
craft came to the planet and then they
sent down robots or androids to explore
the planet.
You must be Julia. I am. I'm Travis.
During his visit to the Johnson Space
Center, aerospace engineer Dr. Travis
Taylor visited NASA's robotics lab where
he was shown the latest in space fairing
robots. Wow. So, this is the robotics
lab, huh? Well, this is the dextrous
robotics lab and this is Robonaut. A lot
of our future exploration concepts have
us sending our assets, sending our
spacecraft, sending the food and
logistics first and making sure
everything's set up and then sending our
crew members. So, it's possible that the
robots uh could actually build our
habitats and things before we got there.
And that's the that's the thought. Yes.
And what if you needed to make repairs
on the outside of the ship? Could
Robonaut do stuff like that instead of
you having to go out and do that?
Absolutely. Robots are great for the
dull, dirty, dangerous and the crew
members inside the spacecraft could
basically be the robot and commanding
everything about it. So I noticed that
Robonaut looks very human. Why make it
look human? It doesn't have to have a
head. You can put the sensors anywhere,
right? Yes, absolutely. However, since
we were trying to make it for a human
environment and to work with humans, we
thought that while form should uh follow
function. So, it's an engineering
decision, but it's also kind of a good
human interaction decision, too. We've
had one on the board the International
Space Station for for many years, and we
always always get the crew request to
say, "Hey, can I tweet this really cool
photo that I took of me and Robonaut?"
And we're doing Tao together. So, it
tends to promote bonding a little bit
more. We Something we can learn from
that. If we ever were to say go to
another star system and we found a
culture that we're not bipedal, right,
we might want to send our AI that that's
got whatever if they're, you know,
quadripeds, we might want to make a
quadripedal uh robot, right? Absolutely.
I mean, people put faces on everything,
right? You'd want to do the same thing
for an alien culture if you would. Yeah.
You know, what kind of AI or whatever
runs its systems? We have some on on
board. So, we do a lot of vision
processing and we've used neural nets.
Um, we're working right now to connect
the Robonaut to the spacecraft. So, have
a smart spacecraft that knows what's
going on within its walls and be able to
say, "Hey, Robonaut, I need you to go
and change this filter out." The other
thing that jumps out at me is, of
course, the negative scenario where they
become smart enough and they want to
take over. I'm not worried about that
yet. You're not worried about that just
yet. Okay.
Is mankind following in the footsteps of
its alien ancestors by using humanoid
robots in the exploration and
colonization of other worlds? Ancient
astronaut theorists say yes. But how
will mankind fulfill its own
extraterrestrial destiny if only robots
are able to function on other planets?
For many, the answer is simple.
Surviving on Mars will require not only
new technology, but a new breed of
humans.
All right. You want to go to Mars? Sure.
Let's go to Mars. At the Johnson Space
Center in Houston, Texas, aerospace
engineer Dr. Travis Taylor meets with
Paul Valley, the project manager for the
active response gravity offload system,
otherwise known as Argos.
Travis is eager to experience firsthand
how space colonists will be trained in
order to survive in reduced gravity
environments.
And now you are on Mars. So this is what
Mars is like. Yep. I can jump.
Oh, a lot higher. So, if I were going to
try and walk across Mars, the Argo
simulator is amazing in giving me some
insight in realizing it's not easy to
work on a planet that isn't the planet I
came from. If I was on Mars or the moon
or anywhere else, I have to completely
retrain my mind and body for working
there. Yeah. Wow. Well, getting up is
the hard part. So if any civilizations
have done that, they would have had to
do the same type of training or when
they got here, they would be extremely
clumsy. Yeah,
that's almost impossible. Yeah. Now
imagine doing it. There we go.
Now imagine doing it with a space suit,
life support. Yeah. I mean, you don't
realize how much you use gravity to do
everything. Mhm. Yeah. You don't realize
till it's gone, right?
Although recent NASA footage of
astronauts doing somersaults in midair
and eating floating M&amp;M's paints a
whimsical picture of what it's like to
live in a low-gravity
environment. The lack of gravity can
over time have a devastating and
profound impact on the human
body. What we have to do when we decide
to go to Mars is really study all
aspects of human physiology.
how we're going to operate in a gravity
that's much less than the Earth. Our
body will change because of that
environment. We're doing research in
many ways right now, studying the
effects of being weightless and then
coming back to the Earth.
March 2nd, 2016,
Kazakhstan. American astronaut Scott
Kelly returns to Earth after a record-
setting 360day mission aboard the
International Space
Station. The duration of the mission was
intended to help researchers understand
how prolonged periods of time in zero
gravity can affect the human body.
Scott's identical twin brother Mark,
also an astronaut, served as a control
subject.
Because of his twin's DNA, which is in
theory identical to his, they could then
determine what kind of DNA changes had
happened to him. And what they
discovered was that about 7% of his DNA
had been
altered.
Extensive post-mission lab tests
confirmed the astonishing changes that
had taken
place. Genes related to Scott Kelly's
immune system, DNA repair, bone
formation networks, his bloodstream, and
numerous other systems have all been
altered.
The startling results prompt scientists
around the world to ask what are the
implications for humans who leave Earth
permanently. So I did a lot of my early
medical work and medical research on how
the human body adopts to space as you go
up into
orbit. So we are going to begin to
speciate and form subspecies of humans
as we head off towards the stars.
Perhaps we should genetically modify
ourselves to thrive in outer
space. We're going to have to modify
ourselves to adjust to different
atmospheres, cosmic rays, radiation, you
name
it. Do we want to use gene editing
technology to evolve ourselves and
modify our DNA, modify our bodies to
meet the needs of space? The human race
is moving irreversibly off the planet.
February
2017, Maverick geneticist Dr. George
Church of Harvard University makes an
announcement that sounds like something
out of a Hollywood
movie. Using a genome editing tool
called Crisper Cast 9, he and his team
have combined DNA from an Asian elephant
with genetic material from a species
that's been extinct for nearly 4,000
years.
With the substitution of 45 sections of
the elephant's genome with the DNA of a
woolly mammoth, they insist that a
creature from ancient times could soon
be once again walking the earth.
Once you have the technology to
completely decode DNA and and recode it,
you also have the technology then to
genetically alter any human being or any
animal or plant. And so therefore,
you're able to genetically engineer a
humanoid species that will be better
adapted to space travel, better adapted
to life on a different planet.
Extraterrestrials coming here in the
ancient past could have easily have done
exactly the same thing.
Could extraterrestrials in possession of
the same DNA altering knowledge have
used it to aid their colonization
efforts here on Earth thousands of years
ago. An idea which once seemed absurd
now seems remarkably and eerily
plausible. Could you go back in time and
look at something like the prehuman
creatures and genetically modify them
and create what has become homo sapiens?
With our technology today, we could pick
a near sinient creature and start doing
genetic modifications on it and create a
new sinient race.
In addition to genetically modifying the
human body in order to make it better
suited for space travel and
colonization, many experts propose that
there will also need to be a merging of
man and
machine. Genetically modified space
colonists, they argue, will have to be
fitted with biomeatronic parts in order
to create a human that is smarter,
faster, stronger, and more durable.
I've been talking with some scientists
and they say the next thing that's going
to be coming is the cyborg evolution of
humanity for those that are going to go
into space.
We have this Hollywood image that the
aliens are going to land and they're
going to come out looking somewhat like
us and they'll say, "Take us to your
leader, Earthman." But I think it could
be quite different. They could be part
robotic. realize that they could be
thousands of years more advanced than
us. If there is a culture out there
that's more advanced than us, they've
already built these robotic bodies. Why
wait for them to come to us? We have to
become a huge space fairing culture, a
civilization to go out and answer these
questions for ourselves instead of just
sitting on our hands and waiting for
them to give us the answer someday.
In finding ways to modify the human body
along with developing highly advanced
methods for terraforming other planets,
is mankind really going where no one has
gone
before? Or are we simply fulfilling our
destiny, one that stretches back to the
very beginnings of human life here on
Earth?
As far as ancient astronaut theorists
are concerned, the more humans venture
into space, the closer they will be to
discovering their true origins. Not on
Earth, but on an alien world far, far
away. December 20th,
2013, noted ecologist Dr. Ellis Silver
publishes his book humans are not from
Earth. In it, he proposes that humans
possess a multitude of physical
vulnerabilities such as slower childhood
development, a heightened susceptibility
to
illness, spinal problems, and difficulty
giving birth. He concludes that they
most likely evolved on another planet.
There are a lot of indications that
mankind, the human race, actually did
not evolve on the planet Earth. For one
thing, you know, if we go out in the sun
too long, we get sunburned. And that
doesn't make a lot of sense, unless the
conditions on planet Earth have changed
very dramatically in the last few
thousand years. You have to wear
sunglasses outdoors. That also indicates
that our eyes are not properly adapted
to the planet. Some recent studies in
sports medicine have shown us that the
human body creates two types of fat. One
isn't a good type of fat and the other
one is. And interestingly enough, the
studies show that if you bring the
temperature down to about 67° F, you
create the good fat and not the bad fat.
Near the equator on Mars in the
summertime, it's about 67° F. Now that's
Mars today with very little atmosphere.
Imagine in the past where Mars had an
atmosphere, the average temperature on
the surface might be around
67°. Another factor is that when
astronauts actually go into space, their
circadian rhythms, their body clocks
change from 24-hour days to a 24.9our
day. And that happens to be the exact
rotational period of a single day on the
planet Mars. Given the fact that our
body clocks are tuned to the planet
Mars, not to the planet Earth, that
indicates to me that we actually came
here from there. Some have suggested
that at some point Mars had an
atmosphere and due to some cataclysmic
events on Mars, the Martians had to find
a new home within our solar system and
they came to Earth. So what if we are
the
Martians? Could it be that the human
race actually evolved on
Mars? And if so, what might have caused
our ancient ancestors to come to Earth
so many years ago?
At some point billions of years ago,
Mars, it suffered a kind of
environmental
catastrophe. Its atmosphere started
bleeding away into outer space cuz it
had no magnetic field to help shield the
planet.
In
1976, author and researcher Zechariah
Sitchin proposed that a 12th planet once
existed in our solar system just beyond
Mars that was somehow
destroyed. Although his declaration was
based on his study of ancient Samrian
texts, it was largely dismissed by the
academic community who thought the idea
absurd.
But recent physical evidence has come to
light that may prove Sitchin more
correct than even he believed
possible. October 7th, 2008, an 80ton
asteroid enters the Earth's atmosphere
and explodes 23 m above the Nubian
desert in
Sudan. That day, an estimated 600
meteorites literally showered the
landscape.
But when examined, the meteorites were
found to contain something incredible.
Diamonds. They also contained something
else. Evidence that they came from what
scientists now believe to have been a
lost planet in our solar system. One
which was destroyed thousands of years
ago.
the asteroid belt in our solar system.
It's a strange thing and some have
suggested that these are the remnants of
a planet that exploded at some point and
the inhabitants of that planet either
went to Mars or they came to Earth. I am
convinced that the reason why there is
such a huge fascination with space
travel is
because that's where we come from.
If there really were an additional
planet in our solar system that was
destroyed by a cosmic collision as
Zechariah Sigin suggested, could its
displacement have had a calamitous
effect on other nearby
planets, perhaps
Mars? And how would the ancient Samrians
have known about
it? Between Mars and Jupiter today, we
have the asteroid belt. And the asteroid
belt, in my opinion, was once a planet
which
exploded, which exploded because there
was a war. There was a war in space, a
war in heaven. Many mythologies speak
about this war in heaven, including our
Christian religion where they speak that
the Archangel Lucifer fighted against
the Archangel Michael. Greek mythology.
Every mythology around the world begins
with the war in space, the war in
heaven. In my opinion, Mars was
inhabitant. Could the human race
actually be populated by the descendants
of refugees from Mars?
And could this be the basis not only for
our long-standing fascination with the
so-called red planet, but why we are so
compelled to return there?
June 20th,
2018. The White House Office of Science
and Technology releases an 18page
report. It outlines what NASA and FEMA,
the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
must do in the next decade to prevent
deadly asteroids from crashing into
Earth. The document covers everything
from earlier detection and possible
deflection to ways of dealing with the
fallout from a catastrophic
impact. We have a lot of these small
bodies, these things that are coming out
of the asteroid belt. these rocky
meteors that then impact the earth. So
over the last 15 years, we've studied
how many are there, how many cross our
orbit, and we find that there are some
really big ones. They are going to hit
the Earth. It's not a matter of if, it's
only a matter of
when. We get a single hit from an
asteroid that's as big as the one that
took out the dinosaurs. And that, by the
way, is a 100% probability that that is
going to happen sooner or later. When
that happens, all human life on Earth
comes to a halt and we go extinct.
All of our proverbial eggs are in this
one basket. If anything happens to us,
if there is a asteroid incident, if
there is a human disaster
created, every element of our culture
can get wiped out instantly.
In recent years, more and more experts
have come forward to stress the
importance of establishing human
settlements off
Earth in order to ensure the
continuation of the
species. But is humankind still many
years away from having the capability to
realize this ambitious
goal? More could efforts to colonize
Mars be much further along than the
government is willing to
reveal? Boulder, Colorado, August 8th,
2018. Tech Titan and SpaceX founder Elon
Musk convenes a secret meeting of
highlevel scientists, engineers, and
space colonization experts.
The 60 attendees are warned not to
publicize anything about the meeting or
even acknowledge their
participation, but news of the meeting
leaks, sparking widespread
speculation. Why such secrecy from its
organizer, a man who rarely shies away
from the
spotlight? Some have suggested there
could be a connection to an event that
happened 7 weeks earlier.
President Donald Trump's call for the
establishment of a new branch of the US
military, the Space
Force. So recently, President Trump
announced a space
force. Basically, what he's saying is we
are going to develop an outer space
initiative, a deep space
program that's going to be started from
the military, controlled by the
military, and apparently will have
militaristic aims. Now some people may
find this alarming but others may look
at it and say what's really happening
here is a very very crucial moment in
human history and in the history of the
United States where we are stepping into
space in a real real serious
way in relation to the space program the
private sector players the the
billionaires the Elon Musks these are
increasingly the people making the
decisions on this it's almost as if
government is losing control of
this or it might be now wholly in the
private sector maybe being deliberately
moved. It is I think sometimes more
difficult for people to find out what's
going on in the private sector than
actually what's going on in government.
I had an interview once with an
astronaut about the fact that if we
don't get ourselves get some contingency
of humans
off some on the moon, some on Mars and
going beyond that eventually homo
sapiens sapen as a species if confined
only to earth might face an existential
crisis. We deserve to know the truth
that there is alien intelligence and our
government knows about it in great
detail. And now we're finally at the
intersection in time where that has to
break out if we're going to grow and go
beyond Earth and start moving out into
our own solar system.
Is it possible that there are people
within the United States government who
already know that the first astronauts
to land on Mars will encounter
intelligent extraterrestrial
life? And are they secretly working with
billionaires in order to help carry out
preparations for this inevitability
outside of the public eye?
As far as ancient astronaut theorists
are concerned, whatever the government
does or does not know, as we begin to
migrate off Earth, all of humanity will
soon learn the truth that we are not
alone in the
universe. I think what we're very near
is an event, a discovery.
could be on the moon, could be Mars,
could be maybe Proxima Centuri or any of
our local stars where we're going to
understand that everything that ancient
astronaut theorists have been talking
about is
true. We human beings, we fancy
ourselves as you know being pioneers and
wanting to be the first and that's
wonderful. We are pioneers. We are the
first on many many things. But what if
we arrive on
Mars? We actually land there and there
are artificial
structures. It's just the closing of a
gigantic circle.
Is it possible that ancient stories
involving everything from angels and
gods descending to the earth to miracles
and extraordinary extraterrestrial
events were handed down from generation
to generation in order to prepare
mankind for interplanetary exploration?
Ancient astronaut theorists not only
believe the answer is yes, but they also
point to a recent scientific discovery
that may indicate we are rapidly
approaching an exodus from planet Earth.
The University of
Tennessee,
2012. Forensic anthropologists examining
human skulls dating from the mid 1800s
to the mid 1980s find that in the past
100 years, human skulls have become
larger, taller, and narrower.
Although exactly why these changes have
occurred is still being debated, many
scientists believe that even more rapid
changes will take place when future
humans spend more and more of their
lives living in outer
space. According to them, the human head
will continue to grow wider as brain
mass increases. Decreased access to
sunlight could lead to the development
of larger eyes and nostrils might
elongate in order to facilitate
breathing in dusty environments like
that of
Mars. Scientists have suggested that if
beings like us were to go into space and
spend long periods in space without
normal gravity and such that our muscles
would begin to atrophy. uh we would have
much more longer spindly arms and this
is how sometimes extraterrestrials are
described as
well. If I say that somehow or other
life on Earth came from an
extraterrestrial source, your first
thought is immediately, oh little green
men or little gray aliens with big bug
eyes or whatever did that. But it's an
interesting parallel when you hear
people talk about humans evolution. Is
it possible that that's what humanity
might become for space fairing purposes
is more like these gray
aliens? One theory has been proposed
that these are actually ancestors of
humanity that left planet earth at some
point and over millions and millions of
years have evolved into this more
spindly limbmed more uh neuro focused
night vision focused creature but
actually are tied to humanity's past.
Some have suggested that the ancient
astronauts that our ancestors
encountered perhaps were us human beings
from the future going back in time to
teach us. That's an interesting idea
because I think that time travel is
conceivably possible. However, with the
ancient texts that I'm familiar with, I
have yet to come across a passage that
one of these quote unquote gods says to
our ancestors, "We're the same, but we
are from the
future." While ancient astronaut
theorists are divided on the question of
whether extraterrestrials, like the
so-called grays, are in fact
biologically evolved humans visiting us
from the future.
What they all agree on is that the day
is fast approaching when we will finally
know the truth about mankind's alien
origins. In the creation mythologies,
there's a a plan that emerges. And this
plan is for the people to become more
like the gods so that we could be
reunited with them in the stars.
We are on the cusp of or perhaps even in
the middle of right now this tremendous
transformation that will connect us with
extraterrestrial beings.
A Gallup poll was done to ask questions
of the populations that would indicate
whether or not they had had interactions
with biological entities that were not
human.
And that Gallup poll came to the
conclusion that 3 to 4% of the current
population of our planet have had an
interaction with something that's in the
non-human category. So are the nonhumans
waiting for a specific moment in which
they will say the human experiment is
beginning to grow
up. We want to go out and explore and we
think it's the
beginning. It's not the
beginning. I don't think it's
coincidental that at this moment we are
recording mass sightings of
extraterrestrial craft. We're
understanding the ancient world and how
they interacted with extraterrestrials.
Science is advancing to understand this.
Communications are being put in place. I
think all of this is leading to this
moment where we are going to peak, where
we're going to experience this
disclosure, this convergence, this
return, and it will forever change
humanity. Will humankind succeed in
establishing new colonies on other
planets? And if we do, will we discover
that we are not the pinnacle of
creation, but just the newest members of
an intergalactic society?
Perhaps as we transition off of Earth
and out into the stars, we will find
that we are not reaching the peak of our
human evolution, but only the beginning
of a destiny that's as limitless as the
universe. An Irish legend, the Supreme
Deity lived inside New Graange. Strange
statues in Japan. They are in what
literally look like
spacuits and a mysterious African tribe.
They didn't see themselves as
Earthlings. They saw themselves as
aliens.
All connected by a single sound. We have
this repeated story of these beings that
said they came from the stars and they
introduced themselves always with the
same phonetics. You have Doon, you have
Dogu, you have Dak Da. What's the
commonality here? Because we have not
similar but identical stories. Could a
simple syllable reveal the identity of
extraterrestrial visitors from thousands
of years ago? There's across cultures a
reference of some type of an amphibious
creature that they thought of as a god.
And might they provide new clues about
mankind's very origins? All these
cultures were visited by the same
people.
[Music]
There is a doorway in the
universe. Beyond it is the promise of
truth. It demands we question everything
we have ever been taught. The evidence
is all around us. The future is right
before our eyes. We are not alone. We
have never been
[Music]
alone. Mali, Africa,
1931. French anthropologist Marcel Grele
trekks through the forbidding desert in
search of the mysterious Doon tribe.
When he finds them, he becomes
fascinated by their culture and
traditions. As Grele starts collecting
Doon legends, he notices an eerie
similarity to ancient tales found across
the globe. Tales of amphibious gods, in
this case called Nommo, who came from
the sky, lived in the sea, and helped
mankind.
They describe these nomos as being very
like mermaid or
mermanlike, but bequething lots of
knowledge of astronomy, math, and
science to this ancient race. The Doon
would say that the Nommo were these
extraterrestrial gods. But they needed a
watery environment to live in, though
they could come on
land. Greel learns that their arrival is
known as the day of the fish.
The Doon actually said, "Well, this was
our creator god, Namo, who descended
from the sky in a loud whirlwind of a
storm of thunder, smoke, and
lightning." But what struck Rule and
shocked the world weren't the Doon
legends themselves, but where they said
their amphibious gods came from. a star
that no one on Earth knew existed until
1862, long after the Doon claimed they
knew of its
existence. In the 1930s, when French
anthropologists were first discussing
the Nommo with these Doon priests, the
Doon priests said that the Nommo were
coming from the star system of Sirius.
Well, the French anthropologists were
amazed at that and were confused as
well. According to the Doon, their gods
didn't come from Sirius A, a star that
is clearly visible in the evening sky,
but from its tiny
companion, a dying star called Sirius B
that can only be seen with advanced
high-powered telescopes. Sirius A is the
brightest star in the sky because it is
very luminous and it is also fairly
close to the Earth. In astronomy, it is
a known fact that there is a Sirius A
and a Sirius B. Sirius A can be seen and
Sirius B for us is invisible because
it's just too small. Now, the Doon knew
about the invisible companion star to
Sirius. How did they know?
For thousands of years, Sirius A has
played an outsized role in the
imagination of Greeks, Persians, Hindus,
Romans, Polynesians, and countless
others. The Egyptians even based their
calendar on Sirius
A. And some believe they aligned the
Giza pyramids to Orion's belt, which
points to Sirius A. villages along the
Nile and along the Euphrates and ancient
Mesopotamia. They lined up their village
dwellings to mimic the constellation in
which Sirius
sat. Sirius is one of the closest stars
to us. It's 8.6 light years away.
Unlike the sun which is beautiful golden
color, a Sirius is a bluish white color
indicating it's much hotter than the
surface of the sun and that corresponds
to it being more massive than the sun
and burning hotter. It'll have a shorter
lifespan. But how could the Doon have
known about the existence of Sirius
[Music]
B? Could they have at one time been in
possession of advanced technology? Or
could there be another even more
profound
explanation? The Doon had an amazing
degree of knowledge about the serious
system. They knew that the orbits of the
two stars were about 50 years
period and that the invisible star was
very dense and past its prime.
They also knew that the brighter one was
a larger star than the sun. The Doon
also knew that Sirius B is about the
size of Earth and spins on its
axis. There is no logical explanation
for why the Doon tribe knew about the
serious star system. Naturally, we
didn't have telescopes in those days.
How did they know this? It's as if an ET
came here and just told them all about
that. It's an amazing story.
[Music]
One theory is maybe the aliens gave them
this knowledge. It can't be ruled out.
That's one possibility because they got
it right on the
dot. But if a race of amphibious Nommo
came from Sirius B and gave the Doon
such gifts of knowledge, did they only
visit this one desert tribe?
or did they visit other peoples in other
lands? It would be one thing if there's
only one legend of a fishman worldwide,
but the Namo is one story of dozens of
amphibious bringers of knowledge to our
ancestors. The ancient Hindus talk about
this. The ancient Greeks, they all had
these fish people that during the day
taught mankind and then at night they
wandered back into the ocean to just
emerge the next day. If the Nommo from
Sirius B visited numerous ancient
cultures, is it possible that some
physical evidence survived?
Sierra Leone,
Africa. The early
1990s. As civil war rages across the
country, rebels begin forcing villagers
to mine so-called blood
diamonds. But from deep within the earth
emerges a vast treasure they weren't
expecting.
mysterious figures ranging from 5 to 10
in
tall, often with reptilian or amphibian
features. They're very strange statues.
Some are clay, some are of granite or
limestone. They are humans and human
figures with lizard heads. There are
hundreds of them.
Archaeologists date the statues known as
the nomaly to around 500 years old when
Europeans first came into contact with
the people of Sierra
Leon. But researchers point out that the
statues were found buried as much as 150
ft
deep which would suggest that they are
extremely ancient.
Normally the deeper you go the more
ancient things are.
That indicates great antiquity.
We know that Angelo Patoni was able to
date the strata to 17,000 years old. We
asked the chiefs and they'll tell us
they could be even older.
17,000 years
old. If true, it would make the Nomaly
statues among the oldest man-made
artifacts ever
found and date them to 12,000 years
before the first known civilizations on
Earth. But for ancient astronaut
theorists, even more interesting is a
strange similarity between tales of the
Nomaly and the stories of the Doon tribe
and their Nommo gods. 12,200 miles away
in Mali.
A similarity that could reveal the
identity of mankind's extraterrestrial
ancestors. In the early
1990s, mysterious figurines were
uncovered in Sierra Leone, Africa, that
were buried in a strat of the earth so
deep it suggests that they could be as
much as 17,000 years old.
They are believed to represent gods
called the nomaly that have been revered
by the native people for
centuries. They are also similar to the
stories of the Doon tribe of Mali who
although located some 1200 m
away worship gods called the Nommo who
descended to the earth in a whirlwind.
They were forced to come down here and
live on earth. Their eyes were so bright
that you could not look into them
because they shone like the
sun. And their voices were so powerful
that when they spoke in one village, you
could hear them in the next
village. They're actually here on earth
as guides helping humanity. So this is a
very interesting tale that we see across
cultures where they actually have some
interaction with beings that come down
from the sky and teach them knowledge.
Like the Nommo, the nomaly gods are
depicted as having amphibious traits and
are often shown entwined with
crocodiles. The Nommo and the Numoli.
Could it be that the creatures that came
to Earth hundreds of thousands of years
ago were somehow aquatic creatures?
It's very conceivable that ET races that
came here many, many, many years ago
looked like maybe an alligator standing
upright. Who knows? It's very
conceivable that's what they
saw. Could the Nomaly and the Nommo
represent the same extraterrestrial
visitors? And could those visitors have
come from Sirius B?
Words are thought of as thought fossils.
They are a record into themselves. And
when we begin to compare words, we find
some very interesting things. In Sierra
Leone, we learn of statues called
Nomaly. Then we flip over to the Doon
and we find that they worshiped a god
called NMA. Is there a linkage between
these two cultures that are supposed to
be entirely separate? Linguists would
argue that there is. Perhaps the most
enticing clue as to the Nomaly's true
origins was discovered in the early
1990s when one of the mysterious Nomaly
figurines was found to contain a
chromium sphere. Inside of it, they
found a sphere made of
chromium. The fascinating thing about
this is that chromium was not isolated
by us until 1797.
But how is it possible that this sphere
was placed inside a statue made 17,000
years before scientists isolated
chromium? There are two schools of
thought. One would be that there were
ancient civilizations which were far
advanced in that area which have been
absorbed back into the jungle. And the
second one is that there was an
influence from some extraterrestrial
beings that came from the
sky. This is absolutely inexplicable in
present paleontology. You have to assume
that there was a contact with an
advanced technology.
But if this chromium sphere was produced
by extraterrestrial visitors to Earth,
what was the purpose of placing it
inside anomaly
statue? Some believe the answer may lie
in a further examination of Sirius
B. We have to wonder if this isn't some
type of representation of Sirrus B.
The Cirrus system is always thought of
one of the best possible places for we
would find intelligent
life. Could Sirius be be one of the home
places of gods that came from that star
system and broad ancient
knowledge? Perhaps further clues can be
found by examining a sacred syllable
that ties the Doon to a
civilization thousands of miles away.
Paris,
France. Ancient astronaut theorists
believe that housed in the Louv is an
unlikely clue to the mystery of the Doon
tribe of
Mali. It's a carved stone made of
bassalt with a depiction of the
Babylonian king
Hammurabi speaking with a divine being.
Below them carved in cunia form is
perhaps the most significant legal text
in the ancient
world. The code of
Hammurabi. King Hammurabi ruled ancient
Babylon in the 18th century BC and he
devised the world's first known set of
laws. For example, this is where we get
the idea of an eye for an eye. But
what's fascinating to me is that
according to King Hammurabi himself,
this was dictated to him by a being that
came from the
[Music]
sky. In my mind, King Hammurabi was
documenting exactly what happened. He
was advised by an extraterrestrial.
Ancient astronaut theorists suggest that
not only were the Babylonian gods
extraterrestrials who instructed King
Hammurabi, but that one of them provides
an intriguing connection to the Doon of
Africa and their amphibious visitors
from Sirius
B. That god, the chief god of the
Babylonians, was called Deeon.
They have a god named Deeon and it too
is an amphibious human
god. The Babylonian god Deeon sounds
eerily similar to the Doon tribe who
claim they were visited by beings from
Sirius
[Music]
B. Is that because the Doon named
themselves after the same god?
The ancient Babylonians had a god half
human half fish called Dagon. Is there a
relationship between the Doon and Dagon
and the deity of the Babylonians that
brought civilization to Earth?
Absolutely. There could be a
relationship. The Babylonians worshiped
Deeon in a temple called Emol or the
house of the star. Could this be Sirius
B?
Did inhabitants of this distant star
visit both the Doon in Africa and the
Babylonians in the Middle East and leave
their name perhaps dag or dog embedded
in both places?
What if when the extraterrestrials
visited our ancestors listened to their
language words with dog, dog, something
that was the most prevalent term that
they just heard? So the idea that we
have these cultures where the root word
is the same indicates to me all these
ancient cultures were visited by the
same
people. According to ancient astronaut
theorists, the extraterrestrials
implanted evidence of their visitation
within the traditions of the cultures
they
encountered. And further proof of this
can be found by examining another early
civilization. On the opposite side of
the
planet, the Imperial Palace, Tokyo,
Japan, New Year's Day, 2019.
Citing age and ill health, Emperor
Akihito abdicates before a crowd of more
than 90,000 well-wishers and family
members, including his eldest son, Crown
Prince Narohito.
Four months later, Narohito succeeds his
father and ascends to the Chrysanthemum
throne, carrying on a tradition of the
oldest royal family on earth, stretching
back over 2500 years to 660
BC. According to legend, the Japanese
imperial family is descended from divine
amphibious beings who like the
Babylonian god Deeon and the Doon gods
of Mali came from the sky and lived in
the
sea. The Japanese name for these beings
is Doroan. In English, we call them
dragons.
Emperor Jimmu, who was the founder of
the Japanese Imperial line, was
supposedly a descendant of the Dragon
King. And the Dragon King lived in a
underwater palace that was massive and
and very prosperous. And through
successive
marriages, eventually his descendants
became rulers of Japan.
Early myths indicated that the dragon
was also an amphibious water type
animal. Also in some ways a halfman half
uh amphibious
type. He later morphed into a flying
serpent as we
know. The Japanese language is unique to
Japan and also isn't connected to any
other language. Not even other Asian
languages such as Korean and
Chinese. Yet the Japanese word for this
creature is strikingly similar to words
embedded in languages all over the
world. Doroan in
Japanese, dragon in
English, Draong in India, Draani in
Swahili, Draontion in ancient Greek and
Dragoy in the Basque language found in
Europe which is also unconnected to any
other language.
So once again we have that similar word
dogone
dagon dragon. So perhaps all of these
words are indicating these halfh human
half amphibious
[Music]
extraterrestrials. Do these linguistic
similarities suggest that the Japanese
were visited by the same beings from
Sirius B that were encountered by the
Doon in Mali. the people of Sierra Leone
and the
Babylonians. Ancient astronaut theorists
say yes and also suggest that actual
physical evidence of the connection
exists in the form of strange figurines
found buried all over
Japan. Tokyo National Museum, Japan.
The country's oldest national museum is
home to a collection of mysterious clay
statues that date as far back as 10,000
years. More than 18,000 of these
figurines have been found throughout the
Japanese islands. And again, their name
is eerily
familiar. They are called the dogu.
The dogu are small clay figurines that
are usually about 15 to 30 cm in height
and they date from one of the earliest
periods of Japanese history from about
14,000 B.CE to 1,000 B.CE.
Much like the similarly sized nomaly
figurines in Sierra Leon, more than
8,000 m away, the Dogu were also found
buried deep in the earth. When one
buries something, one is expressing
reverence for it. So if you find
something that's buried with a lot of
care uh and ritual preparation, it means
it could be some kind of sacred item.
But perhaps the strangest thing about
the Dogu is what they're wearing. So
here we have a replica of a Dogu statue,
which is life-size. You have patterns
that are represented here that look
almost technological in nature. And if
we focus on goggle features of the Dogu
statues that have led many people to
speculate that this in fact might be
some kind of helmet that's part of a
space suit. You really have to wonder
what's going on here. Because in the
case of the dogu, if you look at this
from a modern-day perspective, in my
opinion, those are people in some type
of space
[Music]
suits. For ancient astronaut theorists,
even more intriguing than the appearance
of these figurines is their name, Dogu.
Once again, echoing divine names found
across multiple
cultures. Here we are talking about a
civilization on the island of Japan that
is entirely separate, far across the
ocean, a vast distance from Africa and
Egypt and Mesopotamia. Yet they worship
a deity with the very same name
phonetically. Is it the same being?
Common sense tell us that we have to at
least consider that as a possibility.
If uncanny cultural and linguistic
similarities found in different parts of
the world are the result of
extraterrestrial
visitation, wouldn't there be physical
evidence as
well? Some alien artifact left behind
that could prove our ancestors had
contact with beings from another
world. According to ancient astronaut
theorists, there is.
From the mysterious statues of Sierra
Leon to the Doon tribe of
Mali and the Babylonian worship of
Deeon to the Japanese stories of
dragons and the curious dogu
figures. According to ancient astronaut
theorists, there are eerie similarities
between ancient cultures that indicate
they were all visited by the same
extraterrestrial
beings from Sirius
B. If there were beings from the Sirius
star
system, they may have come for a short
period of time. They may have been
harvesting metals. They may have been
harvesting genetic material. And then
they go.
But is there any physical
evidence? For some, the presence of a
chromium sphere inside a statue
estimated to be 17,000 years old and
ancient figurines that appear to depict
spacuits are proof
enough. But could there also be actual
artifacts from another
world? Among the people of Sierra Leon,
local legend has it that when they're
normally gods fell from heaven, part of
the sky turned to stone and rained down
with
them. These strange blue stones called
sky stones have been found with the
statues. And at first archaeologists
thought, okay, it's just blue stones.
But when they analyzed it and they
couldn't figure out how these had been
made too. Although the people in Sierra
Leone felt that they were actually
pieces of the blue sky that fell with
the
normaly. If these mysterious blue stones
are really connected to the legend of
the sky turning to stone and raining
down on the earth with the arrival of
the anomaly, what could they
be? Some type of protective covering for
an alien
spacecraft. Pieces of a heat shield
perhaps, like the tiles that covered the
bottom of the space
shuttle. And if so, might further
scientific examination of them support
the idea that the nomaly were actually
extraterrestrial
visitors, perhaps from the Syria star
system. Seattle, Washington, March 6th,
2019.
In search of further evidence that the
nomaly statues may have an
extraterrestrial connection, ancient
astronaut theorist David Childress has
arranged to meet up with sky stone
collector and researcher Jared Collins.
Wow. Jared has in his possession a
number of the mysterious blue stones
that were found near the statues.
Jared has been collecting sky stones
since he first heard about them in
2013. He became fascinated by their
enigmatic nature, betraying neither
obvious mineral nor man-made origin.
So, how was it that these stones were
actually discovered in modern times?
This was actually discovered in 1991 by
a man named David Lebet.
He was in Sierra Leone on a mining
concession looking for golden diamonds.
And when he was having his crew dig,
occasionally these stones would appear.
And interestingly, David went to the
village chief to ask if he'd ever seen
any of these stones before. And the
chief said that when these stones are
found, large amounts of gold and
diamonds usually follow shortly
thereafter.
What do other geologists say about
stones like this? Are they able to
identify them? We've sent these now to
12 different labs. There is not one
piece of consensus in here. Everybody
has a different opinion. We still don't
know actually if these are natural or
man-made. So maybe it's from another
planet. I don't know. I really wish I
did. And I would love a chance to
actually be able to get this in front of
somebody else who could look at it
again. I've got some friends at the
University of Washington and I think we
can set this up and have another test
done. That would be fantastic. I would
love to get some consensus on this to
understand what this actually is.
While tests conducted on the stones
found with anomaly statues have so far
produced conflicting and sometimes even
confounding results, David is eager to
have them tested for himself.
At the University of Washington, David
and Jared meet with renowned geologist,
Professor Peter Ward. Hi, I'm David
Childress. I talked to you on the phone.
It's good to meet you. And this is Jared
Collins. Thank you so much for seeing us
today. Jared, both of you guys, welcome
to the University of Washington ISIL
Lab. So, what do we have in this
beautiful box? Well, we're sort of
hoping that you can tell
us. Well, well, well. What are these
beauties? We have been through many
tests on these and no one can identify
them. They cannot tell us whether these
are natural or artificial. What's
causing the blue color, if this is
ancient or modern? So, they've been
checked for the common blue minerals. I
take it. One thing that we know for sure
is that this is not turquoise. This is
not lapis. This is not aonite. The fact
that it's so unbelievably light really
suggests that there's an organic
component to it. Anything that goes blue
generally is much heavier. So this is
this is really a mystery. I should
mention also that this only comes from
one very specific part from one very
specific village. It has never been
found anywhere else in the world. Well,
let's do a test that removes any doubt
about them being partly
organic. So Aaron is going to take this
rock and she's going to scrape it into
these tiny little tin cups.
The tin cups themselves will load into
our mass spectrograph. They will then be
heated to a th00and° centigrade.
Everything inside will combust and turn
to gas. And those individual gas
molecules will then be sampled and we
can examine if there are any truly
organic molecules in this rock. Was
there some life process that was
involved in its formation?
Will the test performed on the so-called
sky
stones reveal that they contain
previously undiscovered organic
material? Possibly from a different
world. And if so, could it mean that
both the sky stones and the nomaly
statues are evidence of an
extraterrestrial event that occurred on
Earth centuries ago?
Sedona, Arizona. March
2019. 2 weeks after bringing the
so-called sky stones found in Sierra
Leone to the University of Washington
for
examination. David Childress received an
email from geologist Dr. Peter Ward. In
the email, Dr. Ward wrote that the
results were so strange they ran the
tests three times. thinking it was a
machine error and added this gives me
the creeps. To learn more, Childress
contacted Dr. Ward through video chat.
Hi, Dr. Ward. So, I wanted to learn
about the results. Yeah, it was pretty
cool. I mean, it was much stranger than
we thought. There really seems to be
some sort of organic aspect to this.
It's got element nitrogen in it in
really high concentrations. Having this
high amount of nitrogen put it into a
wow that's a very peculiar rock
category. We were looking for a possible
extra terrestrial origin. Is it possibly
a meteorite or even part of a spaceship
that exploded?
Uh let's just say that there's a
possibility that it came from off the
earth. As we scientists say it's worth
more studies. Thanks again for uh doing
these tests and and letting us use your
lab. Yep, no problem. See you later.
Although the sky stones are still a
mystery, David and Jared have confirmed
that they are unlike any other stone
ever
examined. Could they have arrived on
Earth with the strange beings that are
depicted in the nomaly
statues? Is this perhaps physical
evidence that linguistic similarities
found across the globe? Doon
Deeon, Dragon, Dogu point to some sort
of extraterrestrial
intervention. Ancient astronaut
theorists say yes, and they claim that
in yet another earthly location may be
found the most significant evidence of
all. A possible alien home base.
County Me
Ireland. Here in the Boone River Valley,
a large circular mound rises out of the
earth. The New Graange Passage Tomb
built around 3,200
BC. It was constructed with over 200,000
tons of stone quarried 75 m away and
contains one passageway that leads to a
centralized chamber.
New Graange is one of the most important
sites in all of Europe. It was possibly
a stone circle with 36 or 37 stones.
Only 12 of these still remain. And after
that, a huge mound made of stone and
earth was built within the stone circle
itself. Within this, we have a huge
chamber which is a crucifiform shape or
a cross. It's got some beautiful
carvings on the 97 curb stones that go
around the edge, as well as on the main
entrance stone and within the chamber
itself, mainly zigzags and spirals and
most notably a triple spiral at the back
of the main chamber within the actual
site
itself. New Graange was designed to
honor the winter solstice. But according
to a book published in 2012 called the
new graange Sirius mystery, the entire
mount was also built to align with the
star Sirius A in the night sky. The
declination of Sirius is the same as the
winter solstice sunrise moving across
the sky and through the light box which
is a rectangular area just above the
main entrance. This is where you witness
not only the sunlight coming through
also later in the day serious light
coming through as
well. The Doon of Mali in West Africa
claimed that their gods came to Earth
from the star Sirius
B. Ancient astronaut theorists connect
these visitors to gods with similar
names all over the world.
But they also point out an intriguing
connection to New Graange in
Ireland. In addition to being in line
with the star Sirius, legend says that
this megalith was built by a Celtic god
with a name that sounds by now eerily
familiar, the god Dagda. The main god
that's associated with New Graange is
called Dagda. So here once again we have
this same word that appears to mean
something about gods coming from Sirius.
The dwellers of the British Isles
worshiped a god named Dag Da. That
cannot be by coincidence. The god known
as Dagda was said to be the leader of a
group of other worldly beings called the
Tow Danon.
So the trad dinan were this renowned
fairy race that arrived mysteriously in
Ireland many thousands of years ago. The
supreme deity of the twathadan was Dagda
Dagdour and he was a renowned god. He
was said to have built and lived inside
New Graange. They had very advanced
weaponry and uh different types of what
sounds like machinery, but also they
taught the high arts of civilization and
they were said to be almost like the
shining ones of the biblical tradition.
It's almost like a science fiction movie
when you start looking at these ancient
Irish
myths. Could New Granch have once been
an alien outpost on Earth?
was Dagda, the supreme leader of a race
of highly advanced
extraterrestrials that came to Earth and
left a lasting influence on our
ancestors. Perhaps the answer can be
found by examining the dog
star. Across the world, ancient people
claim they were visited by amphibious
beings from Sirius who gave the gift of
knowledge and
technology, the Doon of Mali, Deeon of
the
Babylonians, the Dogu of Japan, Dagda of
Ireland, and the dragon whose name
echoes in languages all over the world.
[Music]
So you have to wonder, is it possible
that all the root words come from the
same
visitors? And my answer to that is a
resounding
yes. But what about the English
language? Is there any connection in
English between the ancient syllable dog
or dag and the star
Sirius? Experts say the answer is hiding
in plain sight.
Sirius is the dog star. Tonight, when
you go outside, look for the three stars
that make up Orion. And Orion's belt has
an arrow that points right to Sirius.
So, you can see Sirius, the dog star,
tonight. And in fact, today, the reason
we talk about the dog days of summer is
that those are the days that Sirius is
overhead.
It's very interesting that these beings
said they came from Sirius, which we
call the dog star. Because when
etmologists try to trace the origins of
the English word dog, it's not
attributable. They can't find the origin
of that
word. The word dog is one of the
strangest in the English language
because no one knows where it came from.
English is mostly derived from German,
Latin and French. The German word for
dog is hund. The Latin word is canis and
the French word is
shien. So where do we get dog?
Is it possible that some being from the
dog star from this system gave that type
of vocabulary of Deeon, Doon, Dogu? And
all these similarities are speaking of
one race that visited ancient
man. And I think in this particular
case, whatever came down here at the
time or what group of extraterrestrials
came down here at the time, they were
referred to as this. And then other
civilizations just carried it and picked
up on it. We have to at least ask the
question, is this in fact the name of
these god beings? And I believe it is.
Is it possible that ancient statues
unearthed in West Africa represent the
opening chapter in the story of
humankind?
Do they depict advanced beings that
traveled to our planet from the Sirius
star system to create the first humans
and ignite civilization on
Earth? And did these extraterrestrials
leave behind evidence of their
visitation for future generations to
find?
Perhaps these clues point not only to
their home planet, but to where we must
travel in order to reunite with our
alien ancestors.