I had been pretending to be happy for a
number of years, but I was not paying
attention to my inner life. I woke up
around midnight. Incredible
was coming out of my chest and it was
white scintillating light and it was
love but also peace and joy. The peace I
[music] have never felt before. And my
consciousness is everywhere. That
conscious was not just in my body. We
are a field. We are not the body. I am a
part [music] whole of one. Only quantum
physics could explain what happened.
&gt;&gt; Physicist Fedrico Fine invented silicon
gate technology and the microprocessor,
the foundational breakthrough now
powering all modern technology. [music]
His remarkable and spontaneous spiritual
experience revealed the true nature of
reality and changed how quantum science
is explaining consciousness and how the
world really works. There is no longer a
boundary between science and
spirituality. Who I am was not at all
what I thought I was. I thought that I
was separate from the world. I was
studying nuclear science, biology,
trying to understand how things [music]
work. I realized that books were talking
about electrical biochemical signals in
the brain [music]
as if that was our conscious experience.
That doesn't make any sense. For me to
know myself, I need to know the others
like myself. That's what cooperation is.
And what is that allows us to cooperate?
Love. Love is the taste of meaning.
&gt;&gt; The next evolution in [music] medicine
would be for all of us to have a better
collective understanding of this oneness
and the deeper reality that
consciousness and free [music] will are
providing. So that even medicine could
be affected by the ways that we approach
the cellular systems.
&gt;&gt; That was the problem that no scientist
had actually solved.
[music]
&gt;&gt; Hi, I'm Balik
&gt;&gt; and I'm Jonathan Cohen
&gt;&gt; and welcome to our breakdown. We've
talked a lot about reality here and
maybe reality is more than we can see.
But today we have the opportunity to
speak to one of the greatest
technologically savvy, intellectually
rigorous physicists who has changed the
way we literally live our lives. Meaning
he created silicon gate technology in
1968. That's what underlies all of
modern computing. Why would we speak to
this man about consciousness and
reality? because he had a remarkable
spontaneous spiritual experience which
allowed him to combine everything he
knew about physics, neuroscience,
biology, and computers to construct a
theory of everything that explains
literally not everything you experience,
not everything you think you know,
everything that subserves everything
that we experience. Fedrico Fagine is an
Italian physicist turned inventor. His
latest book, Irreducible Consciousness,
Life, Computers, and Human Nature, is a
fantastic journey about the oneness and
the totality of our existence, as well
as the significance of consciousness and
free will as fundamental components not
just of our existence, but the existence
of the universe.
&gt;&gt; This is a fascinating conversation. We
touch on health, uh, our internal
experience, the idea that we create our
reality and how to shift it, the nature
of happiness and what will actually
bring us happiness, as well as how the
world can possibly change by better
understanding that we were all
interconnected and a part of the whole.
And if you're watching this episode and
you think there might be something wrong
with your screen because you see smoke
coming out of our ears, that's just our
brains working really hard to grasp and
understand this conversation and the
implications it has for how we view
reality and how we go about loving each
other and loving ourselves and how the
role of love actually can change the
entire world. Without further ado, we
welcome from Italy, Fedrico Fine to the
Breakdown.
&gt;&gt; Break it [singing and music] down.
&gt;&gt; I wonder if you can tell us what is your
mission. What do you think your purpose
is before we get into how you got here?
&gt;&gt; Obviously, my purpose is to do what I
came here to do. [laughter]
And so then the the next question is
what did I do? I think what I'm doing
right now, I think, is my purpose. you
know to have lived many lives in one
life and uh to have reached a level of
understanding that uh without the I'm
I'm I'm speaking about my fourth life
now without the other three lives I
could never have achieved and the other
three lives were quite full [snorts] my
second life my first life of course born
raised you know and educated and first
work experiences in Italy Then I went to
the US. My second life was as an
inventor both technology and products
and then managing uh the R&amp;D of Intel at
one point and then decided to be an
entrepreneur. So I started my own
company, started several companies and
uh uh that developed different aspects
of me. After having done all of that, I
was unhappy. And so I didn't understand
why why should I be unhappy when I have
achieved everything that I could
possibly imagine to be happy and I had
all the reasons to be happy and uh then
I had an extraordinary experience of
consciousness because I wanted to
understand
and that changed my life and so I'm on
my fourth life after this extraordinary
experience and uh I'm really now I know
that I came here to do that and I needed
all the other lives in order to do that.
&gt;&gt; So many people look for happiness in
things and in titles and in accolades
and in careers. Uh what what do you
think was necessary about that journey?
Do we all need to struggle? Like does
everyone have their own personal
struggle and at the end there's a
spiritual awakening waiting? I don't
know uh if that is for everybody but
certainly for me it was I had to go
through
uh many struggles but also I enjoyed
every part of my life so it was it
wasn't like oh my god you know how how
what am I going to do to do now no I
I've always followed my passion uh but I
was expecting though that after having
achieved all all of what I've achieved
you know beautiful family everybody
healthy
you know, a beautiful career, famous,
enough money that I didn't need to work,
you know, all that kind of stuff that
normally live in a beautiful place like
Silicon Valley and on it goes, right? I
wasn't happy and I didn't know why. And
of course, now I can tell you because I
didn't I was believing outside of me
&gt;&gt; and not paying attention to my inner
life and I had completely neglected my
interiority. But it took a while. Then
then I had to go through some struggles
to actually figure out what was going
on. And uh after 20 years of work, I
realized that I actually ended living
many of the traumas when I grew up and
so on. So that uh those were out of the
way. And uh I I achieve a a high level
of you know tranquility if you want just
my mind is is not busy. My mind is uh
you know it's perfectly fine and I don't
I don't have all these jumbles and stuff
that goes on all the time that I had
before. Uh I was restless before. I
didn't know that I was restless but
because I thought that I was doing the
right thing. But now I can tell you I
was I never was where I was. I was
always somewhere else in my mind. I was,
you know, my project what I was going to
do, you know, two weeks from now,
tomorrow,
a year from now and on it goes, right?
So, and now I'm I'm just uh I'm living
my life and I'm living day to day as as
it happens. And but I know that I am I
am living exactly what I need to live
and that change completely my my inner
my interiority is very tranquil serene.
&gt;&gt; A lot of the focus of our podcast and
our interest is the intersection of
science and spirituality. And one of the
reasons we're so eager to talk to you is
because your brain, right, has is
holding so much of what many would deem
the materialist side, right? You have
the ability to be rational. You're an
inventor. I mean, you've changed the
world with the technology that you
created. And also you have access to a
completely other side that many people
consider unable to be reconciled with
this scientific rational side. I I
wonder if you can talk us through what
the actual spiritual experience was that
you had and how your rational mind came
to understand what was transforming
inside of you. I had several many in
fact uh transformative experiences but
the first one was the most important
because it revealed that uh who I am was
not at all what I thought I was. I was I
thought I was separate from the world
and I lived as a separate individual. uh
even if I love many people obviously my
my wife my children but still I'm
separate I don't know if it was end of
December or early January but it was in
the Christmas holidays of 1990
and it was after I had realized that I
had been pretending to be happy for a
number of years uh but I wasn't happy
and I was studying neuroscience at that
time I was doing developing neuronet
networks my company uh was in that
business starting 1986. So I was
studying neuros neuroscience biology. I
was trying to understand how things work
and I realized that uh those books were
talking about uh electrical signals,
biochemical signals in the brain as if
that was our experience.
They were describing in in essence our
conscious experience by electrical
signals and biochemical signal. And so
wait a second that doesn't make any
sense. Yeah. Yes, there is something
going on in the brain and clearly has to
be connected with our experience. But
how can electrical signals in the brain
be the taste of food or the smell of you
know flowers or you know the touch that
I have when I touch something that goes
you know that that is a transformation
has to go from there to the feeling side
because I understand not by seeing
electrical signal I understand by the
sensations and feelings that are that
you know equalia that David Chmer's as
probably know you know later on seven
years later wrote a book uh you know you
know the you know on consciousness he
realized that that was the problem that
no scientist had actually solved and so
I actually discovered that on my own uh
at that time because I was trying to
understand what's going on to understand
how to to make better computers that
learn and so on so forth but I also
realized that that was my problem my
inner problem was about that you know
that I realized that consciousness must
exist somehow but I didn't know what it
was and and conscious was also what made
me suffer and I didn't know that or so I
I had two good reasons to find out
personal reason and of course in
intellectual reason because I wanted to
understand as a physicist I'm I'm always
trying to figure out things um and it
was in that climate that one night I I
woke up around midnight I I I was
thirsty. I went to get a glass of water,
went back to bed, and while I was trying
to get back to sleep, uh, a a beam of
light,
it was a, you know, energy,
incredible energy was coming out of my
chest and it was white scintillating
light and it was love. It was me because
my consciousness was in this energy. I
was also this thing that was coming out
of me. How is that possible? Then this
thing expands or blows up covers all the
space this white light everywhere and my
consciousness is everywhere. So now I'm
observing myself
outside of myself because
I realize that I am that consciousness
but that consciousness was not just in
my body was also outside of me. I want
to hit pause here because most of us do
not go about our lives and all of a
sudden have a beam of light explode from
the center of our chest and ex like go
into the universe. It's not something
normal that we experience.
&gt;&gt; It's not normal. Of course, right?
&gt;&gt; You were not drunk. You were not
sleeping.
&gt;&gt; I didn't drink more than a glass of
water that [laughter]
that night. Everything was fine. I I was
in my best uh form. I was skiing all
days. So I was uh physically very very
active as well. I mean it's you know
this is completely incomprehensible
from any points of view. I never had any
anything like that. I couldn't not even
have imagine possible.
&gt;&gt; My breakdown is supported by incogn.
&gt;&gt; Your personal data is everywhere online
and that makes you an easy target for
scammers. websites legally publish and
profit from your info, your name, home
address, even court records. Once it's
out there, it is fair game for stalkers,
identity thieves, or really anyone with
bad intentions. Last year alone, data
breaches skyrocketed by over 200%. That
means your private details could already
be floating around shady directories, AI
summaries, and people search sites
waiting to be exploited. That's where
Incogn comes in. [music] Incogn hunts
down your exposed personal data, not
just from data brokers, but from across
the entire [music] web. Directories,
search results, company databases, gone.
Their custom removals feature takes it
even further. Just send them a link and
your dedicated privacy expert will
handle the takedown. Whether it's a
random court record or a sketchy people
search profile, they'll make it
disappear. [music]
Reduce your risk of scams and identity
theft. Protect your privacy and reclaim
your online solitude. All in just three
steps. Create your account. Give
one-time authorization and let Incogn do
the rest. Remember, they can't harm you
if [music] they can't find you. Add up
to three emails, addresses, and phone
numbers to uncover even more hidden
profiles. With the unlimited plan, you
can send in any link and watch it
vanish. Plus, it's risk-free. Cancel
anytime or get your money back within 30
days if you're not satisfied. Scammers
are getting smarter, but with Incogn.
They're the only data removal service
independently verified by Deote because
your privacy deserves proof. Take your
personal data back with incogn. Head to
incogn.com/m
and use code mim. m a yim to get 60% off
an annual plan.
&gt;&gt; That's code mim [music] at
incogn.com/mim.
My breakdown is supported by bubs
natural.
&gt;&gt; Getting older hit harder than you
expected. I know it did for us. From
stiff joints in the morning, recovery
from the gym taking longer, hair
thinning, nails breaking, dry skin
that's lost its glow. Aging can really
suck. But it doesn't have to. Luckily,
Bubs Naturals collagen peptides are here
to help you turn back the clock.
Starting in your mid20s, your collagen
production actually starts to naturally
decline. That's where Bubs Naturals
collagen peptides comes in. Bubs helps
restore collagen levels closer to what
your body naturally had in its youth, so
your joints feel stronger, your hair and
nails grow healthier, and your skin
looks smoother. Collagen is the most
abundant protein. It's often referred to
as the glue that's holding us all
together.
&gt;&gt; I want extra glue to hold me together.
That's why I use Bubs and I found a
really big difference. I'm actually very
impressed.
&gt;&gt; You are bouncing back faster after
workouts. It's allowing you to play
more, which is great.
&gt;&gt; I'm actually bouncing specifically. I'm
doing a lot of jump training and it's
helping.
&gt;&gt; A lot more bouncing. No complaining
about joint pain. Bubs is different than
other collagen products with no junk,
zero sugar, sweeteners, or fillers.
They're third party tested and NSF
certified for sport and Whole 30
approved. You know it's clean and
trustworthy. Bubs is sustainably sourced
from grass-fed, pasture-raised cattle
and dissolves seamlessly in coffee,
water, or smoothies without taste or
clumps. They have over 100,000 happy
customers and were voted 2024's best
collagen by health.com. Bubs Naturals
also sells electrolyte supplements, MCT
oil creamer, and more. Live better
longer for a limited time only. Our
listeners are getting 20% off at Bubs
Naturals by using code break at
checkout. Just head to bubsnaturals.com.
Use code break and you're all set. After
your purchase, they're going to say,
"Where'd you hear about [music] us?
Please support our show. Tell them we
sent you."
Besides [music] the feeling of love,
were you able to kind of step outside of
the experience and say, "What is going
on?" Or were you so immersed in the
experience that you didn't have that
perspective?
&gt;&gt; I was the experience. While the
experience was going on, I was the
experience clearly, right? While this
was going on this light was everywhere
scintillating a thought forms in my mind
and the thought is wow this is this
stuff of which everything is made and by
that those were mental words but before
the mental words there was a thought and
for the first time there was a thought
that was before it became words this I
realized later but when I was doing It
it was like I was stunned because there
was a thought and then there were words
&gt;&gt; you know where normally I before I was
always thinking in words. So the you
know there were never thoughts that were
without words
and in fact it was only only with a lot
of work that I did later that I could
that I could separate the thought before
is verbalized is raifi in our in our
mind it is which is how it must be in
consciousness before it is transformed
into words mental words and then the
thought that we normally think is the
thought which is already mental. It took
me years to to actually you know
meditation so on and then realizing what
what I was doing. So and now moving back
many years forward but but back at this
point I realized that there was a
distinction there was a distinction
between this flash of inside and then
the words I say
this is what everything is made of also
at that time my the feeling with that
energy was not only love but also peace
and joy they were mixed they were not
separable But the peace I have never
never felt before. Peace was a new a new
idea for me. Peace was I am that my
restlessness
was no longer there in that experience.
You know I because my restlessness was
the fact that I was never where I was.
But now in this experience I am that
this stuff is me because my my my self
the sense of self my consciousness was
out there. So I was both the observer
and the observed. That's another
complete change of perspective. As I was
telling you before I I thought that I
was separate from the world. Now these
experiences I am the world observing
myself. big change of perspective. I am
a part whole of one.
I I have because I have the same
character of one. I have the same
potentiality of one. But I'm I'm also a
part of one. Just like a cell in our
body is a part all of the body because
it has the genome of the entire body.
Every cell contains the genome of the
whole organism of one of the one
organism. This case we are we are a part
of the universe which you know we are a
field we are not the body. So clearly
you know the idea that I am before my
consciousness the sense of myself was
only in my head. I was not even in my
body. It was in my head. And now with
this experience is everywhere. Not only
in my body, but also outside of my body.
I mean that's a that's a change like
this to this, right?
Complete reversal of perspective that I
had before. And uh the other thing is
that my body was vibrating
you know and it was hot. So so every
aspect of me was in the was living this
experience. This was a lived experience.
It was is a lived way to know is you you
know because you experience all those
things I can say now but they were
implicit in that experience but it took
years to unroll in a way that experience
which probably lasted a minute maybe two
but no more. So this was a just like a
you know unbelievable
flash but it changed my life because
[clears throat] he told me that what I
thought I was was not what I was because
the the sense of truth of that
experience was so strong that I could
not compare to anything that had
happened in my life before that was as
true as powerful
consciousness is the one that allows you
to know that is it is this Is is this an
imagination? Is this a you know a uh
fantasy or you know conscious can
actually tell you if that is true or not
or close to the truth than than any
other thing. All of us have one day or
another had a dream that was so vivid
that you thought you you were the dream
right you and you were you truly existed
in that dream. I had many dreams before
of that with that nature but even more
later after this experience but uh you
know where basically you wake up and for
a second you thought you were actually
you know this reality is it was a dream
not the other one
but this one was even stronger than that
and that's why it had the power to
transform it transformed my life
otherwise how could he have the power to
transform my life I would have doubted
my own, you know, my own experience,
right? I would have said, well, maybe I
better I better I better go see a
psychiatrist here. See what he tells me,
right? So, he tells me what I feel.
Well, you know, we should be able to
know what we feel ourselves.
&gt;&gt; There's a few points here in your story
that stand out for me. One is we hear a
lot of people who have a drastic
spiritual awakening which is it sounds
like this was for you where they
question it right they wonder am I going
crazy am I making it up what did I feel
or not and the difference between an
imagination and a fully embodied
experience is the vibrating of the body
the fact that it was fully immersive and
that you are not just imagining
something in a waking state or an
imaginative state. You're not
daydreaming. You're having a full
visceral experience that is
exceptionally powerful. Everything was
going with it. You know, it was there
was a unity in the experience. A unity
in the experience. I am inside, outside
and body, mind and spirit. The other
thing that's fascinating and describes a
lot of what is common in a way when you
have a spiritual experience is realizing
that thoughts exist before we're able to
translate them. That information and
ideas exist in this collective field
that we're going to get into. And we
want the scientific explanation of how
you think that exists. But that the
universe, the world that we live in is
made up of all of this information. And
simply our brains are the interpreters
and the translators of that information
into a language so that things can for
lack of a better word exist all around
us and yet they just can appear and we
have to figure out what does that mean?
How do we communicate them? How do we
translate that into something that's
sharable?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, in the way I say it these
days is that meaning comes first. In
other words, meaning comes before
symbols.
The symbols are invented in order to
carry meaning. But if there is no
meaning, there shouldn't be any symbols
because the meaning comes first. Come
and before symbols. In science, symbols
have no meaning.
The information is only the probability
the symbols appear or not. That's it.
Has no meaning to the symbols. That's
it. You know now I can say it clearly at
that time it was you know it was it was
inherent in the experience but you know
to unpack that experience it took me
years right
but also also years to get to the source
of understanding.
Now my theory actually can explain what
happened. But before it was this is the
opposite of what scientism has been
telling me.
Not science with a capital S, but
scientism, the ideas that we have about
the world.
&gt;&gt; What was it like for you after that
minute, the next day remembering that
you had this experience? Were you able
to go back to that state or was it
something like a reminder that wait, was
it something in your in your memory that
you were like, "Wait a second, that
existed so like I have to unpack it and
understand it." How did it change your
life in like the day the week after?
&gt;&gt; Basically, it was very clear that there
was a message from a deeper part of
reality which I couldn't couldn't know
but that that message had to be
followed. I I it was very clear that and
it was some was a personal message
almost nia would say my high self
opening up the kimono and saying look
man this is what's real
then you know figure it out
&gt;&gt; so you were set out on a journey in that
moment afterwards
&gt;&gt; absolutely I was set out on a journey
they started immediately you know within
days I mean after I came back and you
know obviously you know I was running a
company so on but I the it was probably
two weeks before later on that I found a
person to go and be begin the process
and that that was the you know process
that lasted about 20 years that allow me
to arrive at the conclusion that
consciousnesses and free will must go
hand in hand and they must be
fundamental they cannot be explained in
any other ways when I got to that point
I said Now my next step is to join
science and spirituality figure out a
way to combine because it was clear that
only quantum physics could explain if
any what what happened but now actually
you know I have arrived to the point
where I said we have to start there and
the fact that we are conscious and have
free will can explain why the world has
to manifest itself as quantum physics
you see the is a complete reversal again
the for many years I was trying to
explain conscious and free will quantum
physics as this quantum physics was more
fundamental than conscious and free will
now say no conscience and free will are
the fundamental ontology
and quantum physics is the way the
manifestation of that ontology that then
begets certain mathematical property
properties which are really maps of a
territory. But the territory is
consciousness and free will. These
fields that have this property, they
communicate with each other. Entities,
but they're not entities in space and
time. They're entities in a deeper
reality that control bodies which are in
what we collectively call spaceime,
which is a constructure that we made
because we have similar bodies, similar
ways of thinking, similar culture and so
on. But but the deeper reality is a
reality that has entities that want to
know themselves. And through those
entities knowing themselves, one the
totality of what exists knows itself.
&gt;&gt; Well, yeah. And and in in irreducible,
you kind of take us through all of these
paths.
&gt;&gt; Yes. But the new book actually goes the
next step which is because that book
still wanted to explain consciousness
and free will with
mathematics with quantum physics and
then it was only writing my third book
that I realized one day I said oh I'm
stupid yeah this is yeah I to you know I
to turn it around we have to I cannot
explain conscious and you know we have
to start there that's ontology
And then the the math is which is
quantum physics is really math. The the
only ontology of quantum physics is the
quantum fields are ontological. That's
it. And you start there with quantum
physics. You start with the quantum
fields and the ontology is there but
that ontology does not contain
consciousnesses and free will. So so you
only describe the outer aspect of
beyond.
&gt;&gt; This level of depth though I think is
one that we want to spend a little bit
of time in. So consciousness you say is
the ability to experience qualia right
to experience the the qualities of the
things that we kind of identify and
experience and to know the meaning of
the experience.
&gt;&gt; That's exactly right. That's the deeper
thing of qualia. Qualia are just just
like symbols are bringers of experience.
Qualia qualia are the bringers of
meaning of the experience and that's a
deeper aspect. So there's things that we
experience, then there's the meaning
that we draw from them. But what we're
now talking about is what does it mean
to say that the universe was alive and
conscious from its outset? Because this
is something that you talk about that
consciousness is a quantum property of a
field and not the property of the states
of the field. Can you explain kind of
how this works into our understanding of
the difference between meaning and sort
of a larger oneness of meaning?
&gt;&gt; First of all, there is one, right? One
is the totality of what exists and one
uh described by quantum physics as two
fundamental properties is dynamic
meaning is never the same, keeps on
changing, never the same but we all
experience that. And second is holistic.
That took a that took a while because
ism comes from a property called
entanglement that exists only in quantum
physics. Particles when particles
interact they they get into common joint
states that information that is created
in that interaction independent of
distance afterwards. And that is you
know nobody can explain how that can
happen.
But what it means is that everything is
interconnected. The universe is not made
of separable parts. Not only that, but
the particles what we imagine we have
imagined as little ball.
You know you when you measure them, you
measure in one point you think is a
point particle. They are states of
fields. They're not separable from the
field. They're states of the field like
waves of a sea. The wave of the sea are
states of the sea. But if we don't see
the sea, we only see the wave. We think
that the wave is separate from the sea.
That's a little bit to understand what
you know what what we thought about an
electron. An electron is a wave in the
sea which is the field of electrons.
Only when it is an excited state of the
field because it can exist that electron
can exist as an nonexited state of the
field and it still exists but we don't
is inside is inside the water. We don't
know we cannot we cannot tell anything
about it.
[music]
&gt;&gt; Lion Alex breakdown is supported by
Symbiotica.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Wow, it seems like all I hear about
right now, including me, is people
struggling with stress, with sleep, with
focus. Symbiotica's here to the rescue
with high quality supplements that you
can trust and your body can absorb. We
love their magnesium L3N8 reduces brain
fog, calms and balances mood, and helps
support a restful sleep. Also,
liposomaal delivery actually makes
[music] a difference. It does mean
faster nutrient absorption, and its
patented compound can effectively cross
the bloodb brain barrier. And the yummy
vanilla cream flavor is delicious. It's
completely stress-free also to
incorporate Symbiotica into your life.
Vacations, road trips, doesn't matter.
The little packets fit right into your
bag whenever you need support. Stay
consistent this fall with Symbiotica.
Feeling off lately? Give it a try. It
actually made a huge difference for us.
Go to symbiotica.com/break
for 20% off plus free shipping.
&gt;&gt; That's symbiotica.com/break
for 20% off plus free shipping. My
breakdown is supported by Blissey. You
know, I did not know, my dermatologist
mentioned this, that traditional cotton
pillowcases can actually cause hair
damage, skin breakouts. It makes sense,
but now you can rest easily, literally,
with Blissey, just like me. Their
pillowcases and hair accessories are
better than satin, which is actually
made from synthetics, can be rough on
hair and skin. It's cheap for a reason.
Blissy's pillowcases were voted best
gift of the year of 2024. Hint hint, for
this gift giving season. Their
pillowcases give you healthier skin and
hair in weeks. Reduce fine lines and
wrinkles. Eliminate frizz, protecting
color treated hair in particular, even
preserving that hairstyle that you
managed to nail this morning. Bliss's
dermatologist tested and recommended.
It's clinically proven to not clog pores
unlike cotton, and has naturally
hydrating silk fibers, keeping skin
moisturized all night. They're also, get
this, antibacterial and hypoallergenic.
And easy to care for. They're machine
washable. They've got over 99 colors.
How's that even possible? including a
new Wicked and Harry Potter line. And
they're also available at Target. It's a
good thing. You haven't seen me post a
messy bed head in a while. Very hard to
do with Blissey. They're naturally
cooling. They're naturally breathable. A
lot of times I wake up and I'm all
sweaty and that contributes [music] to
the badness. Not anymore. Because you're
a listener, Blissey is offering 60
nights risk-f free, plus an additional
30% off when you shop at
blissy.com/breakpod.
That's blisssy.com/breakpod.
Use the code breakpod to get an
additional 30% off.
&gt;&gt; Your skin and hair will thank you.
[music]
&gt;&gt; The reality is just not even close to
the reality that is revealed to us in in
the physical you know space and time
where there are microscopic objects and
the microscopic object are separate from
each other and so and also the the world
of computers. the world on the computer
the the bit of the computer is separate
from the other bit. There is nothing the
bits don't have anything in common with
the other bits.
Okay. So we create numbers with those
bits but those each bit is independent
and has to have only two states zero or
one. So we use physics to create this
logical thing that we have invented
because we have invented the bits. The
bits are not in the computer. You open
up the computer and say do you see bits
moving around and there are no bits
moving around. There are signals moving
around but those signals are structured
in such a way that they carry
distinguishable states that you then can
use to do whatever we do with the
computers. But those states are not the
same states like this like an electron
is to the field. Those bits are our
creation that is imposed on matter and
it works until matter is deterministic
behaves with in predictable ways. If you
raise the temperature of the computer
too much the computer stops working
because the that distinction that we
have put into matter can no longer be
you know can no longer be maintained. So
is an our construction is a construction
of consciousness. is not a construction
in the computer. The computer doesn't
know anything about bits. You you you
see the the subtlety here because we we
think that reality is made in a certain
way but in fact we are imposing a
certain certain type of distinction that
we are there are mental distinctions and
conscious distinctions that then we
attribute to reality. Probabilities for
example can only happen
if you are conscious because only a
conscious being wants to predict what
what will happen in the future
especially in a reality like the
classical reality which is
deterministic. In a deterministic
reality there are no probabilities.
There are only certainties. The
probability are a lack of knowing about
something that if we knew we could we
could predict the future and therefore
there would be no probability. It would
predict exactly what will happen. So
probabilities already include quant
include the existence of consciousness
in the definition. Quantum physics is
all about probabilities. It's not about
physical variables. It's all about
probability. when you talk about reality
and obviously this is a concept you can
talk about conceptually but I'd like you
as a physicist to explain to us what you
mean when you say reality is not what we
think it is and you can go as micro or
as macro as you'd like and I think the
beauty of what you talk about is that it
includes the micro in the macro and the
macro in the micro
&gt;&gt; the the fundamental reality is the
reality ity of our inner experience. And
yet that inner experience is not
separate from the material or the mental
aspect. That inner experience is part of
the what we call spirit, the spiritual
reality. In reality, there are three
aspects of reality which are
intertwined. They cannot be separated.
the material which is the body, the the
mental which is actually the prediction
of what might happen in the future.
That's what actually quantum physics
does. It gives you probabilities.
But then is this the spiritual nature
that has the experience of that reality
and also the free will decisions that by
knowing the probabilities
they pick whatever they want with free
will.
So we construct the future by the
collective decisions that we that we
fields not we bodies we fields
make. In other words the deeper reality
is the reality of meaning and
experience.
That's the deep and free will and the
self- knowing that we get out of it and
the love the aspect in which all those
three aspects are superimposed. They
they exist in together. The body is like
red. The mind is like you know blue
green green and the and the spirit is
like blue right? When they combine
together they create white the white
light right. So the three together but
where you have red and green that
superposition is quantum and classical a
type of information which is the one
that would describe living systems. A
cell works with the principles of
quantum physics and classical physics.
Computer works with only the principle
of classical physics. That's the body.
The center of the body is that type. The
center of the quantum reality is
actually the quantum state which
actually allow you to predict
possibilities in the future which then
the spirit decides. And the spirit the
the center of the spirit is the meaning
of the information where the where the
mind and the spirit overlap there is
valia the experience
and that experience can be described
with the quantum state of a field but
that description is not a description of
the experience is only is only a a a
map. The territory is the experience.
The map is just a quantum quantum state
which is a vector in Hilbur space blah
blah blah blah blah but that that is a
map
&gt;&gt; right and our limitation is that we
identif our ego we identify with our
body. So the reality that we have and
that we construct the world with is well
I see this I touch that this is my job
this is my political party this is the
color of my skin this is my religion
this is reality this is who I am but
what you have said is that that way of
thinking and that overidentification of
the ego with basically our sensory
system right you said that it can lead
us to censor the parts of oursel that
actually give us the true reality
of what we can perceive from the body,
the mind and and the spirit. Is this the
seity which is spelled like deity but it
has an s.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The say the sity is this field
with these properties you see. So
consciousness cannot be seen as a as an
entity. conscious is a property of a
sati
and sati I use the word sati because
because
the quantum field which is the the the
quantum aspect of that reality is only a
portion of that reality which is the
only portion that physics recognize
which then is describing quantum states
with all the equations and blah blah
blah but that portion the has eliminated
the deeper aspects which are which are
the you know the the the body and the
and most important the spiritual aspect
which are the fact that we have
experience and the fact that from the
experience we get meaning we get self-
knowing the meaning is the essence of
the self- knowing
&gt;&gt; one of the most practical applications
of your spiritual experience and this
really approach to understanding reality
is you talk about how The destruction of
the environment is one example of us not
being in alignment with how the sum of
the parts, right, are bigger than the
whole. That the notion of a continuous
cooperation as a species is actually
consistent. And obviously there's so
many the politicization of climate
change is a ridiculous conversation that
we don't need to get into, but the
notion of what does it mean not just to
be in alignment with yourself, which
we're very good at in capitalist western
societies, but what does it mean to be
in alignment with not only those around
us, but with the species as a whole? Can
you talk about how this understanding I
I mean the I literally quoted this. You
said that when our rationality is
uniquely informed by the principles of
materialism, reductionism and survival
of the fittest, it can only lead to an
unbridled competition, racism, and war.
So you talk about this kind of
competition and racism, war, and the
environment as consequences of what
happens as a species when we are not
aligned with true reality.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But because the true reality
starts with what is the purpose of one.
Now of course you can say what what who
can tell the purpose of one? Of course I
cannot tell the purpose of one. But by
looking at the deepest aspect of
ourselves we can infer that one wants to
do exactly what we want which is to know
itself. We want to know who we are. We
are here. I mean the deepest aspects of
of human beings is we want to understand
who we are knowing yourself you know is
in you know temple of Apollo you know in
Delelfi you know [laughter]
you know is is in in the history of of
humanity but even even before you know
the vas talk about this same principle.
So I start with that principle. I start
one the totality of what exist is
dynamic holistic and before I didn't
finish and I put one/ird
condition on one. One wants to know
itself. So the wanting to know itself
the wanting is what then reflects into
our will our free will because we also
want to know ourselves and but we have
to have the will to do that and the
capacity to do that. And to to know
itself one must be conscious. So
conscious is a necessity of the
fundamental principle which I consider a
postulate. You know you have to believe
it or not but because you cannot prove
it but then from there you you can see
that quantum physics emerges naturally
from those properties. That's a really
important point that so many of us think
of quantum physics and all of these like
subjects that that not everybody
understands as something outside of us
when the fact is it's just the attempt
to articulate a deeper reality that the
mystics have known for thousands of
years. You experienced at midnight
outside of Lake Tahoe which no one knows
why. But I think that that is the thing
that also people who have psychedelic or
transcendental experiences, they
describe a very very similar explanation
of our purpose here. People who have
near-death experiences who leave this
realm and have experiences of
consciousness that also include 360°ree
vision, which isn't even a thing unless
you remove your consciousness from the
body that it's in. So the fact that
we're seeing all of these things align,
you give it such validity because you
are a man of science. You are a person
who has invented the things that
structure the way we understand a
biologically mechanical world. And yet
you have this insight to be able to say,
guess what? There's something that you
can't even see or touch. You can feel
it, but not with your senses. It's
something deeper that very few will
touch. But our purpose here is to keep
looking for it.
&gt;&gt; Science is about knowing, right? So you
know why so important science? Because
it is you know it is knowing outside
what is outside. But but science today
has forgotten there is also an
interiority. There is an inside. And in
fact scientism
erase the inside. There is nothing
there. We are only a machine. Right? If
we are just a machine, there is only
outside. There is nothing inside. That
is the fundamental problem. But if you
start with one dynamicist, it wants to
know itself. And when one knows itself,
it creates a field. It creates what he
knows. Because knowing and you know and
existing are two word for the same
thing.
When one knows itself, it bring into
existence what it knows. And so knowing
is existence
ontology is in the knowing in the
meaning in the interiority. That's the
point. And then we fields you know then
there are fields fields of fields blah
blah blah you know is a complicated
world but the point is that for me to
know myself I need to know the others
like myself.
That's what cooperation is. I cannot
know the others like myself if I don't
cooperate. And what is that allows us to
cooperate? Love. Love. And what is love?
Love is the taste of meaning.
Love from the inside is the taste of
meaning. The more meaning, the more
taste. The 10,000 more powerful love
that I ever tasted was the the meaning
of me experiencing Tahoe. That was me.
My meaning. Incredible love. That's me.
&gt;&gt; You sound like a dead head. You sound
like someone who wants to travel the
world just spreading love and good
times. [laughter]
&gt;&gt; But the point, but from the outside,
what is love from the outside? From the
outside, love is a force. A force that
brings into resonance the interiorities
of our fields. That's is not classical
resonance. is not pendulums that
oscillate in synchrony. It is the inner
state which is the meaning that meaning
becomes the same meaning and it is love
that brings the meaning to be the same
in the various fields as a force. What
is the equivalent from the seen by the
physicist? I don't know. But I suspect
possibility
gravitational force. Why? Because the
gravitational force is the only
universal force and is only attractive
is only attractive and it is the
smallest force.
But that smallest force can create stars
out of which we create the nucleons
which cannot be created into in any
other way.
&gt;&gt; You talk about this rationality inspired
by heart. You know, you talk about this
incredible heart opening and I can't
help but think of the ways that we
describe love in human terms, right?
That we feel like we're going to like
float away and you have to bring
yourself back to earth when you're in
love, right? You're floating. Your head
is in the clouds. And it's so
interesting that we're talking about
gravity being this grounding this
grounding universal quantum force that
is saying there is a a way to come back
to a source which I would hold is this
this oneness that we're talking about. I
also love that you say that quantum
physics actually doesn't describe an
outer reality. It's describing the inner
reality. And again, most of us would
think I'm not a physicist. I don't know
what he's talking about. But the fact is
we have had to create words and and you
talk about this and this is, you know,
what I love about this book before we
get to your uh your next book is you
take us from literally the beginning of
evolution, the evolution of the universe
and also the evolution of us.
&gt;&gt; Where is life? Life for scientism starts
with a living cell which nobody knows
how it could possibly be made by random
variation in selection because there is
no selection yet. But never mind that.
But the point is that you start with
cells. No, life is the first act of love
of one that wants to know itself and
creates fields. Those fields are parts
whole of one. Those fields are parts
whole of one. That feels since one is
holistic. He cannot create part of
itself. He must create a totality of
itself but with a point of view with a
the way which he know he knew itself
when he created that field that self-
knowing that is the identity that is the
identity of the field and that remains
for the for forever in that field. And
so what you describe is if you go from
however we got that first single-sellled
organism, if you go from that like we
had to come from somewhere meaning there
was a mother of a mother of a mother,
right? You can keep tracing it back and
at a certain point your brain starts to
bend which is why in certain religious
traditions you don't get to study these
things unless you have a certain level
of intellectual sophistication because
it will make you go crazy. Right? But at
some point we got to the humans that we
are. But you talk about the evolution of
language. What was language? It was the
decision by a group of some species to
say we have more to communicate and we
need more ways to do it. But it's
completely arbitrary. And for those of
us who speak more than one language, we
know that it's an arbitrary collection
of sounds and phonemes and gestures that
we say we're just trying to describe
meaning. And ultimately the thing that
we have to get to is how do you
perpetuate the species, right? And for
homo sapiens, we get to insert love into
that perpetuation of species. Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But but you know in this view we
created the first selves. We fields
created different selves to have an
experience collectively in this reality
that we are creating. So they they don't
come from variations in selection
randomness. There is no randomness.
Randomness is only ignorance. That's it.
[laughter] Only ignorance. But and also
the languages. Why do we need languages?
Because we want to communicate the
meaning that we find. But the meaning is
endogenous. It comes from within. It
doesn't come from without it. It then it
creates symbols which are structures
outside in in space and time. Those are
structure that we create to manifest the
meaning that we have inside. But the
creativity is within this in the
spiritual part. It's not in the body and
not even in the mind. The mind creates
the mind does computation about what we
have learned. And so it makes prediction
but the predictions are not reality.
Predictions are probabilities. The
reality is created by our choices as
spiritual beings. They choose to go to
manifest this thing or or something
else. So that is that is very again very
different than the way we imagine
things. What we imagine things is that
you know there is you know there is
there are laws and therefore the laws
govern the world but the laws are the
byproduct.
The laws are the ex the law simply are
saying that there is coherence within
one and that coherence requires certain
certain laws certain coherences that are
reflected to the mathematical laws but
the mathematical law don't dictate what
has to happen.
Coming from an entrepreneurial
background, being in business, business
being a winner take all attitude whereby
you have to corner markets and get as
much market share as possible, get ahead
of your competition. Where does love fit
in to a notion of a new version of
capitalism?
Once we start to accept that cooperation
is the only game in town as opposed to
competition, we had to rethink
everything that we do because we start
from from kids we start to compete. We
are told to compete. I mean the the
educational even in the family we are
sort of you know without even knowing
we're sort of set one against the other
sometimes right and and and then you
know a schools you know business
everything is about competition and and
of course competition leads to war and
you know god knows how many wars we have
lived through you know in our many
lives. We basically have to change the
entire structure of how we interact with
each other. So I I I'm not there yet.
Meaning uh you know I know that that has
to to occur. We has to figure out how to
do this. But you know before we can do
that people have to understand that
they're no longer bodies because if they
think that they are bodies automatically
you go into the survival of the fittest
you know and and and then we have to
have an experience that you are not the
body you know exactly like I had and
everybody can do that the point is that
the difference is that you know you know
I don't set myself as a as a special guy
that you know you have to you have to
believe me. No, no, no, no, no. You
know, everyone of everyone has to
experience its own connection with one.
Without that experience, we will not
believe because the weight of you know
our experience that we think that what
you know this physical reality is the
only reality so powerful that unless you
have a even more powerful experience
that tells you that that's not so you're
not going to change. You're not going to
not giving it a chance. given a chance.
&gt;&gt; You won't even be able to think about
the new paradigm without the embodied
experience of realizing there's another
way of being.
&gt;&gt; This is where people see the divide that
there are those of us that are going to
compete and get ahead and they're going
to trample on all of the working class
and all those other people and they're
going to be having their yachts and all
the other things that rich people do.
Um, and then there's the spiritual
people who are going to be ridiculed,
right, for believing that there's more
than just what we see and what we
experience. And there's this sort of
divide.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But also these spiritual people
are not, you know, they they they live
in their own world. And so they, you
know, they, you know, they they're kind
of say, well, this stuff is not real.
No, the reality is body, mind, and
spirit. Everything has to work together.
And so both had to make a move toward
joining together. Unfortunately they
they stay separate like a two you know
like quantum physics and general
relativity they don't want to come
together you know in some ways but
because everybody wants its own way but
no we have to cross that divide we have
to merge merge is there I word fuse them
there is no longer a boundary between
science and spirituality what science
has that spirituality doesn't have much
of is rationality and the principles of
experiments prove whatever theory you
have because physics
lives and dies on experiments. If you
may have the most beautiful theory but
if the theory makes a prediction that
doesn't happen the theory has to be
scrapped. So the experiment is more
fundamental
in in science than the theory. In in in
spirituality,
you know, it has to be the same. We have
to reach similar states and we have to
be able to talk about it and we have to
be able to see that they are as you know
they're no longer objective like the
outer reality but they are they are
subjective but this subjectivity
overlaps enough to be able to say yeah
we're talking about the same thing but
it is it comes from experience inner
experience instead of outer experience
that's what that's where the the joining
can come and that's why spirit
Spirituality has to be the right word
not religion because there are 200
religions in the world. They better they
better combine themselves first right
they cannot even agree with themselves.
How can we how can we create science and
religion religion? I mean you have to
have 200 science and religions then
because all the religions are different.
So but there is only one physics in the
world. So at least physics has already
arrived to a level of unity because
every everybody agrees because of the
principles of physics are very clear.
You know you have a theory theory makes
prediction and you make an experiment.
If the experiment you know says a theory
is right well even if the theory says
something that appears crazy
reality is that crazy. That's exactly
what has happened in the last 100 years
because quantum physics makes
predictions that nobody thought there
was could exist that kind of reality.
Now we know that there is a reality much
much more much much more different than
what we thought.
&gt;&gt; You you've talked a lot and and your
book includes so much about the
differences between computers and humans
and the differences between biological
systems and those that are let's say
being utilized for artificial
intelligence. And what you talk about is
some of the beauty that every
interaction that cells have is so much
more than the sum of its parts. You talk
about homeostasis. You talk about
metabolic processes. And it's not enough
to say, "Oh, cells are more than the sum
of their parts." You're talking about,
and again, you can think about this on a
human level. It's not just the
individuals that are more than the sum
of their parts. It's the interactions,
the processes that occur when these
units interact is so much more than you
could even imagine in the greatest
fantasy. So can you talk about the cell
being this microscopic, you know,
beautiful quantum classical system, but
the human being this macroscopic one and
what that means practically for us?
Basically, you know, if you look at the
organization of the body, uh the the
organization of our body is we are 30 to
50 trillion cells and each cells as I
mentioned even earlier is a part of the
entire organism because they all came
out of a single cell and each cell or
these 30 plus trillion that we have has
the same genome. So he has the same
fundamental capacity to express as the
original
cell that created the entire organism.
That's a that's amazing. I mean right
now there are you know in in in quantum
biology and also in advanced biology
there are people that can reverse you
know a cell that that is specialized can
become can be be made to be a a a stem
cell which is a you know a a like a plan
potentiary cell that that can create any
other cell you know revert in a sense
you know to become closer to the
original cell that created the entire
organism. Can you do that with a
computer? Is a computer organized the
same way? Not even close. Not even
close. A computer is made of switches.
On, off, on, off, on, off. That's it. At
the best, the computer can know its own
state, which is I'm open or I'm closed.
That's it. There is nothing else for the
computer. A cell has the potential to
understand the other cells because they
have the same making. You can explain
the operation like a machine by you know
by deterministic things. But in a in in
living system the the cells make
decisions which are you know highly
probabilistic and you can only predict
probability because the cells are
quantum and classical system. Each cell
doesn't work with the principle of class
of classical physics. They work with the
principle of quantum physics primarily
and then certain processes are closer to
classical and other are purely quantum
and we do not understand how one how a a
cell works as a as anformational system
that's why in my book I speak about live
information which is a different type of
information between quantum information
and classical information
that information can explain will in the
future be able to explain how living
cells are informationational systems not
biochemical systems. We have studied
cells as if they were biochemistry.
No, not even close. You know, we can
only explain a tiny bit. But cells are
connected directly. All our cells are
connected with the field that we are. So
when when our the field that we are
communicate with the body it doesn't
communicate with with you know you know
with a piece of the system it
communicates in parallel with with with
the entire body. So so the the
potentiality to selfhealing for example
by people that are developed spiritually
are enormous. It's but we have to start
by changing the idea of who we are. If
we if we think that we are the body you
know there is you know the only
intervention has to come from the
outside but but you know we are our the
field that we are can affect the body in
ways that we have still to find out. So
if we approach the cell and the
biological systems as not just
biochemical processes and those that
obey the laws of classical physics
&gt;&gt; as informationational systems,
&gt;&gt; right? If they areformational systems,
this would be support for the notion
that Bruce Lipton talks about that the
cell is operating as a microcosm of the
entire organism.
&gt;&gt; You know, we're talking about
icons where the part is like the whole.
So changing the environment of the cell
as it were creating more positivity
whatever that looks like on a cellular
level is what has the potential you're
saying to then heal the body in ways
that let's say western medicine may not
be able to touch. And right now we have
to do it from the outside because we
don't know how we don't have developed
enough of our own you know our our own
soul if you want to call it that way but
our own spiritual aspects. So the next
sort of evolution in medicine would be
for all of us to have a better
collective understanding of this sort of
oneness and the deeper reality that that
consciousness and free will are
providing so that even medicine could be
affected by the ways that we approach
the cellular systems. It's fascinating.
&gt;&gt; That's right. And the way that you
approach the cellular system is you
start with love again because you know
and and the medicine that we practice
today moves away from love because it's
all about machines. We are you know we
are repairing a machine and that's it
you know and the the the doctor that
looks at the computer doesn't even look
at you and you know ask question and it
print you know types on the computer.
This is why people are going to energy
workers and healers which some of them
are legitimate and some of them are not.
But the notion that there is a spiritual
solution to what is going on that is
presenting itself as a biological one
&gt;&gt; and sometimes it works in ways that
appear to be miracles and they're not
miracles because it shows that there is
something that can come from the inside
out not only from the outside in. And
beside when I say outside in, I I you
know is the in is a different one
because when I say from the outside in,
there is nothing in other than organs
which is still outside. This part of the
outside in in this in my in my meaning
because the inside is not in the body.
The inside is the inner reality of
meaning of qualia and meaning that's not
in the body is in a field that controls
the body. Okay. So unfortunately the
words can can deceive us.
&gt;&gt; We hear a lot from people who listen who
are trying to understand this, right?
They're trying to change their life.
They may be suffering in this moment.
What I'm hearing and what I believe to
be true is that the first step to
accessing a spiritual awakening to
accessing the the ability to start to
heal oneself through adjusting the field
is to start to change the mindset. first
to believe it is possible and second to
start to understand the mechanism that
we're actually changing something. When
we start to invoke love, when we start
to meditate, when we start to have a
belief that something is possible, we're
not just wishful thinking. We're
actually changing the frequency that is
everything that surrounds us, which then
impacts the cell. In in my experience,
the first step is to take responsibility
for what happens in your life. Okay? And
that's the lesson that I learned by
being CEO of a company in fact of more
than one company where the good and the
bad that happens in the company in one
way or another I had a lot to do my by
doing something or even more by not
doing something when I should have done
something. That is a that is an idea
that in the beginning was hard to grasp
because it is mostly by not doing what
you what you should be doing that you
attract to yourself
suffering and whatever. Okay, for
example, it was not taking care of
myself for example my inner reality that
I became very this estrange for myself
and I was unhappy with my life. Okay,
for example, it was not because I did
something wrong. It's because I didn't
do what I was supposed to do.
And so, so it is very important to take
that responsibility and it was exactly
because I have to taken responsibility
on my life that when I was suffering, I
say somehow I created that for myself. I
didn't look outside somebody to blame
for my state, but I say what did I do? I
want to know what did I do to create
this to myself. Who am I? Why is that?
Why is that worrying? Why is that going
on with that sense with that sense of
responsibility? This is my life. I am in
charge of my life. That very important
because if you don't go there, you will
always find outside the problems that
affects you. They always come from the
outside. That's why you go to the side
to find the cure. But once you know that
what you know your happiness or not
depends on you from your interiority
from your conscious self to your inner
experience the meaning the love that you
have within for yourself from others
that stuff then then you can find the
solution. But if you don't if you you
had to reach there first otherwise you
will always look at some kind of magic
inside or outside to solve your problem
but it's not you. We'd like to talk a
little bit about um your new book which
um we just got a little taste of and one
of the quotes that I wanted you to talk
about as you introduce us to what this
next book is. We're not matter we're not
mind we are spirit that is meaning love
joy and peace. And if we want to have a
better future, we must all radically
change direction together. And to do
this, we must first change our minds
about who we are. Um, I inverted those
intentionally. Um, talk a little bit
about what this means and what this new
book is going to introduce us to that is
not covered in irreducible, which I
can't imagine there's anything left
because I love this so much. But tell us
what what we can expect.
&gt;&gt; Well, I mean I mean my next book is
actually not in English yet. I mean it's
I had translated it will be up in hope
hopefully in six months or so
&gt;&gt; even people who speak English might
think that this is not written in
English
it's very dense [laughter]
&gt;&gt; that idea is an idea that will be my
fourth book uh is an idea that the
theory that that I have can actually be
explained very effectively
u with the concepts of body mind and
spirit which I I also illustrated
uh earlier you know where you have
essentially you can you know this these
three aspects are not separ they're not
separable but so when we concentrate
with one we can not lose sight that the
other the other two are also present we
tend to when we tend to concentrate on
one we tend to separate the others
because the you know the way we write
and the way we think tends to you know
it tends to work that way because we
focus something but in reality body,
mind and spirit are three in in
inseparable
aspects which have overlaps like I
mentioned before I mentioned six over
six three overlaps plus the overlap in
the center which is all three together
which is the the the essence of one
essentially that's the white light the
love peace joy meaning all that stuff is
where we want to to get to to you know
within ourselves in communicating and so
on to get to that meaning that unites
that brings us back to one. The next
book is beyond the invisible and beyond
invisible is actually a conversation so
it's easier to read and allows me to
repeat things in different context
without being accused of repeating
myself. You know [laughter]
the context determines the meaning of
you know I mean even particles you know
when you know the the property of the
particles depend on the interaction the
particles has so reality is not built
with things that that are absolute is
everything is relative to each other.
&gt;&gt; We talk a lot about exceptional
phenomenon. We talk a lot about
extrensory perception on this podcast.
We really try and understand the science
of many things that a lot of people
would consider outside of science. I
want to ask you a few things and I want
you to give us your most honest answer
both from your scientific and your
spiritual perspective. Okay. I'm going
to start with kind of a softball one.
Collective consciousness. Is there a
collective consciousness?
&gt;&gt; There is a collective consciousness. I
mean I mean you know in a sense we are a
collective consciousness. We are fields
of fields of fields of fields of fields.
So we exist with a comprehension which
is all the comprehensions of of lower
levels. You know like atoms are more
than the you know than the parts that
compose them and and the nucleons are
more than the the protons and neutrons
but then the neutrons are more than the
quarks and the and the and the gluons
and you know this kind of thing.
&gt;&gt; What happens when we die? Is there an
afterlife? Does consciousness exist
after we die?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I I think that I believe the
essence of the near-death experiences of
which there are hundreds of thousands uh
you know known and hund hundreds of
books written about. So people don't
believe they should read at least one of
one or two of those books and have a
sense of it because they they are you
know
their coherence of what happens is so
strong that you know they and and those
are people that don't have the the body
doesn't work anymore the brain doesn't
work and uh you know they have
extraordinary experience that changed
their life. How can that be that you you
know you have an experience that is so
powerful that changes your life and you
were not even functioning as a body? I
mean if we are the body that's a you
know that needs to be explained and you
cannot explain it by you know just
eliminating it like uh scientism does
you know if you don't there's something
if if something that you cannot prove
something forget it it doesn't exist
well that's that's that's too
convenient.
Are we in a simulation? What do you
think about simulation theory?
&gt;&gt; No, we're not in a simulation. But this
reality, however, is mostly virtual
reality in the sense that but is a
virtuality that we create. No, we're not
in a simulator created by somebody else
and we are just little little avatars
there thinking that we are, you know,
that we are what we are. No, that's not
no th this this is a game that we have
created and we are in the game that we
created. So we are actor but also the
creators of this game
and we learn from this game to create
other games.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; So, so I mean this is this is just u you
know but a lot of this reality that we
think is real is actually a construction
of information that is experienced
as a reality in the field. So it doesn't
exist here. It exists in the field in
our consciousness.
But because the quantum states of the
field are not separable from the field,
I cannot say that this is virtual.
Virtual reality is what you get with a
computer for example, full virtual
reality where the the the bits of the
computer are entirely our creations.
They don't exist. We have created them
and we are the ones our conscious is the
one that gives reality to it. when we
put a a headset and we see you know
space and objects and things going
around and we look around and looks like
is a real reality and it's all done by
bits of the computer that is virtual
reality that does not exist in the same
sense that the game that I was talking
about earlier exist
&gt;&gt; we create our experience therefore we
can adjust our experience so in that way
we can adjust the game some posit that
the fields that all consciousness is a
part of were created by some external
force which would be the potential for
the simulation. Not that our personal
experiences are simulated but that the
entire creation of consciousness and all
of the fields that make up it may have
an external uh creator.
It's like, you know, my body is being
created by a cell and every cell of my
body is a copy of that cell that created
this body. Okay? So I'm selfcreated.
There is not a creator.
I'm a part whole of one. So I'm
indivisible from one. So I'm one in some
way, but not one in the sense that I'm
I'm all of one. I'm a part whole of one.
It's is is a it's a holographic
principle. It's not it's not made like
computers are made. Machines are not
made that way. They're not made of parts
whole. They're made of parts. They are
separable. About the evolution of
technology. You created the
microprocessor before you had your big
spiritual awakening. And so it's a
two-part question. One, do you feel like
that information was given to you in a
way to have that breakthrough to create
this worldchanging technology?
And two, how do you see the evolution of
technology as it relates to our
experience of ourselves to either know
ourselves, some will say it's helped us
know ourselves better, having
conversations like this, being able to
share information, while at the same
time it's distracted us from ourselves,
increasing the ability to check out, to
have digital distraction and create
companies that their sole goal is to
take every moment of our free time and
attention. Perhaps the large my biggest
invention was the invention of the
silicon gate technology that allowed to
make a microprocessor that I did my
first job when I came in this country. I
was 26 working for fertile and that
technology was five times faster than
the previous technology was reliable. It
was you could put twice as many
transistors and it had about 500 times
less leakage current. So you could make
dynamic random access memories to you
couldn't do meonato memories before but
with this technology
you could do everything to make a
computer in a single chip and the first
step was the memories dynamic RAM and
the microprocessor. Microp processor
also used dynamic RAM inside okay
because the static RAM were the to too
many transistors. So that is how I did
this thing. uh and it was an a number of
intuitions that allow me to do that and
then of course a lot of work but also
the intuition was that the
microprocessor were a you know were a
new step in the evolution of computers
that would allow with this technology to
miniaturaturize and have computers
everywhere and so on. And so that that
was uh something that I I you know I
understood and I wanted to really create
as fast as possible and Intel in the
early days was did not understand the
management they don't understand the
microp processor were the future they
thought memories were the future
computers the big computers they did not
understand that the little that little
thing could be a big thing right we have
now in one chip we have now computers
that could couldn't even fit in a
skyscraper for Christ's sake. I mean, in
a chip like this now. So, I decided, you
know, my my second generation microp
processor, the 8080 of Intel, that it
took me nine months to convince them, my
management to let me do it. And and and
then when I done that, they was six
times faster than better architecture
done faster than the previous ones. They
still were waiting wasting their time to
get the next one. And so I decided to
start my own company. Said that's it.
I'm I I have I I have enough of this. So
I started my first company. Zylo
developed the Z80 that became the
bestseller. I mean it's still in
production today almost 50 years after
it was introduced. So but but that
compared to what I'm doing now
is like child play in a sense is a child
playing in the sense that it only covers
this stuff, you know, this stuff. But we
we we we are beyond measure you know we
I mean that's what that's what excites
me is that if we wake up to our own
reality
the machines that we do is you know
already the brain you know our brain has
about 100 trillion parameters
GPT has three trillion parameters so and
our brain consumes 20 watts
of power. Nobody can build a computer
better than the brain. But not even
close. Because we our our brain can do
things that no computer in existence can
do even by itself. Never mind by the
connection with the field that we are
because it's it's like having a
programmer and a and a conscious being
connected with the brain and the brain
is just a machine. The brain is a
machine. So the machine does what
[clears throat] the programmer wants is
on board. All is on board.
So it's a you know is is a is a new
world. So technology just use the way we
use technology today without a sense of
who we are can become dangerous and
that's the danger that I see is both in
the nuclear technology that uh you know
now an arsenal of tens of thousands of
atomic bombs that any crazy person could
use. uh so that that's a very dangerous
uh you know very dangerous thing to have
you know sitting around and of course AI
will become a major problem or a major
or a major abundance if it is used right
but to be used right we need to change
the idea of who we are because if we
think that we are here to compete and to
beat the less fortunate of us that's not
the way the technology will help it will
actually help those guys to destroy our
humanity and that's not the game that I
would like to see.
&gt;&gt; Fedrico Fine, it's really such a such a
pleasure to get to speak to you. We're
so grateful for your time.
&gt;&gt; Thank you. It's a pleasure.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; I'm curious how you heard his
explanation of how the cell is impacted
by changing our perspective and changing
the state around us. Look, I think this
is a really important addition to so
many of our conversations about um in
particular the kind of loving kindness
meditation, the kind of um focus on um
manifesting or placing yourself in an
environment that feels like you've
already achieved it. Um in the
meditation that I led people in, that's
over on Substack, you know, that's what
we talked about. imagine something
beautiful and create the the emotional
state as if you're there. It's very very
powerful and I love how many different
places we're getting for people to pull
from support for that. Whether it's
Bruce Lipton, you know, from this more
kind of, you know, cell biology
perspective, or it's Fedrico Fine from
this, you know, quantum and like micros
microcosmic and macrocosmic, you know,
quantum collective consciousness sort of
perspective. I'm super fascinated with
this concept, you know, of love. Again,
that's just the word you put on it.
Like, don't think about how you feel
about the person that you're dating and,
oh, well, I'm in love with them. What
does that have to do with it? We're
talking about the state of feeling joy,
peace, serenity, that you are loved,
that you are taken care of. That's a
different kind of, you know, what he's
talking about is almost like a
fundamental, you know, uh, foundation of
the universe is that feeling that we
were, you know, and these are the
religious concepts. We're created out of
love, right? His description reminds me
a lot of like the first time I sensed
energy where my palm was tingling and
all of a sudden I had an experience that
was so foreign to how I had grown up and
anything that I had experienced in the
past that I couldn't reconcile it with
my understanding of reality. And
when he describes that in order to
change and come up with solutions that
may not be purely based on competition
that may be more cooperative which we
can't really imagine right now because
our entire society is based on well if I
get this then you don't get that and you
know anything else is seen as unc
capitalist and you know it's described
that capitalism is not the best option
but it's better than all the others.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah, in some cases I think you
have to separate out these
conversations. And I I really appreci I
really appreciated your question
especially from you know to ask the
creator of the you know what we use as a
microprocessor and the phone that we
hold in our hand to ask that person you
know what would you have been like if
you did not have a desire to compete to
get ahead to run a company like all
those things but I think what he was
saying also is you know and the question
I didn't get to ask him but I kind of
feel like I can imagine the answer you
know if he didn't create the
microprocessor, would someone else have?
The answer is is yes, of course. But
would another human being have his
particular awakening experience? No.
That was his alone. But as he indicated,
that part is indicative of the entire
whole, right? And that experience is
sourced in what he calls one.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And when he talks about having that
experience that is not able to be
reconciled with everything else we
understand to have that visceral
powerful emotional and intellectual
change.
That's the first step in solving other
problems. when you say we have to keep
these things divided is because not
enough people have had that awakening to
then imagine a world without the current
incentive structures that exist right
now.
&gt;&gt; Totally. Totally. And what I love about
this conversation and about many of the
others is that people start to paint an
understanding and sort of shine a light
on how they've done it and others can
start to do it as well simply by hearing
these and opening up to the possibility
that there is more. When we had Deepo
Chopra on and he said just by listening
to this conversation you are starting to
change. It can feel like an
overstatement,
but if you've only seen the world in one
particular way and you start to imagine
it in a different way, that's the first
step to having those visceral awakening
experiences.
&gt;&gt; This book, as I said, it's incredibly
dense. Um, but is really it was a
wonderful, you know, a wonderful
exploration literally of exactly what he
says, consciousness, life, computers,
and human nature. We're going to have
more about this conversation uh
reflections as they simmer for uh May
and I. We're going to talk about how
each one of us can have their own
spiritual awakenings. We tell stories
about different ways people wake up and
have these profound moments where they
just feel a connection to something
greater over on Substack. Join us
breakdown on Substack.
&gt;&gt; And from our breakdown to the one we
hope you never have, we'll [music] see
you next time. It's my breakdown. She's
going to break it down for you. She's
got a neuroscience PhD [music]
or two fiction and now she's going to
break down. So break down. She's going
to break it down.