The rational mind is a precious servant
and the intuitive mind is a precious
gift. We live in a world which
acknowledges the servant but has
forgotten the gift. There are profound
philosophical consequences to the fact
that the brain is divided in two. But
they can become very unbalanced towards
the direction of the left hemisphere.
The one that is less intelligent, less
attentive, less perceptive about all the
things the left hemisphere would want
not to do. The number one thing is to
slow down. Everything in our life now
tells us to speed up, to try and do
things faster and faster and faster. And
in doing so, you can't really appreciate
anything. I think once you recapture the
all inspiring nature of existence, then
you're getting close to living again.
99.9%
of the time, your intuitions are doing a
very good job. most important steps
forward in science were not made by
endless scribbling but by a moment of
insight. Intuition is a great gift that
we have and we need to pay attention to
it.
Hey everyone, welcome back to the know
thyself podcast. Our guest today is a
worldrenowned psychiatrist, philosopher,
literary scholar. His landmark works in
the master and his emissary and the
matter with things have been fundamental
in reshaping our world view on life and
the brain our place in it. And um he his
work has evoked so much in my own
personal path getting to study it more
recently re-evoking a sense of awe
beauty wonder and sacred in the everyday
life. Dr. Ian Mcilchris thank you for
being here. No, thank you, Andre, for
inviting me to your rather lovely place
here in
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; To pick a Canyon.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. To Ping a Canyon.
&gt;&gt; The pleasure is mine.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh I thought we could dive right in and
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; set some of the framework for this
conversation by asking why should anyone
care that the brain is split in two?
&gt;&gt; I think that's a very important
question. Uh not often enough as why
should it matter?
Um, people might well say, "Well, as far
as I'm concerned, as long as my brain's
doing the things I want it to do, I
don't care where it's doing it or what
shape it has."
But there are, I believe, profound
philosophical consequences to the fact
that the brain is divided in two. And
and there are three questions that led
me into this area. When I was training
in medicine, I started off in the world
of ideas and literature and realized
that I needed to become trained in
medicine to deal with people
who had
a physical condition often affecting the
brain that changed their mind and their
personality and their way of looking at
the world profoundly. H how did that
happen? and equally people who were
thinking in certain ways that it could
actually produce physical effects on
their body. So it was in that area of
overlap between mind and body that I
wanted to work. And in medical school
there was a couple of things that were
hardly
mentioned. They were glossed over. I
mean they're obviously true. One is that
the brain is divided in two down the
middle. Um, and for people who haven't
seen a human brain, it's slightly like a
large walnut with the sort of wrinkly
masses, but a bit in the middle that
that divides it. And this is not
something peculiar to humans. It's true
of animals. It's true of birds. It's
true of virtually all the creatures that
we've looked at that have a kind of
protorain
uh or a brain.
Why are they all divided in this way?
Because the computational power, if you
think in terms of a computer, which
we've been taught to do, the
computational power of a mass of neurons
must be proportionate to the number of
connections it can make. And therefore,
to willfully reduce the number by
cleaving it down the middle seems odd.
The second thing that was odd and was
mentioned but just glossed over in
medical school was that the brain is
asymmetrical. And that too is
interesting because there's no real
reason for the brain again to be
asymmetrical. The skull is broadly
speaking schemat symmetrical. And if you
wanted to just get a bit more stuff into
the skull, you could expand the brain
symmetrically. But indeed it has
expanded asymmetrically suggesting that
there's a difference between what's
going on in one part and what's going on
in another.
Uh and in school medical school they
mentioned that that was largely due to
the thing that was said to set humanity
apart which was the acquisition of
language and that there were language
areas in the posterior left hemisphere.
And because language was a big thing, it
needed a lot of space. And so that part
of the brain became bigger. But this
can't be true for couple of important
reasons. Uh animals that don't have
language, the monkeys and even the great
apes already have this enlarged area
without any big vocabulary to take up
that space.
Um and the other thing is that and it
wasn't ever mentioned because it was
rather embarrassing was that the largest
asymmetry in the brain was actually in
favor of the right hemisphere at the
front. So the frontal part of the right
hemisphere is bigger than the uh the if
you like the the same area on the left.
Why was that? The third thing was
actually mentioned and it really went
home to me which is that a lot of the
communication across the corpus colosum
is negative in the sense that it's
saying keep out of it. I'm dealing with
it. So one hemisphere will take hold of
a task as it were and it will send
messages to the other hemisphere which
are largely inhibitory.
Some of them of course are excitatory
but their overall function more often
than not is to exclude the other
hemisphere from getting involved at the
moment with this task. Now that seemed
extraordinary. Um I later discovered
that there was no such band of fibers.
We call it the corpus colosum in humans.
There was no corpus colosum until
mammals. So other creatures, reptiles,
amphibians, birds, whatever, however
sophisticated, didn't have a corpse
colosum. Uh, and so there two halves of
the brain were much more independent.
And then when we started to develop one
in mammals,
very quickly the growth in the size of
the brain was not replicated in the size
of the corpus colosum. So as the brain
got bigger, the corpus colosum got
effectively smaller. So it's smaller
again in humans. What is all this about?
And it seemed to me that at the least
what one can say it was about both
uniting two things and dividing two
things, keeping them together but
keeping them separate because they were
distinct. Why and what was that about?
And the old story it was uh and I would
ask everybody who doesn't know my work
just to put out of their mind everything
they think they know about the
differences between the hemispheres
because largely it was all nonsense and
it used to be said for example that the
left hemisphere was rational and
dependable a little bit boring but there
it was it was you know sensible and
mature whereas the right hemisphere was
was sort of aerodyairy and given to
painting pictures, but this is a very
bad, very bad picture of what's going
on. In fact, both hemispheres are
involved in doing everything. And that
led some people to say, well, there's no
question here to answer. But it led me
to think, no, there is. There just needs
to be a better question than what are
they doing? And that question was in
what way are they doing it? And I don't
mean by which mechanism. I mean in what
manner as you would say of a person but
you know how does he approach this? What
is he like when he's doing whatever he's
doing? So um the answers there are
really fascinating
because perhaps I should just mention
that the left hemisphere is not reliable
and dependable. It is actually given to
delusions far more delusional than the
right hemisphere. Indeed, I'm by far not
the only neurologist who said the left
hemisphere is delusional when left to
its own devices. Secondly, it is not
devoid of emotion. It has rather strong
emotions, most them self-regarding ones.
It gets very angry very quickly. anger
lateral lateralizes to the left
hemisphere more than to the right. Um,
and it gets uh quickly uh expresses
disgust uh and contempt. In fact, it's a
rather disagreeable
uh creature that is not by any means uh
free from its own emotions. Um the right
hemisphere is far more a good guide to
reality. We'll come on to that. So just
to say all of that stuff is that used to
be said is wrong.
Why there are two hemispheres is because
at least this is the best explanation I
can find and nobody's produced a better
one and nobody's said that I must be
wrong is that all creatures have to
solve a fundamental problem of survival
which is how to get stuff in order to
eat or to uh make a shelter or whatever
and utilize it. So to manipulate the
environment to get stuff to eat, to
gather stuff, to make tools, to use the
world. But if that's all it's doing, it
will miss everything else that's going
on at the same time. So while it's
getting its lunch, it's somebody else's
uh it's not looking out for its kin.
It's not looking out for its mate. It's
not looking out for everything else that
it should be looking out for. And and so
the solution, the only solution
has to be must be and has been
historically to have two
loai or losi of consciousness.
One in one of the cerebral hemispheres
and one in the other and addressed to
the world in different ways.
So their disposition towards the world
is different. their attention to the
world is different. This is the root of
the distinction. So the left
hemisphere's
root of attention is to a tiny thing
that is isolated, already known, desired
and is easily graspable as long as you
focus on it alone and go for it. Whereas
the right hemisphere uh attention is
exactly the opposite. It's not narrow
but broad. It's not moving from here to
place but sustained. It's vigilant. It's
open for everything else without
preconception of what it might be. Now
these two complement one another. They
work well together. They have completely
different modes of approach. But we need
those two to be able to survive. And
this was imaged in the title I chose for
my first book on this topic, the master
and his emissary. And the idea there is
that there is a wise spiritual master
who looks after a community so well that
it flourishes. And after a while he
realizes that he can't look after all
the needs of the community. But what's
more he realizes something even more
important that he mustn't get involved
with certain
particular detailed matters because they
will draw him away from his broad
intelligent wise oversight. So he
appoints his, you know, brightest and
best second in command, a sort of
aspiring um bureaucrat to go about on
his behalf and do the the the number
crunching and the administration and all
that while he is able to maintain the
oversight.
And there's a well-known principle in
psychology called the Dunning Krueger
effect, which means that the the more
you know, the more you realize you don't
know, and the less you know, the more
you think you know it all. The left
hemisphere is an example of the one that
knows rather little but thinks it knows
it all. Whereas the right hemisphere
knows so much that it's more aware of
what it can't know. So the idea of the
story is that the emissary is vain,
resents the master, thinks what does he
know? He sits back there at home
meditating peacefully while I go about
doing all the hard work. I'm the one
that really knows I'm the master and
adopted the master's cloak and because
he didn't know what it was he didn't
know, the community fell into ruins and
along with it the master and the
emissary. So that that story is if you
like my way of expressing what I think
is happening at the present moment in
the 21st century where um the
hemisphere, the left hemisphere that
knows and sees much less, thinks it
knows everything and is telling us what
the answers to things are. while we're
not listening to the right hemisphere
who knows a great deal more about how
things are and you to come very
belatedly to your question why should
this matter
um well obviously it does matter if our
brains are in some sense
the the scene of a battle between two
entities one of which is headstrong and
taking control while it knows very
little
uh that that is important in itself but
the real crux of this is
that we can now with the help of the
research I've done we can be fairly
clear when we see the stamp of left
hemisphere thinking on something and we
can be pretty clear when we see the
hallmark of right hemisphere thinking
and because we know that left hemisphere
thinking leads us astray
far more often than right hemisphere
thinking. We should have now the
capacity to go well I think a right
hemisphere point of view would be like
this and so we ought to give that more
credence than the other. So historically
you know in in philosophy people have
have said about various questions. Oh
well look um at one point in history
people thought like this there was this
school that thought like this and then
later there came this school that
thought like that you know shrug
yourself just take your choice but I
believe no now I mean I I don't want to
sound as though I'm I'm um
overestimating what it is I've achieved
but I think I have given an indication
of how we can resolve these dilemmas in
favor of the path towards what is true
this this quote I want to pull from
uh
as you're describing the way the left
hemisphere has colonized the
contemporary world this quote from your
book uh the matter with things at the
core of the contemporary world is a
reductionist view that we are nature is
and earth is nothing but a bundle of
senseless particles pointlessly
helplessly mindlessly colliding in a
predict predictable fashion whose
existence is purely material and whose
only value is utility. And so you
examine this reductionistic notion as a
disease essentially. And so I would love
for you just to unpack a bit more about
the clear differences both on the left
and the right way of attending to the
world and then we can go deeper into how
the contemporary world is very much so
uh overly operating within the left
hemisphere.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Yes. Good.
Well, I think the first thing to say is
that in our search for any kind of
understanding of the world,
we have to begin from the question which
of these hemispheres is better able to
take in information about the world at
at the lowest level. And the first part
of my book, the matter with things,
shows that it is in every case but one,
it is the right hemisphere. So the right
hemisphere attends
better to the world, attends to more. It
perceives better than the left
hemisphere in all modalities and
perceives more. It makes better
judgments on the basis of what it has
attended to and perceived.
And it also has a greater intelligence
to bring on bear on understanding that
information. So it's
emotional and social intelligence that
of the right hemisphere is greater than
that of the left and the cognitive
intelligence of the right hemisphere. IQ
is far more dependent on the right
hemisphere than on the left. And indeed
in terms of creativity, the right
hemisphere is better at being able to
see how something would fit with
something else. So we can make sense of
the world better than the left
hemisphere can do.
And so we've got at outset those
what I call the the the sort of windows
on the world or the the the modes
whereby we can get hold of information.
Then we work on that to try and build up
a picture. And it is the second part of
the matter with things in which I say
there are probably four main paths
towards truth that we would all agree on
to some degree. Some some would
emphasize one or two more than others,
but generally everyone would probably
agree that we do need science, that we
do need reason, that we do also need
intuition, and that we do also need
imagination. Now, those last two have
had a bit of a bad rap in the last 40,
50 years from cognitive psychologists
who are sort of trained to think that
only rationalistic observations can
work. But in fact, we know a great deal
thanks to their efforts apart from
anything else about the great importance
of intuition in coming to deeper uh
understandings of things. Following a
rational course can only go along one
linear track at a time. But intuition is
able to draw perhaps up to 15 different
things that it's aware of that it knows
unconsciously and bring them to bear on
making a final decision. And imagination
is I would argue essential to uh getting
to understand thoroughly anything else.
Um, it's not like fantasy, a way of
covering it up and making it untruthful
and more fun. Imagination is the the
deep faculty within us which is true to
what is true and wishes to see into it.
And if for those who know
the work of particularly Wersworth and
Cridge in English but also of
philosophers like Hegel and Shelling
around the same time in Germany uh and
Gerta will know what I mean about
imagination. So those are the parts and
when we come to finally say okay so what
is the cosmos like? What can we say
about the cosmos that
that is truer than the opposite? And
that is the very last part the it's the
second volume but the third part of the
matter with things and in it I look at
the structure of the cosmos that it is
that is not afraid of paradox that
paradox and the so-called coincidence of
opposites are essential to its
understanding
and that the one and the many as in
other cultures particularly Chinese and
Indian culture the one and the many are
both real and both parts of the creative
cosmos.
I look at flow and change much as in the
spirit of daoism but I believe I can see
that also from a western point of view
is important that things are not fixed
but flowing
um the nature of time the nature of
space and matter of matter and
consciousness
and then of value and purpose and the
sense of the sacred. Now those I knew I
was always going to be writing about the
first of those like time and space and
matter and consciousness but I didn't
realize when I started writing the
matter of things which was about 10
years before I finished it that I would
absolutely crucially be needing to go to
chapters on value and purpose and the
sense of the sacred. And for me these
are nonnegotiable
elements of the cosmos that didn't arise
certainly are not painted onto it by us
but didn't arise secondarily from
anything else that they cannot in fact
be secondarily
derived from anything else in the same
way that I believe that consciousness
cannot be got out of matter if matter
has nothing of consciousness in it. uh
whatever you do, you simply will never
end up um doing anything to lumps of
completely unconscious matter and going
heck consciousness came out of it. So I
I hold a view that is now quite um
remarkably um mainstream in even western
uh philosophy now uh which is that uh
psyche is fundamental to the cosmos. I'm
a pan psychist in the sense that I
believe that psyche is there at the
origin
and we can come on to talk about where
matter fits in later if you like. Um but
I would point out that it's only through
psyche that we can even know anything
about matter at all. That matter is
something that we know through our
consciousness.
Um but uh consciousness is not something
that uh derives from or is based on
matter.
Uh uh complicatedly they may actually be
facets of the same thing but that's what
I would eventually wish to argue. So
when people imagine that the world is
they've reduced it to parts by analyzing
it and then found that there's very
little in the parts and said oh well
that's all there is and I am helplessly
reminded here of Montipython not
Montipython of 40 towers and I guess 40
towers has crossed to America pretty
much has it and I don't know if you
remember there is an episode um in which
the the chef uh gets drunk and they're
having a gala night and they and Paul
thinks what can I do and he goes to his
friend Andre who runs it runs a
restaurant in town and brings back with
him what he believes is the duck which
is to be the centerpiece of the evening
and unfortunately unknown to him it was
swapped in the restaurant with a bling
room with his trolley with a duck and
he's sharpening his knife and fork and
making
um ineimitable John Cle sort of face
and he takes off the lid and does a
double take cuz there's not a duck there
and then he goes like this and he goes
ducks off because whatever it was
there's nothing in it. I sometimes apply
this to the um decoding of the human
genome because the great shock was that
there was nowhere near the amount of
information by billions and billions and
trillionfolds that we would have needed
for the genome to explain all the things
that we' laid upon it to explain. So
reductionism has always tended to
produce an answer that is unsatisfactory
for what it's going to make. And you
know a simple down to earth example of
may give one is a piece of music. So if
you ask somebody who is um analytically
banned you know to to work out what a
piece of music is doing. Well they say
well first of all what is a a piece of
music made out of? It's made of notes.
Well um well let's the first thing
question then to answer is what is a
note? And a note is a sound like that.
Then what does it mean? Nothing. Okay.
All right. Um, well then the music has
another of these notes. Uh, what does it
mean? Nothing. And after 30,000 notes,
I've got Mozart's G minor quintet. It's
just made out of notes, none of which
mean anything. So it must be a heap of
nothing. And in this process, you have
driven out everything that was invisible
to your analytic eye, which was the web
of connections
in which and only in which the thing had
any meaning. Now I believe that applies
to the cosmos in general that in fact I
argue that everything rises from
relations.
So there aren't first things which are
then related but the things don't even
come into being until they are in
relations with other things. That's what
makes them what they are.
And so I sometimes use the image of
uh from the vidanta of Indra's net and
Indra is a god whose net was cast over
the cosmos and this was a very special
net and every crossing point in the net
was suspended a jewel and in each jewel
was seen all the other jewels in the
net. Now that is a very good uh analogy
of the way in which I see the coming
into being of everything that we call
the universe the cosmos
that it stems from relations and the
bits that stand forward to us in
networks or in the the apparent fosi of
interest at crossing points. These are
what we then call things, but they're
secondary to the net. The net is
primary. And and you you can see this
because you know what what is a human
person? Well, in what context is that
person a person at all? And what we've
lost sight of is that people are only
people in the context of a society out
of which they come and which help very
much to create them. Even if they reject
that society, that rejection is very
much part of the idea of how things are
that was built into what they learned
from that society. So we are social
beings. We derive from sociality and we
give back to sociality and we can only
be said to be what we are because of the
relations in which we stand.
I don't know if I answered your
question, but the point I think I'm
trying to get at is that if you take
things apart, you destroy their meaning.
And if you think of the universe as just
made up of little bits of stuff that
you've got down to with your microscope,
you can't see what it makes in
aggregate.
Um, a simple analogy would be like, um,
what is a motorbike? Oh, I'm going to
find out. There's one in the garage.
I'll take it apart. And several hours
later, the other person comes back and
says, "Okay, what is it?" Well, it's got
two of these and three of those and
something else, but search me. I have no
idea what it is. And it doesn't mean
anything because it's completely
destroyed by the acts of analysis. And
the only way in which you could work out
what it was was to get on it and ride
it. And life is like that that you can't
stand aside from it from outside and
understand it. A religious belief is
like that. You can't stand aside from it
and inspect it and go, "Well, it doesn't
add up according to where I am standing
now." But it only doesn't stand up from
where you're standing now because of
where you're standing now. Another
example would be like learning to swim
by sitting on the bank with a river with
a book saying this is how you swim and
swearing you're not going to get into
the river until you've learned how to
swim from the book.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. It's like the difference
between having reading a menu and having
the meal, right? The experience.
&gt;&gt; Very good one. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um I am very fascinated at this
distinction you have in this example
with the vidantic lens of Indra's net
where it is like the blossoming of a
flower where there's an unfolding of
something that is unfolded uh which I've
heard you speak to. And so it reframes
our position in the universe when we go
from this left hemispheric notion of a
mechanistic universe of atoms bouncing
off of each other towards a relational
universe uh where there's meaning tied
into how things are unfolding and uh and
I'm just curious if you want to
highlight any of your thoughts there
specifically on the unfolding of
something that is unfolded.
&gt;&gt; Yes, very much. Thank you for that. Um
there's a a marvelous saying of Gerta.
Um
dividing the united, uniting the divided
is the whole work of nature. And he
compares it to the uh sisterly and
diastily, the two beats of the heart and
the drawing in of breath and the
exhalation of it. that there are these
two complimentary processes that don't
somehow negate one another but each
require the other and couldn't be
without the other. You couldn't have
just the cy and not the diastily. You
couldn't just breathe in and never
breathe out. And the same thing exists
everywhere that there is an enrichment
in the unfolding which is not lost when
it is reintegrated. So if you take the
image of a buzz
um the buzz eventually unfolds and what
you find the bud is beautiful but what
you find is a flower in all its
complexity and it is beautiful in a new
way but it hasn't destroyed the bud.
It's completed the potential of the bud.
It has fulfilled the potential of the
bud and eventually that flower will then
go back again and become a fruit
and the fruit hasn't destroyed the
flower. The fruit is the fulfillment of
the flower and it is the promise of new
life. So these processes are constantly
cycling and involve alternating
unfoldings and infoldings.
uh Hegel used this image also as and I'm
a great believer in call myself heal
exactly but particularly in the master
in his embassy I do rely on on Hegel
quite a bit but I think what he saw for
the first time was that
um things and their apparent opposites
uh have the same nature and require one
another. I had a very interesting
conversation just the other day with uh
a a Chinese scholar and she was saying
well of course in the west you talk
about paradoxes but we don't see any
paradoxes because for us there is
nothing
unruly or to be explained away in the
idea that a thing and its opposite come
together. And you know I remember in my
own intellectual unfolding that at the
time that I was reading Plato in class
uh um an older boy introduced me to the
work of Heraclitus the precratic
philosopher in whose work a lot of
apparent paradoxes are displayed or or
or examined or just left there for your
curiosity.
And uh I began to see something there
that was so important that I'd intuited
and thought at last here's somebody
who's expressing it. This this essential
paradoxical nature of things it's not
really paradoxical. Uh for there to be
wet there needs to be dry the way up
needs to be also the way down. Um as uh
uh Neils Boore uh said to be the father
of quantum mechanics uh said although uh
the everyday and and the small um do not
coincide with their opposites the more
important something is the more it will
coincide with its opposite.
And so I see that
in western terms coincidence of
opposites or in eastern terms the
fulfillment of a a a nondual dual nature
if you like that the the magnet has a
north pole and a south pole. These are
not in opposition to one another. They
do in fact oppose one another if you
push them together but they are in fact
inseparable.
The one cannot be had without the other
and together they make up what it is to
be a magnet. And together the things
that we think of as the big opposites go
to make up
something important. For example, I'm a
strong believer that deaths which people
nowadays are terrified of and start
running away from as soon as they can
even bring themselves to look at the
concept that one day they're going to
die buster. they they just start running
away from it and won't talk about it and
do all kinds of self-punitive things in
order to they make their lives that
little bit longer. And death is not in
any way the enemy of life. Death is is
is like the rose going through another
phase. It is again, as Gera said, death
is life's way, nature's way of making
room for more life. And I, for one, have
not the slightest fear of death. I'm
excited by the prospect of death because
there are only two possible outcomes.
Either there'll be something in which
case I'm fascinated to know what it is
or there'll be nothing at all in which
case I won't be there to be
disappointed.
That's a very that's a very liberating
thought you know that there is the
excitement of of the adventure and
continue if it does and if not then you
won't be there for the disappointment of
it. That's that's great. I I think of
because you mentioned Neil's Boore.
Another saying of his I believe which I
love is the opposite of a fact is a
falsehood, but the opposite of a
profound truth may very well be another
profound truth.
&gt;&gt; Profound truth. That was roughly
speaking exactly what I was referring
to.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And it makes me think of
how we can embrace paradox more in our
life and how much we've really come to
see life in such a fractured and
separated sense. Um and it can quickly
fall into the camp of demonizing the
left hemisphere and and saying this way
of you know viewing the world is wrong
um without seeing the necessary you know
pole polarity and the purpose it serves.
Um, but I am fascinated to hear your
thoughts on how this way of thinking has
infiltrated society largely and how it
will attract positions of leadership and
authority that that are in congruence
with its perspective on life, the left
hemisphere.
&gt;&gt; Um, and how that begets more of its own
way of thinking.
&gt;&gt; Going back to a question that you asked
me right at the beginning, why is any of
this important?
One way is to talk in terms of social
and cultural history.
And uh I believe that each hemisphere's
experiential world has a different
quality
uh simply because of the nature of the
attention it pays to the world. And
these
go together to compose the way we think
about the world. But they can become
very unbalanced. And in particular they
can become unbalanced and tend always to
become unbalanced towards the direction
of the left hemisphere the one that is
less intelligent less attentive less
perceptive more liable to delusion that
is kind of important. So in the uh
second half of the master and his
emissary uh as you know I effectively
look at the history of the west from the
ancient Greeks through to postmodernism
looking at the main shifts in the
history of ideas and show that there are
oscillations
uh periods when the two hemispheres are
working in a kind of harmony. Um that
doesn't mean they're of equal value. It
means that the left hemisphere is acting
as the proper servant or emissary of the
right hemisphere. And when it does, we
have wonderful periods of flourishing as
we did in the 6th century BC in Athens,
as we did again around the dots in Rome
and as we did at the beginning of the
Renaissance in Western Europe. And in
those periods, you can see everything
taking a step forward. a highly
imaginative, creative society that was
evolving new systems of thought. Uh um
making steps forward in science, in
astronomy, in mapmaking, but also in
drama, in poetry, in music, in in
painting, in architecture. All these
things were flourishing
and then inevitably they become more
crude, more gross, more vulgar and
eventually collapse and they get as they
do so they drift more and more into the
left hemisphere's mode of being. Now I
believe we're in that stretch. We have
been for arguably a few hundred years,
but certainly since the enlightenment
really in a in a period when although
the enlightenment was a marvelous
movement and if I'd been there at the
time I would have I'd have been a great
supporter of it. I think it's also a
hubristic movement that overestimated
what it could do and what its importance
was and we're reaping the benefits now.
They are that we believe we can find all
the answers to everything by simply
doing more experiments.
roughly speaking. Um,
so what are the differences between
these two worlds like? I think that
would be worth worth saying. Well,
firstly, the the left hemisphere's world
because it's focused on one thing that
it knows and it wants to get it quickly.
The left hemisphere is the quick and
dirty one, not the right hemisphere. The
right hemisphere is, as Ramachandran
says, the devil's advocate is always
going, "Yeah, but it might be something
different." But the left hemisphere is
in a great hurry. It wants to get it so
that he can eat it, grab it and have it.
So, it's not particularly interested. It
might get it wrong sometimes, but who
cares? So, that's the left hemisphere.
It's made up of little things that it
knows what they are that are separate,
non-individual. I mean, it doesn't
matter which rabbit it is or whether the
rabbit has a family. It's a rabbit. I
want to eat it. Um, it doesn't
understand anything that is not
explicit. It understands the the brute
fact of the something there that it can
grab, pick up, and take. In doing so,
it's taking the individual embodied
being and making it an abstract
representative of a category. It's a
rabbit. It's a twig. It's a whatever it
is. It is also distancing itself from
whatever that is in the sense that it is
the manipulator of it. It's not
interested in the relationship with it.
is interested in just getting it
and this kind of world builds up a
picture which is literally inanimate. So
people who have right hemisphere damage
often talk about uh living creatures
including other living people as say
automter or zombies. Uh they begin to
see themselves as possibly like that or
describe themselves as having the
qualities of a piece of furniture. So
the the the the animacy has been lost
but so has everything else that makes
things important. And these are the
things the right hemisphere sees. It
doesn't see anything as ultimately
entirely isolated or entirely fixed. It
sees things as always changing
interweaving themselves with other
things having meaning which goes beyond
the explicit. In fact, sometimes what is
not said is as important as what is
said. It understands poetry and jokes,
both of which depend on not explaining
what's going on. When you explain a
joke, you kill it. When you explain a
poem and reduce it to a few um benile
sentences about how painful it is when
somebody you love dies, you've destroyed
the poem. The poem was also unique and
it just becomes another example of
something in the in the left hemisphere.
The poem was embodied. It it didn't just
affect your intellect, but in reading
it, it had effects on your embodied
being, on your blood pressure, on your
heart rate. It can have effects on your
on the um make your hair stand on end or
bring tears to your eyes or make you
sweat or whatever. So
all the right hemisphyes is embodied
physical complex interconnected never
exactly pinnable down um and ever more
evolving into being. Whereas the left
hemisphere these things where all that
is finished and dead. It is cut up into
bits and the bits are recognized and
added up and the more of them there are
the better. Never mind about quality.
We're interested in quantity.
And you can imagine that
what this results is two kinds of a
world. One is like the real living
unpredictable world that you actually
encounter from second to second and the
other is like a reproduction like a map
or a film or whatever where everything
is already in place and is just um a
representation of what was originally a
living thing and present because after
all representation means being present
again when you are no longer present. So
the left hemisphere's world is this
nonworld and the right hemisphere's
world is this vivid living world. And
what I think has happened in our
time is that we have come so much to
believe in our helpful map the schema
the diagram that enabled us to exploit
that we think that's all that there is
and it's like somebody who tries to live
in the map instead of living in the
world that is mapped.
This has a lot of damaging consequences.
It means that
everything has to be
if you like converted into a web of
algorithms, procedures and rules. So
what used to be um intuitive
responses, common sensical responses to
two human situations between them is now
one in which whatever you're doing the
other person is I'm sorry the system
won't let me do that. No, the computer
says no and all this. So they are only
stuck in what the system allows which is
almost never a reflection of what real
life is because real life doesn't fit
into those categories.
So I think that happens and leaders
think that you see the power let me talk
a bit about values. The one single value
of the left hemisphere is power.
the power to control. And this is what
going back to um the evolution of the
two hemisphere
uh system uh suggests is that the left
hemisphere is the grabber. It's the one
that gets stuff. And so it's really only
interested in having control of things.
If it hasn't got control of things, it's
anxious.
So if the left hemisphere begins to take
over, we're anxious about everything
that doesn't seem to be already under
control. So the natural world is
intrinsically
a source of danger. It must be
administrated, brought under
departments, have um people who go out
in little uniforms and create paths and
and and and destroy the natural nature
of it. There will be a hatred of the
human body, an attack on it because it
has all kinds of unpredictable
qualities. It can get ill. It can it can
fall in love and then what on earth will
happen then? And it might get ill and
die. And so we we we resist this thing
that is the only way which way through
which we can experience life. We see it
as whatever is over and against our
will. And so the left hemisphere's field
is one of will. If I can just create
enough departments and enough uh special
interest groups who will investigate and
evaluate, we'll get there. But of
course, that process in itself uses
colossal energy uh distracts one from
everything that really is important and
becomes a tyranny in itself. There's a
wonderful book by the way called The
Tyranny of Matrix
and it's by Jerry
can't remember his surname now but
anyway look up the tyranny of matrix uh
all those who are listening or or or
whatever uh but he explains uh in ways
that just make it clear what we all
sense about the ridiculous way in which
our lives are overlaid with more and
more and more rules. So much so that
actually just trying to um answer the
questions and follow the rules and tick
the boxes can take up um half of one's
life and time is important. Time is
life. When your time is taken away, your
life is drained away from you. So part
that's part of the well and now and I
think that managers instead of allowing
as light a hand on the till tiller as
possible so that people are free to use
their initiative their intuitions their
insight want to microcontrol things and
when you do that of course the whole
project uh becomes sclerotic and
eventually dies.
Hey guys, something that I strive to
maintain as a pillar with the
partnerships I bring onto this platform
and share with you all is to collaborate
with brands that I feel like are really
pioneering something of unique value to
the world. One example of such companies
is Fractal Forest, a company focused on
using modern technology to harness the
ancient wisdom of earth and medicinal
properties of different plant compounds.
Their formulas are made only from
high-performance natural compounds
sourced for purity, designed for
precision, and crafted for the results.
Their products are targeted to directly
support various pathways in the human
body that in modern society we're almost
all struggling with. One of which is
mineral depletion, which causes immune
function impairment, fatigue, muscle
weakness, cognitive issues, and more. If
you don't know, chiligy is a
nutrient-dense resin containing a wide
spectrum of over 84 essential minerals,
humic acid, fulvic acid, and it all
helps achieve optimal mineral balance
within the body. And supplementing
throughout your week directly or in
beverage of your choice helps support
any mineral depletions you have. They
were kind enough to kick off our
partnership by offering a free 10ml
bottle of Himalayan chiligit and you
just pay shipping. So, you can get the
offer by going to
fractalforest.co/nolyself
or use code no thyself at checkout to
get your free trilogy today. Link in
description. As always, it looks like
this. Try it out. See how you feel. Back
to the show.
This is very much so what you're getting
at when you say that we nowadays no
longer live in the presence of the
world, but through our representations
of it. And there's something so
devastating about that understanding
because to not be in true intimacy with
the gift of a human life is uh yeah it's
&gt;&gt; yes
&gt;&gt; it's devastating. Um and so I'm just
curious for you to share your thoughts
on that because uh we have become
society it's become so normalized to
live life through our models of reality
instead of intimate with reality itself.
Yes, very true.
And coming back to what I was saying
about the the pointlessness of
constantly trying to extend your life,
it seems like the less your life means,
the more you want to extend it. And in
other words, you're looking for
quantity, which is the left hemisphere's
idea, not quality of life, which would
be the right hemisphere. So, what are
you getting out of this life? What are
you experiencing in this life? What are
you contributing to this life? And so
it's about all the things the left
hemisphere would
uh want you not to do. The number one
thing is to slow down.
Everything in our life now tells us to
speed up to try and do things faster and
faster and faster. And in doing so, you
can't really appreciate anything because
it it takes time. And you can't
certainly appreciate the
the subtle unspoken, the intuitional and
the um in between the lines sort of
elements in life which need to be
savored and to take pleasure in the
moment which actually is something we
need to practice. It doesn't come
naturally to us anymore because we've
been subjected to a culture which
focuses on us on surfaces, on the
superficial, on the maps, on the
diagrams, on the boxes we need to take.
Anything to get us not to be looking at
the actual world which is still
amazingly unfolding in front of us and
to recapture the awe of that. I think
once you recapture and feel again the
the all inspiring nature of existence
then you're getting close to living
again. And I think there are a couple of
other things I say are important. Um one
is a kind of humility
which is unusual in the modern world. Uh
because we are so hubristic. We're
guided by these um fantasies of total
control of being able to achieve so
much. Just wait in 10 years time. We'll
we've mucked everything up. But you
wait, we'll have even more power to muck
it up in 10 years time. Um we don't need
more power over the world because we're
exemplating
sorry exerting that power in damaging
ways. What we need is greater wisdom.
And wisdom begins in humility, which is
the awareness of just how little you do
really understand.
That doesn't mean to say you have to
accept to be stupid. In fact, it's an a
sign of astuteness to be modest about
what you know. The person who is
believes they've they've they've got the
answers to everything is by definition a
fool. I always say there's um ignorance
comes before knowing but there's
unknowing that comes after knowing and
it's that unknowing that one is aiming
for much as you know Christ said except
you become as little lambs you know
which is of course how should we do that
his disciples said
um but what he meant was there is there
are two kinds of innocence the innocence
of the child before the child becomes
experienced. But there is a much more
robust innocence if you like of the
saintly person who has achieved an
innocence the hard way through having
had experience. So these these things
the spiritual gifts at the end they
sound curiously like what we thought we
were leaving behind but they're in a new
light a new coming into being.
I loved all of that so much, man, that
it just I resonate so deeply uh in the
way that you described and the notions
in which we can attend to life. And it
is inspiring to know that we can
experience more of that way of life
through the way that we choose to use
our attention and attend to things. And
I'm curious to hear you explain how the
way that we attend to life in our
relationships and in circumstances in
life changes very much so what we find
there.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
Yes. And I make a slightly stronger
claim.
Um
but I do make that claim. So, so
what what I what I would say is that
depending on how we attend to things
we find different things there in the
world to attend to and because of the
way we have attended and it's brought
forth whatever it is it has we think oh
well that worked let's pay more of that
attention. So if for example you're use
you're using
a kind of
detached manipulative attention to
people, you will see them as mechanisms
that can be
overcome and directed by you. Um, but if
you see other people as objects of of
compassion and of of love and capable of
all the same kinds of
things to give in life as yourself, then
you will get a different experience from
being around people.
And to make it simple, I talk about the
mountain behind my house. you know the
the mountain behind my house is it's a
got a sloping outline which can be seen
from the sea and uh it gives the name
Talisa to the place where I live because
Talisa and apparently in Norse meant the
sloping rock and so what that tells you
is what it was that mountain to the
Vikings who came down that coast of
Scotland in the year a thousand
it was a landmark which told them the
difference between danger and safety
because it it it it signified a bay that
was famous for its rocks and its
capacity for shipwreck.
Um but it was also the home of the gods
for the Kelts who uh sorry the picss in
fact who lived in the shadow of it a
thousand years before that. uh as we
know from their what they have left in
in behind of their dwellings and their
their artifacts.
Um in the 18th century people started to
go there to paint it and for them it was
a a multicolored form of of different
textures that was very beautiful to
draw. In the 19th century people got
very interested in geology and it
happens to be an outstanding example of
columna bassalt formation. So people
went there for that and they still go
there with their bright yellow hats
wandering around with their hammers. Um
and uh
because it's battle to a uh um
what should I say to exploit it would be
dollars. Um but to a physicist it's
99.99 empty space and the other 0.01%
01% we don't really know what it is. Now
these are each descriptions of the
mountain but which is the mountain and
the answer is in my view none of them is
the mountain because the mountain can be
all kinds of things depending on how you
attend to it. And if you attend with a
certain goal you see one thing. If you
attend with another goal you see
something else.
So you know the same thing is true of a
human body. There are different ways
that we attend with the the doctor, the
the pathologist on the slab and he's
dissecting a corpse.
Your lover,
an art, an artistic model. All these
bodies are all human bodies, but they
require a different attention.
&gt;&gt; How does the quality of the attention
you pay change not just what you find,
but also you, the attender? I thought as
you absolutely because you become I mean
suppose you think well humans are just
machines and you attend to the
extraordinary complex um organismic
um nature of of the human body in a me
mechanistic way you will certainly find
small areas where there appear to be
quite clear linear mechanisms where
Affects B affects C. In fact, if you
look a bit broader using the right
hemisphere, you see that actually these
systems are not um onetoone analytic
linear but are in fact massively complex
systems in which 10,000 things are
happening in a cell per second and
they're all interreacting with one
another in ways that you simply can't
map and are not just beyond our power to
predict but are intrinsically
unpredictable. So on the one hand you've
got this vision. It's all predictable
and mechanical. On the other you've got
no it's infinitely complex. It has
recursive loops in it and it can't
really be predicted. Now if you if you
are interested in having noticed a
mechanism and you're able to intervene
in it you feel very clever. Oh I've done
something useful. I intervene in the
mechanism so on. So I think the whole
thing is just a mechanism and you just
carry on paying that attention for the
rest of your life and you never see
anything else. So I think it does affect
you. But I'd also go further and say
that the way that we attend to things
affects the world at large because none
of us again is isolated. So if grows up
a culture, you may be inclined to see
the world in all kinds of interesting,
virtuous,
revealing, creative ways. But if your
culture nonetheless all around you is
saying this landscape is whatever it is,
it's it's for extractive purposes. It
can be covered in all kinds of roads and
bits of metal and so on and it'll still
be what it is. Then as far as the
culture is concerned, that is what it
has become and it becomes harder and
harder for people to see it in any other
light and to argue back against it.
two two examples come to mind for me.
One is a a long report 400page report on
the impact of a certain development on
an area of outstanding natural beauty
which would effectively destroy its
outstanding natural beauty.
And the report mentions um you know how
money could be raised for the project um
how interest could be earned on the
project, how jobs could be provided
during the construction of the project,
the impact on the local community that
might be beneficial or not and so on.
But nowhere did they mention the
the above all important thing that one
of the last really beautiful wild places
in that part of Britain was going to be
completely destroyed and and at the end
they say but we can't um we can't
evaluate that so we're not saying
anything about it and we can't put any
numbers on it and so it doesn't exist
the tyranny of metrics and and even more
extraordinary one is the
uh report
uh of UNESCO
on the effectiveness of a campaign
uh to wipe out encoasis
in uh children in very poor parts of
Africa. It being a um a protoone that uh
is can cause blindness and by washing in
certain river water you can become blind
from this creature. And at the end it it
said various things um about the impact
on the local economy which could be
measured and it said um of course a lot
of people have been saved from blindness
but we we're not going to talk about
that because there's no figures we can
put on it. So it it is almost as I mean
one can smile but it is it is beyond
belief absurd that that is how we now
think so much in terms of the scheme of
money and jobs and so on and so little
of beauty and goodness and truth all of
which seem to me to indicate that
encoyis and the beauty of a of a
landscape are important. Have you ever
gone people watching?
Have you just gone Have you ever just
sat somewhere and watched people go
about their life?
&gt;&gt; Quite a lot. Yes. Yes.
&gt;&gt; I'm I'm curious because
in the deeper studying of the
contemplative practices,
you have the ability to train your
faculty of attention and the kind of
quality of attention you pay. Many
different practices. One could be
staring at a candle um and being able to
which seems like an impossible task at
first maintain 20 seconds of
concentration let alone 10 seconds
without distracted thought. And it can
be a cultivated practice to where uh the
penetrative nature of your attention and
awareness can uh glean you insights
about that to which you're paying
attention to. And that can be taken from
a candle flame to all of life around us,
especially other people. And it's
fascinating to the degree in which we
pay attention. What comes to mind? What
comes into our awareness when we pay
attention in a certain way? Where you
might just see people walking about in
their daily life and their hustle,
bustle, and struggles to the deeper
things that you can attend to and pay
attention, become aware of within their
experience, their emotional landscape,
things that you become much more
sensitive and receptive to uh that you
just weren't previously aware of. And I
find that fascinating because in many
ways I've seen attention as our
spiritual currency, if you will. Like
that's why we pay it. We pay attention
&gt;&gt; and it's what we do with our life in any
given moment. And um so I just find it
so important to to focus on this a bit
more because
attention
is an area of life and an aspect of
being human that uh is is the faculty in
which we engage with and derive meaning
through life. And I'm just curious if
anything comes to mind as uh yeah, how
you ch how you how you pay attention
changes um
what you become aware of and therefore
can also change how you interact with
and steward life around you. In a sense
&gt;&gt; it is a sense in which attention
well I say it is a moral act because it
has moral consequences in
how much or what you see in a person and
it's been compared to love by uh two
French philosophers Simonve
and Louis label that uh attention is is
the pure attention that you pay to
another is a kind of love that you give
that person and in it that other person
can become
more revealed they can become more
themselves
and I think there are people also who
have practiced very much what you
describe which alas I haven't over long
periods and who are therefore able to
see things in people
um
very clearly
uh and rather alarmingly
but they can detect
what is going on for a certain person
very well. I it's a kind of psychic
phenomenon I suppose and I don't claim
to have it. Um but I do know people who
who can exercise it
and see their way into the nature of of
things. This was in a way what the poet
Werdsworth did and often describes that
he was much mocked for paying attention
to, you know, very simple ordinary
things to a small tree, not the big
ones, or
a lump of rock in the middle of
mountains, but of focusing on these
things for a while, as well as of course
all the rest of it and seeing into them.
So I you see one of the things I think
is that
we may feel that it's important to get
to know
a realm that is conceived of as beyond
the one we inhabit.
And and that may well be real. I believe
it is real. But I think the mistake is
to think that we would get to find it by
turning our backs on the realm that we
find ourselves in. Instead, I think one
sees deeply through the realm that one
is in. So we don't find the infinite by
turning our backs on the finite, but by
looking more deeply into the finite.
and and that we
we in other words treat the world as
having what I call translucency
and it's not quite the same as
transparency
at least not in the way I use it. So
transparency would just be that I was
able to see through a landscape or see
through
you and see something else beyond. But
very importantly I also see you and the
landscape as well as what is beyond. And
it's rather like looking at a painting
and your eye can stop on the surface of
the painting or it can go through the
painting not in such a way that you
don't see the painting. In fact, you see
the painting more really than ever but
you are thereby granted access to
something that in one sense lies through
and beyond that painting. Does that make
any sense? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It makes me think of how
Why is there a felt experience that
music and poetry seem to get us at what
something truly is in its essence other
than pros or typical language, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um and and it also just yeah it makes me
think of the ability to pay attention
and become aware of the context in which
something arises. M
&gt;&gt; what makes this room useful is really
the empty space in between all the
things, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And uh and so it's like the the
awareness of the nuances, the space for
the silence in between the notes of a
song that make it what it is.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Yes. I I um
I wrote a book back in my 20ies
uh called Against Criticism, which was
my way of dealing with the problems I'd
encounter in teaching literary
criticism.
Partly because of
the way in which we took this unique
artifact from
the past that somebody had left for us
because they believed it communicated
something and it was unique. It was
embodied. It was implicit and we took it
out of its embodiedness
made its implicit quality explicit and
destroyed its uniqueness. I we worked in
the exact opposite direction in which
the work of art was supposedly taking
us. And at the end of that book, I have
a chapter called speaking silence, which
is about the fact that often the words
we use when faced with something
spiritually profound
get between us and our understanding of
it. and that it's the silence in
encountering it not an not a a pure
absence
and much as the um the whole idea of
emptiness as it's translated is that
shunyata I think is translated from
Sanskrit is is not emptiness as commonly
understood in the west now as something
entirely negative but the fruitful space
within that is like the womb, a a place
whose emptiness makes possible the
forthcoming of an endless potential. So
it is a richness that is in that silence
and the silence is not saying nothing.
The silence is where you can if you are
attentive pick up important things. So
you must have this this attentive
posture which George Steiner um
talks about in in one of his um essays
on
um
Fangelico's
paintings of the enunciation
to where the angel comes to Mary and
says you will be you or bear a child and
so forth. And and he describes this this
this
inclination of her head in which she is
listening and
it's an open or active passivity. She's
not actively going towards something or
grasping something but she is remaining
receptive but actively receptive. And
it's that active receptivity that I
think that we
need to and I try to when I can to
cultivate so that I am listening but I'm
not talking into that space but I'm
listening for things and if one does
listen things come not complete uh I
mean they may do to some people say they
hear a voice and that's wonderful and
God speaks to them and so on. this
doesn't happen to me but I do know that
creative things can have this quality so
that there is something there that has a
shape to begin with uh has certain
uh qualities and you and by rushing in
you will destroy it and saying you've
got it before you really have but a sort
of a a subtle diplomatic being aware
being available but not trying grasp it
too quickly allows it to come into
being.
&gt;&gt; The sort of dialogue between the the the
left hemisphere saying, "Oh, I got it."
And the right hemisphere, how hang on a
minute, I don't think you have got it.
Stay listen. And then allowing it to
come.
Hey guys, a quick share about creatine.
I'm not sure how many of you know about
or consistently take creatine, but I
have genuinely noticed the effects it
has had on supporting my training,
workout, building muscle, and also my
mind supplementing with it the past
year. It's not just for gym bros like a
lot of people think. If you don't know,
creatine, which is comprised of three
amino acids, is not just for muscle.
It's essential daily fuel for your
brain, your body, and your long-term
health. Momentous is the gold standard
in creatine because they source Creapure
creatine which is the purest most
effective creatine monohydrate
available. Single sourced from Germany
and not cut with any fillers or junk.
Their new lemon flavor single serve
travel packs are amazing. They make it
easy to stay consistent. You just mix it
with water and it tastes amazing. If
you're curious about trying them out,
you can head to livemus.com
and use code know thyself for up to 35%
off your first order. That's know
thyself at live momentous.com. Link in
description as always. I hope you like
it. Hope you enjoy. Back to the show.
What would you say is then the sa the
sacred? And we've been alluding to
throughout this conversation the various
barriers to a felt experience of the
sacred in our day-to-day life, but I'm
curious how you
define which I understand is inherently
paradoxical in doing so, the sacred.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um and then Yeah. And then we'll go from
there.
&gt;&gt; Well, as you would imagine, it's very
difficult to say. Uh, as a result,
writing the chapter called the sense of
the sacred, which is the last
substantive chapter of the matter with
things, took me longer than any other
piece of its length that I've ever
written. It is 111 pages long, so it's
kind of a short book. But the reason
that it was so difficult and it took me
time is because I had to both say and
unsay because
I didn't want people to run away with
clear ideas of what it was I'd said and
substitute those for what I was trying
to get them to
to understand I was gesturing towards
and trying to help come into being in
however little way. So
it was much easier to say what it's not
because I think a lot of things are
mistaken for the sacred. And indeed in
religions I think there can be both the
left hemisphere and the right hemisphere
playing their roles in ways that are
quite typical. So there are religions
and most religions have branches in
which a great deal is set on a written
text which is infallible because it's
written by God and the truth is all 100%
clear cuz it's written down there and
that's it. Now that is a a left
hemisphere fantasy uh which makes it
feel very very safe and comfortable and
because it's constantly longing for
certainty and safety then that's a very
prominent part. It also answers all the
questions that are so difficult by
saying I'm right you're wrong if you
believe anything else you're damned and
all that kind of things. We get this
growing in religions. It's a kind of
anti- relligion that takes over
religions historically at various parts.
But in those religions are also
traditions that respect very much the
that which cannot be pinned down in
language that the important things about
the divine are what cannot be said. So
for example, at the beginning of the Dao
de Jing, the great text of Dowoism, it
says the Dao that can be named is not
the real Dao. And you might think, well,
that's just Chinese. But no, um St.
Augustine um pretty heavy heavyduty
uh priest uh saint of the um Christian
church said see comprehend no deos if
you have understood
it's not god you understand
in other words he's saying from the
outset you will never understand god it
god defies all understanding
But doesn't the mean by that that defies
all
all approach?
Uh if you try to grasp is what he's
saying with the left hemisphere I
grasped it. The right hand I've grasped
it. The left hemisphere controls
grasping then you will never succeed.
But if you are open to something that
will come to you out of its own
own goodness, out of its own charity,
then you may receive it. I I begin the
chapter in question with a quote from
the anonymous writer of the cloud of
unknowing.
And I can't now think what it is
exactly, but it's by
By love he may be caught and held
but by thinking never.
And so
paradoxically an awful lot of the
history of religions uh do contain a
great deal of thinking. And I'm not
against that actually. I think that as
long as the thinking doesn't think it's
finally pinned things down, it can be
useful. It can help clear away areas
where it's not important.
But what that sacred is is something
that I think, let us put it this way,
that we all, unless we've deliberately
tried to, you know, say, "Oh, it's
rubbish or it's nonsense. It doesn't
mean anything." We've probably all got
some sense of what is meant by the
sacred, they may have experiences that
seem to them sacred. They may or may not
be related to a holy place or to a
church, but they may nonetheless have
that quality of sacredness. They may be
of the natural world. They may be of an
encounter with another person.
They may be through through art through
particularly for me music. I think
there's music that is very beautiful of
course and very intellectually
satisfying but there is also music that
really
asks to be called sacred and
I wouldn't apply it to other music that
I find equally beautiful. I would say
it's is wonderful. There are songs by by
Schubus and Schuman which are
exceptionally beautiful and moving. I
wouldn't call them sacred in the normal
sense, but there is a lot of music
particularly welling out of the whole of
the 16th century in Europe that I would
call, you know, just quintessentially
sacred. When you a lot of it was set for
sacred purposes, but when you hear it,
when you encounter it, it raises
feelings in you which are not just
feelings, nor not just thoughts, but are
something that involves your emotional
and intellectual being, but also your
soul. you are called to by something
that carries conviction. And indeed, I
come from a family that had no religious
convictions and I didn't get taken to
church or anything like that. But in my
teens, I was lucky enough to encounter
um this particularly this extraordinary
stream of unbelievably
moving and beautiful church music and
music from other non-European traditions
that was sacred
um and the architecture and the arts and
um the poetry of both poets and many
books of the Bible. And I thought
there's something here. You know, I
wasn't brought up to this. Um at the
time I was mainly studying science, but
I thought I know it's not good enough to
pass this by. It's calling to me.
And um I decided I was going to become a
monk. Actually, I was going to go to
Oxford and preferably do
philosophy and theology and then
probably go into an enclosed order or
maybe get ordained and pad the streets
of Manchester. I don't know. But in any
case, this didn't happen. But all my
life, these things have been with me so
vivid. And I can't say what it is. I've
certainly experienced it in in the
astonishing beauty of lonely and
beautiful landscapes. And
you you find this in in all cultures
that there's a a fifth century
monk who lived in a desert waste and who
describes the the beauty of it as
speciosis, which means of having a a
charming beauty. Um,
so it's a strange thing.
I'm not sure I can really do more than
say if people are interested, try
reading my best shot at explaining what
I'm talking about. You won't be
encouraged by my ramblings now, but I
have tried to explain what it is and
what it isn't. And I thought it was the
most important thing that I could give
to people. And interestingly since
writing that I have had
many many many many many
communications from people it has been a
fantastic gift that they have writing to
me saying how much my work has meant to
them. But in particular
um people who say I never understood
what people meant by a religion or the
the talk of spirituality but after
reading this I think I understand
people saying I lost my religious faith
but in reading this I have come back to
it. um monks and priests uh uh
Christian,
Judeaic,
um Islamic,
uh Hindu have written to me and said
what you have said is so important to in
our tradition and rings many bells for
me. And the most touching thing for me
was that the man who was the person who
prepared me for confirmation classes,
which um meant that you were prepared to
be confirmed into the church as an adult
and receive communion and so forth. And
I wasn't too sure about it all, but I
was interested enough to go along with
it, and I did. But anyway, he read
he must he was been he died last year
and he was 95 and he wrote to me
therefore in his early 90s and he sent
such a moving thing. He said, you know,
what you've been able to say here is
what I have struggled all my life to
say.
I mean, can you imagine what that made
me feel? And he sent some wonderful
poems, actually, Blakeian poems, which
uh anyway, so I I was able to write back
and say, gosh, that is very touching and
beautiful.
I'm curious to hear your thoughts on
what society would look like if
education
from a young age culturally was more
right brain centric. M
well in terms of what we can do to
help the chances of this civilization
surviving.
Education has got to one of the key
elements in it.
I think education has
got worse during
the last 40 50 years. Uh I haven't been
involved in it except at the level of
teaching younger doctors and things like
that. So um my
my experience of certainly school
teaching is from my young days when it
was exceptionally good
and I'm going therefore mainly on what I
hear reported.
Um but I feel that it's like everything
it's become over administrated
over um evaluated at all levels of
constant checking and ticking and so on.
And what this tends to encourage is that
the idea of an education is putting
information into children.
It couldn't be further from that. It's
about not putting in things at all.
Certainly not putting in information. I
mean that may happen. I mean that may be
a byproduct of education and it's an
important one. Somebody who left school
with no information would obviously be
in a rather poor way. I understand that.
But it can't remotely
uh constitute in itself an education. An
education is about drawing something
out, not putting something in. It's
about drawing out something that is
already latent, innate in the person
that is being educated.
And that is
done by as always a mixture between
um or should I say steering a very
important path between two
opposite
problems. One is the problem of
too much structure, too much emphasis on
the quote right answer
and uh too much regulation and not
enough independence for the child. But
equally avoiding the opposite one in
which they just please themselves,
anything goes, let it all hang out.
Neither of these is a sensible or indeed
a decent or compassionate way to treat a
living being. One is just abandoning
them and the other is destroying them by
overregulation. So what I believe should
happen
is that there should be first of all I
think that teachers should be
more independent from government edicts
and when um when I was uh growing up our
own school system in England was
contrasted of course favorably by us
with the system in France where on the
morning of the 3rd of March
um 1962
every child in France would be on the
same page of the same book. Um and this
was said to be a reflection of the deist
character of French culture whereas
there was much more freedom to what we
did. But so I think having that freedom
is is good and trusting teachers is
good. And I would I would say
get the best teachers you can.
There's no other criterion than how good
they seem to be when you interview them
and and so on. That is why you employ
them. Uh give them a good deal of leeway
and keep an eye on what their pupils are
turning out like. And if there's a
problem, you should be allowed to sack
them without too much trouble. at the
moment once you get to be whatever it
is, it's almost impossible to sack you,
however bad you are. Um, and I
understand that's that's, you know,
protective for the teacher, but it was
alsoifying
for everybody if you saddled with
somebody who's doing a very bad job and
they can't be got rid of. So I mean
really that's only a passing note but
what I'm trying to say is it's probably
the the necessary safeguard if you're
going to give them a great deal of
independence. So I would gather a group
of of teachers who were different from
one another, phenomenal, excited by what
they were teaching and allow them to go
ahead and yes that you would test them
and so on and children and see how
they're getting on and unless there's
any particular problem and that's a
really well-running school but what I
understand is that it's all about no
they must know this particular thing and
they must there are 12 things you must
say about Jane Austin or if Jane is even
allowed in the curriculum anymore
nowadays. Um
is all very sad. People are being
dragged away from their the history of
their own culture without which they
can't really understand what they're
looking at in the culture around them.
Um
there's Neil Postman who I'm very late
in the day I'm reading his book um
technopoly
uh about what's happened to our culture
and really he's saying things that I've
been saying for a very long time but he
did say them before me um that unless we
have a grounding in our own culture and
its history and unless we understand the
works of literature like Shakespeare and
poetry and and drama unless we
understand and music becomes part of our
education.
Acting is part of our education
it's not an education and another part
of it should be free thinking. So
at my school I was taught okay come on
um
tell us what something you really
important you think is very important
and you're passionate about it. So I
would I would talk about it for five
minutes and then they say, "Yep, that's
fine. Now imagine you're somebody who
has exactly the opposite belief. Now
argue their point of view for 5 minutes
and we'll we'll score you on how good
you are at that."
Now if more of children couldn't leave
school without doing that there'd be
less of the simplistic this view is
right that view is wrong rather than
saying that most views can be taken to
extremes in which they become wrong but
there is common ground between many um
sensible wise thinkers. So we need get
to get away from you see the left
hemisphere is black and white in its
thinking. It's either this or it's that.
It has no time for subtlety, for nuance,
for a bit of this and a bit of that, for
the coming together of opposites. It
thinks no, it's this. And if so much of
this was good, then more and more and
more of it would be better. So a right
hemisphered educational system would
produce people who were first of all,
yes, capable of doing the so-called STEM
subjects. That is important. But they're
not in themselves in education. They do
need the humanities because guess what?
they're going to be human beings we hope
and live their lives among human beings
and the keys in the word. So do a bit of
that as well rather a lot of that. Um
yes do creative work yes learn to think
flexibly
and um learn how to mediate between
people and listen to them. So and it
wouldn't take very long. It needn't be a
big part of education, but it could be a
week, you know, in perhaps one of the
later years at school in which you you
all spent time learning how to mediate
between two groups of people with
completely opposing ideas. If people
were chained in that, gosh, that would
create a happier society. And the other
one that I think of, but isn't familiar
to most people unless they've been
through it themselves, is really a form
of couples therapy. and and and it's
applicable across the board, not just
the couples. So, in couples therapy, um
there are two people who want to either
part on better terms or get their life
together back on on track. And to do
that, they need to understand what the
other person
wants and sees and hopes for. So you you
have the the two people and you ask one
of them to talk about what they conceive
as being the main problem that they're
facing and then they'll say something
and the other person will say, "Oh, but
that's always when you and they say,
"No, no, no, hang on. You'll have your
chance in a minute. We want to hear more
from this person." And so that person
has their say. And then the first thing
that happens is you turn to the other
person and say, "What did you just hear
said?"
And it's incredibly revealing because
they say what they thought they heard
said. And the other person says, "That's
fantastic cuz I never meant that at all.
I meant this." And another person go,
"Oh, well that's useful to know." So,
you know, so much misunderstanding
happens because
people get into shouting matches in
which they never hear anything that
doesn't confirm what it is that's
already going around in their head. So,
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; that's what I'd say on that one.
Yeah, it seems like if education
was truly the way it was the word was
designed at Duko I believe Greek or
Latin origins to evoke from within not
stuff things down not just what to think
but
&gt;&gt; it's meaning to draw something out or
lead something forth. Yes.
&gt;&gt; So not just what to think but how to
think, when to think, why to think. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um and it
it kind of broadens the the
conversation. So what you mentioned
earlier around the four different ways
of knowing of science and reason of
course important empirical ways of you
know examining reality and yet the
underutilized faculties of intuition and
imagination. And I would just love for
you to spend some time, if you will,
sharing your thoughts on what
these modalities of of ways of knowing
provide that the others don't, the
importance of them. Um, and yeah, the
thoughts you have around the the
importance and power of intuition and
imagination.
H
well
about intuition I think the first point
I'd make is that uh people like Dan
Connean who whose work I respect
um can develop very clever
um
scenarios
which
are set in such a way that you may well
make a mistake if you answer them
intuitively
and so then people do and they
and then conan I'm not using but you
know people like them
clever cognitive scientists come along
and say ah but you're mistaken you see
because and then you feel a bit of a
fool
but the way I look at that is that the
reason that you can be caught out is
that 99.9%
of the time your intuition is doing a
very good job for you and it is always
possible to set up a special set of
circumstances so designed to lead you
into making the wrong choice that
doesn't show that it's a generally
facious procedure and the analogy I use
is that of
um optical illusions there is one
optical illusion that is so staggering
that it is impossible to believe when
you look at it. The so-called
checkerboard illusion. I don't know if
you know it, but I include it in my book
because it is
so amazing. And two squares that look
obviously different shades are in fact
exactly the same shade.
But I've never known anyone who after
seeing this and having had it pointed
out to them that they got it wrong said,
"Oh, well that does it for me. I'm never
going to use my eyes again." because of
course almost all the time your eyes are
doing a very very good job. So I work
through whole areas in which um our
intuitions are good
and they of course one thing that
happens now and is uh entirely
understandable is people worry about
prejudice
and um I make a distinction between
prejudice which is inevitable and bias
which is swinging your judgment in an
unfair way. Um so um prejudices uh
there's been a lot of work on prejudices
and um you won't like this but you can
go back to the science. Prejudice are
extraordinarily robust. Most prejudices
are common across um peoples around the
world and are generally borne out by the
data that we have that is objective.
Um
bias is the use of that information in a
way that is damaging and unfair to an
individual.
And the really good news about that is
that it is also one of the most robust
findings
in social psychology that faced with say
a person who belongs to a group against
whom you have a prejudice
um
you are enormously skilled at setting
that prejudice aside if the evidence is
this person is not like that prejudice
would suggest.
So
that's the deal with the really thorny
one and no doubt people will argue all
kinds of ways but I have cheated it as
fairly as I can with the information and
it is it is really a case that while you
can't do away with prejudices, people
are extraordinarily good on on the whole
at doing away with them. And whether
you're good at or not in disregarding a
prejudice when making a a decision has
nothing to nothing to do with your
educational level. So uh scientists and
highly educated people are just as
biased as uh less educated people. Um
their biases just may be different but
they have them. And
uh so
the
concept of prejudice and bias is is
the concept of prejudice and bias is is
an interesting area. For example, nobody
nobody who's intelligent can avoid
having prejudices. If you were walking
down a street at night and you see a
gang of loud
um leather jacketed men swinging bicycle
chains and shouting
uh your prejudice that these people are
quite like likely to attack you is
perfectly correct. Um, and you see them
as more dangerous than a group of
ballerinas walking down the street. I
mean, they might suddenly turn on you,
but it's much less likely. So, in
general, our prejudices are the
absolutely inevitable consequence of
leading a life and not not um
blindfolding yourself to what you know.
It's what you do with that information
and whether you use it in bias, in
judgment, and so on.
And this also is importantly not either
a left or right thing. So there are
people who are biased on both ends who
make judgments about people on the basis
that they belong to a certain group and
they don't wait to see whether they're
actually more reasonable than they would
have anticipated or um whatever else it
is.
So that's not the most important and
likable thing. I just need to deal with
it because of course everyone will say
but intuitions are subject to prejudice
but one of the things about intuitions
is that they are capable of gathering
together as many many as 12 to 15
strands of thought
and for for this reason there was a
jurist i legal expert who is the head of
one of the German maxplunk institutes
whose advice to um business leaders is
to allow ow their their people to use
their intuitions as much as possible.
And you may or may not know this, but
most important steps forward in science
and in mathematics were not made by
endless scribbling, but by a moment of
insight. And I I I know of about 40 of
these and quote many of them in the
book. and George Gaylord Simpson who was
the uh the leading light in the
establishment
um of the um of the main way the
mainstream way in which um science now
looks at um evolutionary biology himself
said that most scientists don't produce
their results as a result of the
scientific method. You know, we're
taught at school you do this, you do
that, you know, and a certain amount of
that obviously comes into it and perhaps
many years of slogging goes into it. But
you don't actually reach your answer
that way. You reach your answer through
intuition. And if you rule intuition
out, you will never be an imaginative,
creative or interesting scientist.
That's science and math. Never mind art
and poetry and music and so on where
again the
whatever it is seems to come to us not
through a conscious level of an effort
indeed stops one from it happening. So
one has to stop the effort and allow the
thing to speak to you and again I have
descriptions from poets from novelists
uh from uh composers and so forth. So
intuition is a very fine and a very
accurate thing.
Accurate. Can that possibly be right?
Yes. Because
take a couple of examples.
Raceh horses
are all very fast. And when they're
racing, they normally are able to win.
the winner will win by sometimes a
fraction of a second.
And I have the accounts of a man who
contacted me after reading the master
and his emustry and said, you know, I'm
a fairly left hemisphere type of guy. I
grew up um in and was um
I think he grew up in France but he he
worked in America where he got a
doctorate in horse equin physiology and
he developed a 120 point score for how
to estimate the um
the potential speed of a particular
horse. Uh and then he he went to to to
France and and bred horses and so on.
and he now makes his living in England
by being a tipster. He goes to the the
course before a great race and he says
for the at maximum 5 minutes I see the
horses being led around the ring or
being slowly walked by their uh by their
jockeyies around the ring and on the
basis of that I have to make a decision
as to which horse is going to ring win
and he found that to begin with his left
hemisphere kept getting in the way so
he'd make a judgment
and then he'd go, "But I've put high
odds on that one winning." But why? No,
it it'll be the the other one. And so
he'd put the other one and send that in.
And of course, the first horse that he
he shied off everywhere
one. And this happens so often that the
people that he was advising, the betting
um people in the betting office said,
"For heaven's sake, don't write it down
and then change your mind. Just put it
straight into your phone and send it."
And as long as he just did that, he won
most of the time and became one of the
most successful
uh you know, with with a six-figure
income out of just this guessing. He
said, "But how can I guess this? How can
I guess this that this particular horse
can be perhaps a tenth of a second
faster than the other one? And another
thing he found was that when he went to
the raceourse, if he took his son with
him and his son knew a lot about it and
was interested in it and wanted to
follow his dad, he would explain to his
son why it was he made a decision and as
soon as he'd done that, it was no good
anymore. So eventually they said to him,
"Please don't take your son."
And the other thing he discovered was
that if he had a short nap before
meeting the horses, he would he would go
along and he'd stay in the car, he'd
have a 10-minute nap, he'd then go and
do this. As long as he followed this,
his instinct, his intuitive sense um
gave him a huge advantage.
And and another thing from sport that I
examined was the man who is the
physician to the TT races in the aisle
of man wrote to me. Now the TT races in
the aisle of man is has been described
as the most dangerous sport in the world
in which the aisle of man is a rocky
island off Britain. Um, and it
runs an annual race around the island,
not on a race course, but on the roads
that go up over mountains and so forth.
And while they're running these courses,
there's no other traffic on the road.
So, that's it. But there are potholes,
there are tight bends, there are all
kinds of things you wouldn't encounter
on a on a on a smooth raceourse.
and he looked after these people and he
was fascinated because there's a big
place where they would pass a stand and
go down a steep hill, turn to the right,
have to do a a wiggle around a bend, go
over a bridge, and so on. And he would
say to them, "If you're not in exactly
the right place as you stand, as you
pass the stand at the top of this rise,
you won't be able to negotiate the the
bend at the bottom." How do you envision
that? And this guy said, "Oh, when I'm
at the stand at the top, I'm not
bothering about the bend at the bottom.
I'm thinking of what is half a mile
away, which is this going over a
bridge."
And if I actually were thinking about
the bend, I'd come off. So there's some
And he has many stories about them, how
their attention is extraordinarily vivid
to the whole field. so that he can he
can detect somebody in a field to the
side lighting up a cigarette. He can
smell it. He can take in the whole
scene, but his eyes are completely
unfocused. He said, "When you watch
these people, it's like they're just
staring into the middle distance, but
they're doing stuff at the at the
immediate level, which is
life-threatening. And indeed, they have
to take a certain bend that has a stone
wall in it so tight that their leathers
brush the stone, otherwise they won't be
able to carry on. All this is going on
and it's all done entirely intuitively
and when you stop to think about it you
you mess up and you can multiply this
across as many sports as you like but of
course to me it's not just I mean that
gives massive interest but it's just
that intuition is a great gift that we
have and we need to pay attention to it
and I have this quote from Einstein that
the rational mind is the precious
servant And the intuitive mind is a
precious gift. We have um we live in a
world which um acknowledges the the
servant but has forgotten the gift.
&gt;&gt; So that that's about a few thoughts on
on on intuition. Imagination is a wholly
different matter. Imagination is the
capacity to see connections to see forms
and shapes that are not obvious. And as
I say to see into
what Wdsworth used to call seeing into
the light of things
by which he meant this ability I
described earlier of being able to see
something through and beyond whatever he
was not neglecting what he was seeing
but actually seeing it more real than it
ever was. And by doing that seeing what
it really intimated to him of a realm
beyond. As a child, he was constantly
aware of this, if you like,
transcendental
sense of the world. He describes himself
as a a 7-year-old or a 10year-old as as
as completely enwrapped, bewitched
um by by the waterfalls, by clambering
on the rocks, by the woods forest and
the sound of the cat cataract and all
these things. And as an as an adult, he
he sort of recognizes them. He knows
they're there. He sort of can see
they're beautiful in the left hemisphere
example of, but he can no longer get
back to feeling that whatever it was
that he sensed as a child. And what's
really amusing to me about that one is
that um you know obviously who I mean by
Richard Dawkins and he um
has this view that children have no
sense of the transcendental or of the
spiritual or of the divine. and that
they wouldn't have any time with this
absolute nonsense if it wasn't
indoctrinated into them by their
families and their early schooling. And
this has been researched. And what
actually it seems is that preschool
children naturally think in such terms.
They hear things and see things that
other people don't hear and see. And
their parents tell don't tell lies. You
can't really hear things. they can't
really see and so and they're
discouraged when they get to school for
talking in spiritualized terms because
they learn that it's not smart to do so
that really by the time you're you're in
you're seven or eight you really ought
to be talking in mechanistic terms about
everything. So what Dawkins believes is
happening is the precise opposite of
what actually happens. And this is
important too when you come to think of
people some peoples of indigenous
origins and indigenous tribes that I
have met uh who are capable of hearing
things, knowing things, seeing things at
a distance and even being able to see
things in the future.
And
you know, who are we to say that they
can't? And when they say they can hear
the voices of the elders advising them
things, how do I know that they're not?
&gt;&gt; What does that make you think of the
nature of consciousness then? Because
&gt;&gt; the the limits of consciousness,
&gt;&gt; the nature of consciousness,
&gt;&gt; the nature of consciousness
&gt;&gt; because there are yeah, like you said,
innumerable examples across cultures all
around the globe that have access to
information that they in sort have no
business in knowing or having access to.
&gt;&gt; Um, and you could look at the Doon tribe
that has maps of the Sirius stars and
proper proportions to so many different
examples. And um I'm just curious your
thoughts on a light on a larger scale of
the possibility of consciousness being
more fundamental than emergent and uh
information
being communicated in not just the top
down sense.
&gt;&gt; Yes,
information is a word we should come
back to. But anyway, um
let's let's dive into the consciousness
question instead. But I would like to
come back to information.
&gt;&gt; We can do it. I promise.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. So
the relationship between the brain and
consciousness can only be of one of
three kinds logically. Either the brain
can
secrete consciousness or emit
consciousness in the way that the kidney
produces urine. Um,
or it can transmit consciousness in the
way that a radio receiver transmits a
program from somewhere else. Doesn't
generate it, but it passes it on. Or it
can, and this is my favorite um
relation, it can permit it. By which I
mean it's closer to transmit, but it's
not really transmitting something. it by
its
by its uh permission or negation
it is allowing something to come into
being. So it is like a sculpting
element. It is like a valve that
constricts, restrains and alters the
course of what passes through it. So we
can either emit for which there is no
evidence at all. There has never been
the slightest explanation of how that
could happen unless consciousness is
already in matter to some extent in
which case that is not the question. I
agree that there is matter and
consciousness are also always together.
Um so
the only possibilities are those and I
suggest that what it is is that it
permits consciousness. And what I mean
by that is that um and the best I can
come up with is the way in which
water flows and water lands on a
landscape
in entirely at random and it then drains
across the landscape and it flows down
certain channels and those channels
reliably end up getting the water and
they flow reliably eventually. into the
sea
and
the banks of the river that form the
channels, the undulations in the
landscape certainly don't make the
water. The water comes to them. They
don't exactly make the river. They are
part of the river for the time that
they're constraining its banks. So the
the river couldn't exist without those
banks, but the river couldn't exist
without the water that came to it. Now
that's really my
simple idea,
simplified idea about the relationship
between the brain and consciousness.
That consciousness
as a whole
is pre-existent
to my consciousness.
It comes into being for me as my
consciousness because of my particular
brain constraining the consciousness
that is everywhere in certain ways and
it becomes my consciousness. Now if by
an accident or um a disease or something
the the landscape of my brain changes
and these these
channels as it were become disrupted
then of course my consciousness will
become disrupted in ways that are
relatively predictable. So
that is it and I think that
matter is the more difficult one than
consciousness. Unbelievably, there are,
I believe, professors still holding down
chairs at respectable universities
uh who claim that there can be no
consciousness or consciousness doesn't
exist. Uh and that it is quote an
illusion. Dan Dennett was one of the
people who said this before he himself
became an illusion. But the problem is
that you know if it's an illusion, it's
got to be an illusion in consciousness
in something. Uh you can't have just an
illusion without consciousness. It's
utterly incoherent. But never mind.
Let's pass over all that. Consciousness
being the one thing that is self-evident
that
&gt;&gt; it is it is the one thing that is
absolutely undeniable and self-evident.
Um so there it is. Um and what is
matter? Well, nobody has ever seen
matter.
All we've ever seen is things
manifesting themselves in our
consciousness that we call material. We
we we fix the term material to them. And
what what what do we mean by that? We
mean that they have certain qualities
which I can think can be pretty much
summed up as persistence and resistance.
So um you know something that is
immaterial, it can disappear from my
mind. uh it can come back again a year
later but it has no persistence and um
an and a an immaterial thing also um
brings no resistance to bear um a
thought again I I can I can go with it
or leave it or whatever um I can put my
hand through it but I can't put my hand
through the table so and those two
things permanence and resistance turn
out to be incredibly important for
creation for something to create it has
to have a degree of continuity of
existence. Otherwise, there is nothing
being created except random comingings
and goings of nothing. Um, and
resistance enables it to come into
being. If there weren't resistance,
there could be no permanence and there
could be no thing separate from
the unity
globular nature of the all. for there to
be the many as well as the all. And it
seems to me that that is the the one
thing we can say fairly clearly about
the story of the cosmos is that it
started from this relatively
undifferentiated
um mass and then has become
differentiated in unimaginably rich
ways, complexified, made beautiful. Um
and that is the evolving of the many.
And in doing so, it is not disrupting
the wholeness of the whole. We had this
earlier when we talked about a flower
that when the flower unfolds, it hasn't
as it were disrupted the flower. It has
fulfilled the potential of the flower.
It still remains a flower and can close
in again and open again and so forth.
And this is what this coming together
and coming apart is the intrinsic nature
of the cosmos.
So
matter presents us with material
that is persistent and resistant
and all matter partakes of consciousness
in that particular way. Now I believe
that you you shouldn't separate matter
and consciousness
but instead talk about them as phases of
the same underlying entity.
So there is never a need to say well how
can we bring these two things together
unless he even if they both existed from
time in memorial how can we nonetheless
reconcile them I say they can be easily
reconciled because matter is just
another phase of consciousness and I'm
not using phrase phase in the sense of a
temporal phase but in the say phase of a
physical sense that physicists and
chemists talk about the different phases
and the obvious one to refer to here is
water. Um, if you think of water, you
tend to think of something that is
translucent and and flows easily and and
can run over your hand and can support
you and so on. That's fine. But water
can also present as something that is um
opaque,
rigid, um, immovable unless a great
force pushes it. um and is so solid it
can split your head open. In other
words, ice. And it can also present and
is present in this room as literally
tons of water you cannot see in the form
of water vapor. Now, which of these is
water? Well, we're inclined to say the
the liquid stream, but in fact, they are
all water. They're just different ways
in which water manifests. My view is
that matter is a phase of consciousness
in that same sense
&gt;&gt; that very much so actually align with
the eastern yogic sciences uh and what
they say and how they delineate
uh the different forms of density.
&gt;&gt; Yes. that consciousness would take shape
in. Um as we as human beings have
different layers of self that you could
say have different lay take different
shapes and different forms and of
density. Uh
so okay then do you want to come to
information now?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The reason I wanted to come to
information is because well first of all
you used it there and and secondly
you've talked about knowledge
and
and especially when we're talking about
education it seems to me rather crucial
to talk about information
knowledge
and understanding as different things.
Would you say understanding is
consilient with wisdom? Knowled
information, knowledge, wisdom.
&gt;&gt; I say wisdom is something yet again, but
I'd be happy to include it as another
idea, a force. I think one should
&gt;&gt; um and I think wisdom is
is is a a more spiritually rich state.
Um, and I think it's a gift that comes
only out of a great deal of
understanding and a great deal of
knowledge of the experiential kind.
So
what is it information? Well, it is
effectively data.
I mean originally there is in the idea
of a form which is fascinating because
in physics a long time ago certainly at
least 115 years ago and in biology in
the last perhaps 15 years only people
are beginning to see that you cannot
talk about um well in biology you cannot
talk about uh processes without invoking
fields that enable certain forms to be
followed because there isn't enough
information in the genome now that we've
decoded it that could possibly direct uh
fourdimensional formal processes. In
fact, there's so little information in
the genome that um it's been described
as one of the most inert rather than
being the this um Dawkins like tyrant
that directs us the lumbering robots
that almost nothing is directed by the
genome. It's a it's kind of like a
ladder to which the cell can go when it
needs certain ingredients, but often the
ingredients aren't there and therefore
have to be found another way.
So
form fields are are very interesting but
information
has come to mean lists of facts and in
other words points of data and these are
things that on their own mean nothing
and this again um in technopoly Neil
Postman's book was now 25 years old more
even perhaps 35. Um he was saying the
problem nowadays is that people have
lost all the things that gave meaning to
life which were the connections
historical, social and so on which
enable them to read what certain things
meant. But if you take people away from
their history, and by the way, one of
the ways of really destroying a culture,
if you are an oppressor, a tyrant who
takes over and wants to destroy a
culture is to destroy their history,
take them away from their history. This
is happening now in Western Europe. At
any rate, I can't speak for America, but
it is. And um another way is to um
fragment their values and say there are
no sources of value which used to be
partly the knowledge that was passed
down in families and by churches and by
other bodies. Now I'm not saying that
anybody here is infallible but without
certain guides that are pretty reliable
as to how people got to know something
we are at a loss. and information makes
things not only know better but worse.
So his theory is and I think it's a
pretty much a revelation is that we
started from a position where we thought
more information obviously was good
because it helped us understand more and
to banish superstitions
and that then with the printing press
there became more and more information
that was disseminated much faster and
and that seemed to be good for a while
and then along came much faster
transmissions of information using
um uh photography um telegraphy and and
so on and that now we have a situation
in which there is so much information
that it is disinformation for almost
everybody. Nobody knows well he doesn't
say this but by now we can clearly see
nobody knows what to trust in the way of
information because information itself
can't answer the question whether it is
has a meaning even if it's trustworthy
even if it is true that whatever
information comes to me that a certain
thing is you know for to most intents
and purposes that is a true fact
information itself no amount of it not
more of it can help me understand the
meaning of that information. So where
does the meaning come from? The meaning
comes from the network in which that
information is embedded. And I don't
just mean a lot of other facts. I mean
other things that come to us
intuitively, imaginatively, and through
a lifetime of being able to think
reasonably and carefully. And I say
reasonably rather than just rationally
because there are certain things that
are totally irrational that conclusions
that you can reach that are totally
irrational through mere rationality. Uh
I make a distinction between rationality
which can often lead you astray and
reason which doesn't lead you astray.
Reason is what a wise judge would have
after a lifetime of dealing with people,
thinking about things and absorbing
information from experience.
So
reason and these other things will will
nurture one into along with a culture
and along with the the the connections
between different areas of knowledge
will help one
re realize the information as meaning.
Now the the next thing is knowing and
and knowing has two very importantly
different meanings which uh again I say
again because other languages have
differences between rationalizing and
reason but we don't I use those but
knowing as you as you know in in most
languages um there are two words for
this so in in in French for example
there is savv and know a fact I know
that France is the capital Paris is the
capital of France, but there is also
conet meaning I know Paris because I
spent a couple of years living there and
that's a much more diffuse rich round
and it's so if I I say I know Paris oh
you know it then well what is it no I
can't tell you that in a few sentences
but I can certainly tell you it's the
capital of France that's just sir and
there's the same difference in German
kenan and viston so kenan is the
knowledge by experience vist is knowing
the facts
and and I don't speak Spanish but there
probably is in Spanish and and so forth.
&gt;&gt; Sanskrit vidya and yan are two ways in
describing knowledge that is could be
transmissible through a book versus the
nosis of uh the experience of the
knowing. That's that's very important
and and that probably is is a is is an
even deeper one actually because it's um
there are kinds of knowing that can be
known through a book but would be more
of the conford kind after you'd read the
book. So I think that's even as subtle
as a distinction.
Um, and I gave a talk once where I was
told that Swedish has three words for I
can't remember what the third one
entailed. But, but anyway, the point I'm
making is that there are different ways
in which you can know. And one of them
is relatively superficial and a computer
could easily take it on board because
it's more dependent on facts and the
other is dependent only on experience.
the experience of a embodied being who
is capable of emotion, capable of
suffering, capable of love, capable of
acknowledging the the briefness of life
and so on which helps you understand
what being in Paris for a while means in
its bittersweet
nature
and and neither of those is the same as
understanding.
First of all, why is it called
understanding? And
there's a kind of meaning of under that
has gone out of English but is preserved
in German. So German in German has the
word un and it can of course mean below
but it can also mean among unen when one
is among friends one can say. So um un
standing understanding is being able to
stand amidst and among a whole array of
things and it's not a simple business of
knowing in any sense it's something
about ah I see this gestal this whole
thing that makes sense and that
understanding gets richer from more
experience from more knowledge from more
everything and is in a way the goal of a
life well-lived if it is to understand
the really important things which I
would say are the true the good and the
beautiful
and wisdom is to see the way of
negotiating
those
one's ability to bring those things into
being in in a life to to do them with
love to do them with compassion to do
them with humility
but to respond to those ultimate values
of goodness, truth and be to beauty.
All of which I've seen in my lifetime
trashed and degraded, you know. So
wisdom being the integration and
synthesis perhaps of those other modes
of knowing and
&gt;&gt; yes and whereas I think understanding
might
might be more
something you might expect in in
somebody that um and and what is your
understanding and they could explain and
then there may be bits of it that you
might think oh unusual but I think
wisdom can be completely bulver as the
French say can be completely
turn things topsyturvy. So I think Zen
is an example of this where part of his
wisdom might be if you meet the Buddha
on the road kill him. Um and you think
really
is that wise?
So I think in order to get to wisdom,
you sometimes have to
take a a position which which which
shocks or inverts in order to release
another level of understanding in which
true wisdom can cuz I think wisdom will
often be the case like Neil Boris where
you know the opposite of a deep truth is
another deep truth. Yes.
I'm curious what your thoughts are on
the
words know thyself to know thyself and
what the extent of the self is. I know
we've been exploring around a lot of
different aspects of consciousness,
value, meaning, attention, what it means
to be human. What is the self in your
eyes?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
Um,
I'll just mention before I forget it
that I I wrote an article for the
journal of consciousness studies called
selving and union. And the word selving,
becoming a self I take from Gerald
Manley Hopkins from one of his poems.
Um
and in it I was really being asked to
consider. So what is the self that for
example in many religious traditions you
are advised to rid yourself or free
yourself of.
And I think there are again different
ways of understanding the self. Not
surprisingly,
for everything there will be differences
at least between the way the left and
the right hemisphere think of the self.
And I think it's pretty reasonable to
say that the left hemisphere self is
something like Jung's idea of the ego.
Um
and his idea of the ego was something
that was very valuable in the early
stages of the development of any human
being because it enabled that being
to have a coherent self. When a child is
newly born, it is not aware that it is
in any sense separate from the mother.
And for several months it may not have
any understanding of itself as a
separate being. The mother and one of
few and the children the child is the
mother and child are fused. Then as
things progress the child suddenly
realizes that there are differences
between the mother and the child and
include differences in desires,
difference in expressed wishes
and they have to learn how to
know that they are themselves and not
just as it were swallowed up in the
mother, but also that by being separate
from the mother, they're not abandoned
by the mother. that in fact there can
now be a a still richer union that comes
from the fact that there are two.
And those phases, you know, are the
starts of the idea that one consolidates
in toddlerhood and in childhood to an
extent that you are separate from other
people.
But he also emphasizes that there is a
self that grows
um
not so much when one's very young but
begins to grow as one attains some sort
of maturity
um as a self that is constituted by the
presence of others. Um
much as indeed that very first ego was
constituted by the presence of the
mother that one's selfhood is also
constituted by the net of people to whom
you belong who are your family, your
people, your kin and that you owe
something to them and that indeed you
put yourself eventually second to the
flourishing of those that you love and
that is the the development of a pure or
purer or more mature self.
When the Buddha was hungry, it wasn't
somebody else that was hungry. It was
the Buddha that was hungry and he knew
he was hungry. And when the Buddha died,
it was the Buddha that died. It wasn't
somebody else that died. There was a
self that was a Buddha. But the Buddha's
selfhood had become so um
extended if you like that it was uh
something like Indra's net. It was
ramified across all all all that exists
is perhaps one way of putting at it.
Most of us won't achieve that. But if we
achieve a kind of self that is other
centered then I think that is not a bad
aim because
from a psychologist point of view people
who have no sound self of themselves are
very damaged and unhappy people who
cause a great deal of grief to
themselves and to others. Two principal
examples of people who don't have a
secure sense of self are people with
schizophrenia and people with um
um
multiple personality disorder. Uh
borderline personality disorder.
um and who who tend to act impulsively
extremely damagingly because they don't
really have a secure sense of who they
are. So a lot of psychiatric work for
such people is enabling them to get a
securer sense of who they are. Um and in
the case of schizophrenia, obviously
there's much else that has to be dealt
with in the cognitive and emotional
realm. But but so that's my thought on
the self.
Um but
what were you saying before that?
What was it the the other part of your
question? I mean this the sense of self
uh what the self is the extent of self.
I'm also happy to share just uh
I'm taking back to the beginning of this
conversation when you said that we start
in ignorance, we come to knowing and
then make our way to unknowing again.
And when it comes to the sense of self,
the
necessary individuation process that one
must go through to have a secure sense
of self. Otherwise the many different
derails and skits from from that from
that point uh are made are made
possible.
Going from the healthy integration and
individuation process of an ego and a
sense of a separate self to then putting
that that experience of that small self
if you will and the content of our
experience in a larger context of
awareness where our sense of self
extends beyond the temporal meat suit of
our
&gt;&gt; of our body uh is a journey that I'm
&gt;&gt; obviously very interested in and since
you are as Well uh and so yeah I'm just
curious about your your thought process
on the extension of the self.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well
I mean there's some sense in which
parallel to the idea of knowing
sorry of ignorance knowing and
unknowing. uh is a sort of the ego the
self and then
a sort of dissipation of that sense of
the self at least as the ground of
everything that one does. I I I don't
know of it because I haven't attained to
that. Um
but one reads the accounts of people who
who who perhaps do experience that it's
very difficult to say because you see
the thing is
we come now to the nature of love.
And
to love somebody
there have to be two selves.
Those souls,
heaven forbid, should be isolated egos.
But they also need to be reaching out to
one another. And to reach out to another
is to have a base from which to do so.
To build a bridge. A bridge cannot have
only one stonion. It needs to have two.
And in a relationship, a good
relationship.
And love seems to me the archetype of
relationship. And in most
spiritual traditions that I know of, the
ground of being, however
conceived, is a fountain of of love.
Tuness as well as oneness comes into it.
and
even perhaps threenness of course
because the love that's created is
something that is not purely dependent
on the two that are there. So you get a
movement that Hegel would have been
familiar with that a thing and its
opposite form a relationship in which
neither nulls the opposite element in
the other. They hold the two in tension
and out of that tension comes forth
something new.
And here again I would think of
Heracitis's
image of the bow that has to be pulled
in two directions not just one. It it
has to be pulled apart which sounds like
a waste of effort but actually that it
that is what allows the bow to have the
power to send forth an arrow. It's that
which allows the strings of the liar the
power to produce a note. Without that
tension between the two, there wouldn't
be the third thing, the music. Now, in a
way, two people can be thought of as the
two opposites that are tied together and
they're pulling apart, but they're also
holding together in order that the music
can come. Perhaps also the arrow can
come.
uh and arrows can be the arrows of Cupid
and they can be the arrows of other
things too but such as the nature of
human relation
and so I would I would see it like that
and I've really been interested very
much in thinking about the trinity which
is odd because
um
when I started off being interested in
in religion I thought well there's a lot
of wonderful ideas in Christianity
some of the things you're asked to
believe are frankly highly improbable,
if not impossible. Um, and I'm hoping to
get by by not having to sign up to them.
Um,
as I've gone on in my very simple way
pursuing these things, I I I think I can
understand
the meaning of some things that seem to
me improbable or paradoxical or
whatever. and and one of them is the
Trinity. Um
there was some light shone on it shone
on it for me by a a monk who a
Franciscan monk who I um met while I was
at school. I was in a not in a a
religious well not in a religious
foundation at school. Um and he said
well think of it like this. It's like a
book. What is the book? Is the book
whatever it was in the mind of the one
who wrote the book? Or is it the result
of that which is this object here on the
table in front of me that I can open and
read? Or is it what happens when I read
it and it goes into me and becomes part
of me? I thought that was quite good as
a way of dealing with the idea of
something which exists in different
realms of matter and consciousness. But
in a way
all three of them partake of one
another. And in in looking further at
the trinity I discovered that the
trinities is is and probably you know
this very well an ancient idea. It is
pre-Christian
and the Christian faith took it up in
this special way of um thinking about
the relationship between different
parts of something that is never divided
into parts.
It is one hole and yet it is also
tripartite and and that when you get to
this level you are dealing with that
kind of
paradox but that paradox doesn't
doesn't destroy anything for me. I think
both parts of it need to be there.
I love a story I perhaps we need to end
fairly soon but I I love a story which I
must tell you. um of a Russian bishop
who went he had a number of monasteries
and hermitages and so on in his I don't
know dasis or whatever under his
oversight
and he heard that there was a small
group of three very holy men who lived
on a rock somewhere and um that they
hadn't been visited for you 30 years or
something. So I thought, well, I must go
and visit them and see whether they're
all right and see what it is they're
doing and thinking and so on. So he
arrived there and they were
duly impressed to be met by the bishop
and the bishop tell said to him said to
them, "So what do you do?" And they
said, "Well, we work and we pray. Uh
what do you pray?" And they said
to
us,
which means
there are three of you. There are three
of us. Have mercy on us.
And he said, "No, no, no, no, no, no,
no. You must pray like this." And he
taught them the Lord's Prayer and
no doubt the creed and various things.
And then feeling that he'd set things
right, he the bishop felt it was time to
leave. And so he said his farewells and
pushed off
the boat and was sailing away. And then
in the boat, the crew were amazed to see
the the monks running towards them
across the water and they ran towards
the boat and were well they were calling
out and they were calling out and the
bishop said, "What happened?" And they
said, "We forgot the prayers."
I think it's beautiful.
I uh both that story and what you were
mentioning to to beforehand about this
within the realm of duality and the
trinity.
&gt;&gt; Um
&gt;&gt; it makes me
one personally grateful for the contrast
of experience that is always available
to us. So not just seeking out the
joyful beautiful moments but uh
embracing the
&gt;&gt; very much
&gt;&gt; the the antithesis to that and very much
so what you mentioned with Hegel's
dialectic with the synthesis of
&gt;&gt; two seeming opposites um or opponents um
it makes me think and again through the
Vic lens like the one becomes two for
the joy of becoming one again
&gt;&gt; like the illusion of separation allows
the experience of one another.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And through that there is the joyful
rejoicing
&gt;&gt; and the experience and the contrast. And
&gt;&gt; so it
&gt;&gt; it to me brings in gratitude and grace
into the picture what seems like uh just
opposition and suffering. Uh and I think
that's really important.
It so much is and uh thank you for
mentioning that because I think there's
a sense in which
a life in which there was no suffering
would be one without meaning. And
William Blake thought that even in
heaven there must be suffering because
if so if there were no suffering there
could not be joy.
uh the two as it were need one another
like the two poles of a magnet.
And I thought, well, that's an
interesting idea. And of course, he was
very sound on the coming together of
opposites of innocence and experience
and and so on. Um good and evil and all
the rest. But
I
came back to a an insight of Victor
Franklles.
And um for those of your listeners who
may not know, Victor Frankle was a very
important
psychotherapist who himself was a
psychotherapist and philosopher who was
as well as his family um interned by the
Nazis and his family were killed. He
himself survived
and goodness knows what he experienced
and suffered is beyond
beyond imagination.
And when he was asked what gave meaning
to life,
he said three things. One is the feeling
of being together with others, sharing
life with others, sharing one's meals
with others, sharing one's love with
others, sharing one's worship with
others.
The second
was feeling that you had managed to do
something in your life that made you
feel had been worthy, that you had done
something worthy and fulfilling.
And the third was to have suffered.
I thought that was extraordinary
coming from him especially and he said
that
without suffering there is really no
meaning no understanding. I think one of
the things that's happened in my
lifetime is that
we have lived in a very very peaceful
period. I was born in the 1950s.
Um, and you know,
touching wood, I have so far anyway
lived in a world in which I my life has
not been narrowly touched by by by war.
Uh, I I do not know what is coming. It
may be something terrible, but we've had
a very peaceful time and on the whole
we've become somewhat lazy. So we
thought oh bad things don't happen very
much and we don't need to guard
ourselves against them and we can just
enjoy ourselves and to begin with this
was rather nice but it's ended in a
sense of um a kind of pointless hedonism
well you I can get pleasure from doing
that but so what's the point in that the
so-called hideonic treadmill that you
need to do something more enjoyable but
you don't get even the enjoyment and
it's such a demeaning idea that we're
here just to have fun. And Vickinstein
himself said, "I have no idea why we're
here, but I'm pretty certain it's not to
justify the fun."
Um,
so
yeah, I think that is, you know,
suffering can just make people very
better. It's very, it's true and I've
seen that. But most people that I like
and I value have have really suffered.
They've been through some pretty
devastating things that may have brought
them near to death. Um, and I I think
that is right. And I'm sure it helped
him be a better psychiatrist.
Um,
in my own smaller way, I I I have
experienced such things that pretty much
killed me. And I hope they've made me a
better psychiatrist and better able
actually to enjoy life and feel the
meaning of it having not been completely
destroyed by it, you know, which is the
the other thing. But that's right. You
see that you can't have the one in a way
without the other. You can't have just
the north pole without the south pole.
And seeing that,
living with it, acknowledging it brings
you to a position where you can say in
the title of one of Victor Frankle's
books, which I very much recommend, by
the way, saying yes to life in spite of
everything.
And I like that both for saying yes to
life, but also in spite of everything.
Not because it's so marvelous, but
because actually a lot of it is not
marvelous. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. No, it's great. And it it just
makes me feel so so much gratitude and
resonant for your work, which is of
course much larger than the exploring of
the two hemispheres, but larger like
cosmologically on the human
developmental journey, this experience
of life, the union of two opposing
forces at large.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Um both on the emotional scale, on the
psychological scale. uh on on all
scales. Yes.
&gt;&gt; And um and that's what I see so much of
your work as doing is bringing into
unicity seemingly separate
uh areas.
&gt;&gt; Thank you for that. And I I'm glad you
feel that. I think I recognize that also
as part of part of the aim of what I've
done with my life actually is to draw
things together that are not often
brought together in order to illuminate
one another. H
&gt;&gt; if you had a last message,
which I know is a big ask
for humanity,
what would that message be?
Ooh,
well, apart from say yes to life to
everything. I think I was trumped there
already by Frankle.
Um,
I think it would be
never to despair.
I call myself a hopeful pessimist. In
other words, I see things going wrong
all around me, but I remain hopeful.
And that's partly because I believe we
don't know a tenth of what's actually
happening. partly because I think human
beings are a wonderful
um a wonderful species. We've focus all
the time on the things we've done wrong
and there have been many of them. But we
should be more grateful for and aware of
not in a vain way but in a a humble way
for what we can achieve at our best
which is extraordinary and is attested
to by so many historical examples
and that gives one gives one hope. So
don't despair and don't say it's all so
much bigger than anything I can do. Uh I
often hear you know
everything seems to be going wrong but
what can I do? The world is such a huge
place and I'm so small and this world is
so tiny in respect of the cosmos. Why
does it even matter? And I think that is
the left hemisphere speaking
because what the left hemisphere is
saying is things are important because
of their size measurement. What we want
is more. More quantity not quality.
And so stop thinking in terms of
quantity. Quality can be important in a
very small quantity.
How
big for example are the things that are
completely immeasurable. How big is my
love for the person in my life I love
more than anything? I may say my love is
bigger than the heavens. It's deeper
than the seas or whatever. But in the
left, okay, how how deep is that? And
so, no, that's not what I mean. It's
like, oh, what does this person mean to
you? No, I can't explain what you mean.
This is the left hemisphere doing its
kind of let's get it all charted and
measured and then I'll say whether it's
worth doing. No, there are things you
can do on a big level. You can join
Green Peace and you can join um
organizations that hope to help people
in indigenous tribes carry on their way
of life and so forth. And that's fine
and good. They may or may not be
successful. At an intermediary level,
you can start modeling things like um
small groups of people who do aim to
live together, preferably without being
embroiled in technology, living their
lives close to the ground, making and
eating their food together. Um no doubt
one hopes having some kind of spiritual
life that they can share together and
modeling something that may help us if
things collapse. And I do think they may
well collapse. And if they do, the most
helpful thing will be to have small
centers of people rather like the
monasteries in the middle ages that kept
going despite everything.
But the third and last is there is an
area which sounds so small that it can't
be worth anything but it is worth
everything which is in you. What is in
you is so big
that the left hemisphere can't even
measure it. And what is the only bit
that you're asked to take responsibility
for? You're not asked to solve all the
problems of the world. Nobody is. That's
completely ridiculous. So let that one
go. Instead, make sure you've at least
dealt with your own self. And that can
start tonight.
It can start now. It doesn't have to be
something that's labored on for years.
And it really is the most important
thing you'll ever do because you've been
given you to look after you to grow. As
John Keat said, amazing man died at 26
in the letter to his brother. This world
is a veil of soul making. You your soul
is not something that's sort of given to
you. Oh, okay. That's nice. I've got one
of those. That's my eternal life. Is it?
But no, the soul is something you
encounter in you and you grow in you or
you fail to grow in you and that matters
enormously to you and for you and you
matter enormously but it is also part of
the saving of the world.
Thank you so much. I
will take home so much of what you said
which isn't hard cuz we're in my home
and it happened to your first live. I uh
I'm uh I'm honored to share a space and
conversation with you today. Uh so much
of what we talked about is what makes me
come most alive in life. And uh I just
appreciate the awareness of complexity
uh attention to nuance uh and the depth
of understanding you bring to all these
different seemingly disperate topics
that come together to for inform and and
unite uh a greater understanding of the
whole. And so I uh I just really
appreciate you. Thank you for your time.
&gt;&gt; You're a very kind man, Andre. And thank
you very much for giving me this
opportunity to talk. I really enjoyed
it.
&gt;&gt; Thank you so much. We'll leave links
down the description where people can
find you, your work, your writings. Uh
is there any other last words you have
where people can find you or anything?
And the best place to go is probably
channel migillchrist.com
which is fairly straightforward as long
as you spell miguel right. But even if
you don't, Google will probably find me.
&gt;&gt; You'll find it. You'll find them.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Amazing. Thank you so much.
&gt;&gt; Thank you very much.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
[Music]