Daniel Poulin: ...with three distinguished guests. Howard Scott at my far left was Glenn Gould's
first producer at Columbia Records, then called if I believe, Columbia Masterworks
(they believed in themselves there: Masterworks, that's what they were doing). Robert
Silverman from Piano Quarterly, Senior Editor, and John Roberts, President of the
Glenn Gould Foundation and one of the very very few close friends of Glenn
Gould. I myself I am now retarded...[laughter] I'm sorry, retired from the CBC. (It does that to
you, working for 20 years at the CBC), where I was working as a radio
and TV announcer and journalist, and producer. It was in French, obviously, I'm
sure you guessed that, and that's how I got to know somebody by the name of
Glenn Gould. The title of this morning's discussion is 'Glenn Gould the
Communicator'. I think it's a nice title, very appropriate, and in my case anyway
it fits, because Glenn Gould communicated with me and it was of course a beautiful
experience. So I don't think we have speeches ready. We'd rather open the
floor to questions, unless one of you gentlemen would like to state something
at first. Mr Scott maybe.
Howard Scott: I also am retarded from Columbia Records, which became CBS Records, which is now
Sony Classical. I am reminded of the story
(no offense meant) that they asked Andre Kostelanetz where he came from, and he
said, "I was born in St Petersburg." They said to him, "where did you grow up and go to
school?" And he said, "I grew up and went to school in Petrograd". And they said, "where
would you - where do you live now?" He said, "I live in Leningrad".
They asked him, "where would you like to live?" He said, "in St Petersburg." [weak laughter]
I might fit that category - I'm not quite sure, but it was my great pleasure in
1955 to meet Glenn. Just so you have a little background on it which you may
not be aware of: in 1955 in May, Dave Oppenheim, who was the Director of
Masterworks (I was the recording director of Masterworks) - Dave got a call from
Sasha Schneider, the famous violinist - conductor of the Budapest Quartet from
Washington saying, "David, I just heard the most incredible pianist. You must go and
hear him at Town Hall next week, and you must sign him." Dave went to Town Hall,
came back the next day to the office. He said, "Howard, I just signed a pianist and
we're gonna do the Goldberg Variations next month in June, and I'm too busy.
Although I'd love to do this session, I want you to do it, which was the way it
worked. Dave was the A&amp;R and did all the working with the artists and planning
and some sessions, and I did all the recordings. So I went to the studio on
June 6, 1955, and waited for Glenn Gould, and this
young man appeared, obviously, as we all know, in full dress, which for him was a
winter suit, a winter sports jacket which I think he still had - still wore 32 years
later, sweater, overcoat, scarf, hat, and woolen gloves, carrying his little bridge
chair that his daddy had fixed with the screws on the bottom. And Dave was there
too. This was in 30th Street which is also retarded now. They tore it down. And
Dave said, "now Howard, I want you to let this man just play. I don't want any
interruptions, because I don't want him to think he's in a studio recording. I
want him to think he's just home musing on his piano, because that's the way he
is." I said, "Dave, I'm sorry, that's not the way this game is going to be played,
because as the recording director I'm going to have to edit. I'm gonna have to
choose takes with Glenn, and if we don't have any kind of rational system, we'll
never make it." He said, "well, I've got to go now. I think the piano's in tune,
everything's all right." And he left. And I was there with my engineer Fred
Plaut, who was French by the way, and I
said to Glenn, who was playing out in the studio, I said, "Glenn, this is the way
we're going to do it, if you don't mind." I said, "you can do whatever you
wish, and I want you to play and feel as comfortable as possible." And he told me
how he was used to microphones. Microphones were his friend, not his
enemy, by the way, which I think is one of the keys to Glenn. He looked upon a
microphone as a means of communicating, not as a means of fear - of being fearful
of what he would hear when it was returned. And I said, "Glenn, it's very simple.
You can play as long as you want, but if and when you stop, I'm gonna have
to interrupt, and say "take two" or "take three" or if you want to make a piece
we'll call it part 1 or part 2 of whatever you want, and my only rule is
that you can play and when you're finished playing, we'll stop, we'll listen,
we'll make - talk suggestions or whatever you have, because I want you to be able
to hear any playbacks". And that was our basic rule for communicating. And Glenn
said, "okay", and he started to play, and I'd not heard
him the few weeks before, so I was obviously totally boggled by this
incredible performance that he was giving. So in a way, Glenn
then for the next six years, during which we recorded 32 different works over a period
of 60 days of recording. I added them up, by the way. I went back to Columbia -
Sony, and Sony was very kind and let me look through the artists cards, so I
could see what we had really done. We did work on 32 different works over 60
days over six years, plus all our listening, and plus all our meetings, and
plus all our concerts that we went to together.
And Glenn really opened a new realm of music for me in his ways that he was
able to communicate what he thought. It sounds easy.
I've been privileged to work with some of the great pianists of our time
including Rudy Serkin, Robert Casadesus, Leon Fleisher, and they all were
remarkable in their performances and pianism, intellect, but Glenn had a
special way of looking at his relationships of time and space and
rhythm, really. I think what was most remarkable for me was to see that he had
a picture in his mind of what he wanted to do, and it was easily communicated
particularly to me (I was fortunate enough to be his only audience at the
time of course) but his relationship of time and space, his relationship to how
to get that across to a microphone which he considered an audience and a friend
you see. He didn't consider it something to be afraid of as most recording
artists do - they're petrified not so much at playing but they're petrified at the
thought of what they're going to hear when they're finished [that] they won't like, or
they didn't think they played it that way.
That never happened with Glenn. Glenn knew exactly what he was playing and
knew exactly what he wanted to hear. Six months after we'd have a recording
session, I could play six takes of a Bach Partita, and Glenn would say, "oh yes, I
remember, in this one now we're going to hear I didn't like the ritard in the
middle of the Partita where it changes and goes to another form." It was
totally uncanny his ability to not only see what he wanted
or hear what he wanted to do, but he was uncanny in his ability to
picture what he wanted to do and know exactly how to change these things. In
the film 'On the Record' I think which you may have seen (I don't know if any of you
have) but 'On the Record' you will see what he's doing the Italian Concerto which we
did in 1959. You will see that he is totally uninhibited in front of a
microphone. By the way, one of the great things about Glenn was [that] in a studio we
could have repartee. It was serious for sure, but it was not life and
death, you know. He'd always be able to come back down and be able then
to focus in on exactly what he wanted to do, and I suppose I should be able to
brag a little bit at my age now, but I think that was partially due to the fact
that we started out very simply recording. There was no time. Time didn't
exist in the studio for us, and he could communicate any way he wanted as
differently as he wanted. He changed things quite often in the studio. I don't
know if you were aware of this, but before he'd arrive at an end-product
sometimes, he would do it three or four times, even though we'd end up doing take
one as saying, "well I really do like it the way I conceived it", but he would
change - he'd go - he'd do one a little slower, he'd do one a little faster, he'd
make a ritard here, he'd say, "let me try that this way."
In fact in the Italian Concerto, one of the things we did (and I think I just
happened to see it because my friend Don Hunstein who was on that session and
took those fabulous pictures of Glenn - they're over in Thomson Hall - we
stopped to take some pictures) and I teased him and said, "how about playing
Rhapsody in Blue, which of course he started to play, and then did a little
jazz on it and things like that while Don was
snapping and then we said,  "okay, let's go back to work." He said, "no, I want to stop
for five minutes and have tea", which we did, because he could switch moods or
thoughts so quickly. So the communication was in a highly
intense level, and obviously as the years went by and I watched him progress
from 'Glenn Gould, young pianist from Toronto' to 'Glenn Gould, world-famous
special artist', and I watched and we talked a great deal about his leaving the
concert stage because he felt constricted in a concert stage. He felt
free in a recording studio, in front of a microphone, which I don't know any
artist with the exception of George Szell, the conductor and pianist, and
George had said to me one time after Glenn had finished doing a Beethoven out
there [i.e. Cleveland] (we also did his String Quartet in Severance Hall) but [?]
George said at the intermission when he'd finished playing, he said, "that nut's
a genius," and it was really true. I mean to George he was not a nut, but he, to
George also, he had a special level of communicating because he was a genius,
and his ability to be free of that concert hall, and have the ability to be
able to play for his friend the microphone, and, let's see, hear his
concepts because while he knew them (I'd better shut up) while he knew them very
well, he was able to experiment and as you know (and I'll let these gentlemen
continue on), he did this in radio; he did it in television; he did it in writing; he
did it in having fun with his friends. I used to get calls at 10 o'clock at night and
at 2:30 in the morning. I'd say, "Glenn I have to go to sleep."
If you have any questions or you'd like to discuss this, as you can see I can
ramble on for hours about Glenn Gould who was... and I was really proud to be
able to say he was a friend. So why don't we let my colleagues here add to this
and I will pass for now. Daniel Poulin: Thank you so much, Howard. Just a footnote to what you
just said. You mentioned a film. For those of you who would not know, it's a
National Film Board documentary in two parts called 'On and Off the Record'. It's
in black and white and it's gorgeous. I think we even see Howard Scott in that
film. HS: Yes. DP: Much younger shall I say. HS: Thank you. DP: Mr Silverman, if you would
please give us a few words about your experiences with Glenn. I believe you
communicated with him more through the phone than in the studio? Robert Silverman: Well, I was
never in the studio; as a matter of fact one time he told me he was coming to
New York and I said I would like to come into the studio and see a session, and he
said something to the effect, "I'd rather you didn't", and so that was one of the
indications that I got that he put people in compartments, and that
I had a place in his life but that lots of other people had places in his life, I
felt, without knowing who they were for the most part, so I left it. I played
the game on his level for about the first five years that we talked on the
telephone, assuming that I was simply a small cog in a wheel. He had decided that
he wanted to switch from High Fidelity to my little magazine. He had problems
with High Fidelity, with the editor, with editing what he was doing: trivial
problems, I'm sure, because I'm sure they were very happy to have him
writing. But he must have liked what I started out
in our first conversation by saying: "you can write anything you want about any
subject you want, and even though it's a piano magazine, pianists are more than
just pianists, so they'll read anything that anybody has to offer that has any
merit, and I won't edit you except in terms of grammar and matters of trivia."
And as a matter of fact, he was, as many people of great talent are, he had the
strong perfectionist drive, and so we'd fight over a comma, and I really mean it,
and he'd tell me that he had a draft. Early conversations always started
with, "I've written something. Have you got a few minutes? Can I read it to you?"
And then he'd start reading it, and that would break the ice kind of, and then
he'd say, "what do you think?" and I always said, "I love it."
I was very passive and just a receptor to somebody who I didn't realise at the
time had this great need to communicate in all kinds of ways, and only toward the
end of his life did I began to realise that he had a need to communicate people
to people, on a one-to-one basis. I thought it was a kind of... for years I
thought it was just that he has some things that he wants to say; that he
wants to get out of his system and whatnot. He's using writing as one of the
vehicles. There's one - I'm gonna switch for a minute because there's something that
Howard said that I'd never thought of before, and maybe some people, Mr
Roberts and others, would comment upon it, and that's the thought that struck me
just now: what if he hadn't been able to play the piano so well?
How would we be looking - where would he be today? And when I think about that I
remember when I heard the Goldberg for the first term time and said to myself,
(this was an incredibly exhilarating experience listening to it on a
phonograph) and saying also to myself - I distinctly remember saying to myself, how
I'd love to be able to to know the man who plays this way. And it was like 15
years later before fate pushed us into each other's paths. But that
communication, whether it be through the Haydn sonatas or through Bach,
or through the charming little pieces of Strauss, or however they get through
to me, obviously have gotten through to people
all over the world, many of them non- musicians - a tremendous number of them -
they're the record buyers, and they're the ones who prove that he has a
way to communicate that's unique, that's completely different and far more
penetrating to me then any other great pianists of my time. I'm talking about
living now or living recently, and I wonder why - what is the
component parts of this communication business, because if he hadn't played the
piano so well, he would have had to go into other fields. What those fields are,
I don't know, but it's it's kind of interesting for me to think as I was
listening to Howard. He was so verbal and he was so warm -
we've heard that all week long about how nice a guy he was - and how he was
able to communicate his thoughts either to other musicians or to people he was
in contact with. But I'm wondering now whether I would have thought of him as a
genius if I didn't know (whatever that word means - it's a very nebulous word)
if I hadn't known of his musical background. I wonder if anybody wants to
comment upon that? DP: Mr Silverman, thank you. I was wondering if you ever won
one of those battles over a comma? RS: I won the first battle. DP: But not the war? RS: That
was a battle over use in words like 'colour'. Americanised spellings versus the
British. He had this, what I felt was a somewhat affected way, of writing,
sometimes crossing the line into sophomoric humour and almost to the line
of poor taste, but he had an absolutely fixed vision of whatever it
was that was under discussion or whatever - if it was a comma,
he had an absolutely valid reason. He would work over his manuscripts. I didn't
know it because he'd say, "here's a draft," and he'd read me the draft, and then the
draft was exactly what he sent me so, I think... I stopped for a minute in
that exhibit and I see some of his editing on some of the printed copy -
'typed out copy' he used to say, and I pick up an error, and he'd say, "oh my secretary - I
have to get a new secretary. She doesn't type well." But he was - he did as close as
he could to to focusing in on the material. I might add, he didn't get paid
for the material. He wouldn't take any money.
He wouldn't let me call him. The arrangement always was [that] I would call him,
his answering machine. His answering service would answer, but
he, if he was home, he was listening, and so if he recognised my voice and wanted
to talk to me, he'd say, "hi Bob." If he didn't, he'd call me back later. He always
would call me back, and I was usually in the early years just calling him about
things to do with articles and not conversational things about life and my
family and what he was doing and whatnot. That came later. I spent five days with
him here in Toronto and they were five of the most exhilarating days of my life.
He wanted to show me everything that he'd ever done and play everything that
he'd ever put on a tape and we went at sessions from about 4:00 in the
afternoon until the next morning, literally the next morning, in that
little dungeon that he lived in at the Inn on the Park or whatever it's called. He
- and that's when - that's at point that I wanted to make - that's when I realised
that he wanted to communicate one-on-one with people rather than also communicate
getting out some of his thoughts. I felt he had a strong need to want to
show me, "this is the next - this is what I just did", or "this is what I've done. Have
you seen my film on Toronto?" or whatever it was - so this kind of attitude. I'll
tell you one last story and get off the pot.
When I was there the first time, along the course of the way he played me a
string quartet and he said, "I'm gonna play a string quartet by a composer and I
don't think you know him. I'd like your comments at the
end." So he played this string quartet and he said, "well, what do you think?" And I
remember what I said. I said, "well, the first movement sounds kind of Dvorak-y,
kind of early Richard Strauss." And he said, "well, when do you think it was
written?" And I said, "well I hear, you know, the Viennese School in here and it could
have been written any time from about 1900 to the present, but it's not a very
good piece of music." [laughter] Long pause... [laughter] And then, as if nothing had happened,
he continued on. He didn't project a discussion of it; he didn't defend
himself. I said, "who wrote it?" and he said, "I
did", and then he continued on and he just - he said, "I did." ... and he just went
on to the next thing. "Let's look at this", or whatever, as if nothing happened.
That was one remarkable thing about him as a human being; probably the thing
that stuck out most in my mind is, of all the people I've known in the world, (and
I've been privileged because of where I've sat as an editor of a magazine and
other fortunate happenstances to run across a number of famous people in the
arts), he's the only one I know who never bitched, who never defended himself, who
never felt the need if things went wrong (and things did go wrong: he got fired
from the CBC, and the way he put the story to me, "I've been fired by the
CBC", was in a non-defensive way. He said, "and they had every right to do it. I
drove them past the point of no return", and whatnot.) I've never met anybody, I
never did meet anyone who had this lack of feeling that in the controversial
situation the other person was wrong, or that he had needed to express that fact.
If he felt it, he didn't communicate it that way. He communicated it, and this in
a way I think, is the thing that makes me think of him as a giant as a
human being, is that he had developed such a kind of character that he didn't
need to feel defensive about the thing. I wouldn't say most of us because I can't
speak for anyone else, but certainly I, in the course of my life, whenever things
have gone wrong, am pretty sure to bring up defensive mechanisms pretty quick in the
game.
John P.L. Roberts: Thank you. I'm not sure how much time we've got left now? DP: Well, if we want to
field a few questions from the floor you know not that much time, but if you
want to speak, go ahead. JR: Well, there are a few things I'd like to say, and I think we're here
to talk about Glenn Gould the communicator. I was privileged
to know him for 27 years. He was a very great friend of mine, a great personal friend, and
I must say a very dear and wonderful friend but he was also a professional
colleague. When I first met him I was a producer at CBC Winnipeg. He came to
perform actually Beethoven's C-major Piano Concerto, and at the end of
it he was received with total adulation by the audience. I mean, like a pop star -
something he was very uncomfortable with. When I moved to Toronto two years later
to be one of three people at the head of the new CBC music department which was
being really formed for the first time, Glenn was the only person I knew in
Toronto, and so I phoned him from Winnipeg and said, "I'm coming." I explained what
happened. He said, "oh that's great," and so I saw a lot of him, and I saw a lot of
him at home and at that time he was living with his parents. Now as far as
communicating was concerned, obviously he had an extraordinarily sophisticated mind
and he was very very articulate. His use of
English, I thought, was quite extraordinary, in terms of being able to
get at the very kernel of ideas when he was communicating them. The problem was
(and I said this to him) was that his ideas were sometimes very sophisticated,
and he gave me scripts to look at sometimes, and even articles including
those for Mr Silverman, and I would play the devil's advocate with him, and I'd
say, "well, what do you mean?" I knew perfectly well what he meant, and he used
to laugh and say, "well, here we go again." And I'd say, "it's not simple enough."
[Announcer: for the conclusion of this presentation, please turn your cassette over and
press the play button. Do not rewind your cassette.] JR: ... it's not just
words. It's the power of the spirit behind the words, and Glenn believed so
passionately in what he was talking about, he always spoke as though his very
life depended on it. And he, in this way, was really quite
charismatic. If you looked at his eyes, they were glowing with conviction and
with passion, and he was irresistible. And so you find that in the late 60s, when he did
a programme for television called 'The Subject is Beethoven', in which he played
the Eroica Variations, a lot of people watched that programme who really had never
watched or seen or heard classical music before, and the result was extraordinary.
People wrote him the most touching letters. I saw some of these letters say,
"Mr Gould, you've changed my life. I never knew about this." And then there was some
subsequent letters from people who said, well, they'd been off to buy records and
how marvellous this all was, and they didn't know how they'd lived for so long
without knowing about so-called serious music or good music, and this meant a
great deal to him. He really felt that this was the extremely important thing.
This veers towards something which one might describe as a therapeutic
aspect of music of which he did not have a professional knowledge, but he had a
certain instinct. As far as his radio documentaries were concerned, he was
trying all sorts of new things there, his contrapuntal radio, and the big question was
would people understand what he was doing? When you have one voice
laid over another and then laid over another still, and then over another
with, in the case of The Idea of North, the sounds of a train going on as a
basso continuo underneath, the question is, how well are you
communicating? Now there was someone who hadn't done really any research into
this at all; that he just said, "I believe that people are capable of receiving a
lot more information than they normally get, and of sifting it and sorting it out. It
was quite interesting when North was broadcast for the first time. Master
control at CBC nearly had a nervous breakdown. I mean they said, "my god, what
is going on with this program?" First of all the levels were too low. They said
they have to be at a certain level to
stabilise the network, as it were, and so we had the engineers all jumping up and
down and all very upset. Then you had of course the public phoning in. Some people
said, "there seems to be something the matter with my radio." You were several
people talking at once here." And of course what was he doing, he was pushing
back the frontiers. He was trying new things and he always believed that if he
wasn't understood now he would be, and I think he was right. Well
perhaps that's enough for me. I could go on for hours and even days.  But perhaps we can
answer questions DP: We could go on for hours listening to you. If there's one
man I envy here on this table it is this gentleman, because do you know that
he once sat and listened to Glenn Gould play, sight-reading,
just for him, Grieg's Piano Concerto. You're the only one that heard that I think. JR: Yes
I am. Yes, HS? background. DP: He played it for you too? There you go - two men to be jealous of. Okay
questions now. I'd like you to know for those of you who do not speak English
but do speak French, we can field questions in French and translate
them. You can even ask a question in French from Mr Roberts who's fluently
bilingual. Audience member: I'd like to ask Mr Scott, did you ever attempt to inhibit his humming while recording? Howard Scott: Did I ever inhibit his humming? Yes, that was an ongoing battle to the
extent that Glenn had a remarkable sense of humour about it and to the extent that
we allowed it to exist even though it was not normal. To the extent that I
still have in my cellar a Canadian gas mask that he wore as he came into the
studio one morning. Yes, we did. We tried mic placements and in the
end we gave up because we knew that was part of Glenn and it would seem strange
not to hear it. It's sort of like listening to Schnabel recordings without
the mistakes. You know you can't.  It isn't Schnabel and it's the same with
Glenn, so I would try and he would laugh, and as Bob I think pointed out, and so
did John, it was a unique carrying on of an expression of one on one or one on
a microphone, but that wasn't part of his nature. It was like when he was only
playing with his right hand or his left hand he would conduct, you know. It was
just a natural basic instinct. Now if we were recording for video someone might
say, "well, that has to go", but that was part of his structure and you couldn't...
you would... if you took videos you'd have him doing this, as he did in concert by
the way. As we all know. DP: Mr Aide. William Aide: I want to ask the three
gentlemen to respond to something that struck me in the Otto Friedrich biography
which was an opinion by the American composer David Diamond, who
was commenting on the fact that the [indistinct] String Quartet [indistinct]
ambition or [indistinct]. David Diamond was of the opinion that a musician with
the powers of analysis and insight into the process to the degree that Gould had
could have composed had he persisted. [indistinct] but that the liner notes [indistinct] were somehow a replacement for something which
swallowed up the time. It was as if he didn't want to go through any kind of
apprenticeship and whether that was a deliberate choice or a waste or somehow
a free-fall, I'm just wondering if you have any comment on that because I think it's
fairly documented that he did want to be a composer as far as modes of communication were concerned, he thought that composition was more important than piano playing.
DP: Mr Roberts maybe? JR: That's a very interesting question.
He of course said - he for years he talked
about giving up playing in public, and the reason he gave was that he was going
to compose, and after the String Quartet, he was definitely working on other
things. I remember something called Letter from Stalingrad, which is a kind
of big scena for solo voice and orchestra, and I remember being at his
penthouse at 110 St Clair Avenue West and he had a score, a big score like an
orchestral score which he was working on, and he had instruments pencilled in. He hadn't
actually written out the parts and he was singing this, singing this
to me, and I think part of the problem as to why he didn't go on was the fact that he
was quite wounded that people felt he should be writing in a most avant-garde
progressive quote and unquote manner, and when he wrote, it seemed to come out late
Richard Strauss or Mahler or Max Reger perhaps, and he was very
criticised right here in Toronto by his colleagues. I mean in one case absolutely
viciously, and this got to him. He was really incredibly wounded by that, and I think
that he realised it was not a talent that he had like playing the piano.
Playing the piano was like having breakfast. It was the easiest thing in
the world to him. But composition wasn't, and I think this
is a big setback that really affected him; affected his ego, and so
those who did that I suppose have got something to answer for. I could go on
a lot more but I'm sure other people have got something to say.
RS: I think of a telephone call where he said that he was writing the score to a
movie called I think it's called War - The Wars, and he asked me if I wanted
to come up to Toronto to see the premiere, and I said I couldn't. Whether I
had a deadline with the magazine, whatever, and he said that he had
written the score to it. I haven't seen that film but I've been told, and I'm
sure Mr Roberts will amplify this, that there's very little creative music in it;
that he used some Brahms and other music, but here he had a chance, had he
wanted to, had the creative drive been strong enough, to write. I really don't
think (I'm being subjective about this, and slightly in disagreement with Mr
Roberts) - I think if you have the need to write, or the need to play, or the need to
write words or whatever, you've survived this: the slings and
arrows, and you go ahead. He didn't get all good reviews when he played. Nobody
ever does, and I think in that sense, that he just didn't have it. I think I was
right when I made the judgement hearing the work only once,
that it wasn't a very good piece of music. And I think he knew it. I mean he, you
know, you read the biographies, the dictionaries, and in Groves and in
Baker's. It's interesting they always list him among other things as
composer and I suspect if knowing how they work, where they send you a
questionnaire and they ask you to recite your
background and whatnot, that he put 'composer' down as one of the things,
one of his listings, but I don't think he felt... That's my guess. It has nothing to
do with having ever discussed it with him. I don't think he felt he was a
composer. HS: Well, there's one other thing I think that's important to consider. I
take umbrage at Mr Diamond's words, by the way; considering their source however,
I don't get too angry. I do think that Glenn - I agree with Bob - wanted to try
composing, but whenever I was with him, whether it was at Uptergrove or in his
studio, he would play for me a Bruckner symphony;
he would play the Grieg Piano Concerto. I insisted we record the Quartet by the
way, and that's another story which we haven't got time for, but he had so much
to give and so much to say on the piano, and by word, that I really agree, and I
think the three of us are in agreement on this, that it precluded his taking his
time to create individually. He recreated or created individually actually by
superimposing Glenn Gould on anything he touched in his way, and therefore he
didn't need to really compose. He composed when he played. It was
an original composition, which is why we're all here and it's why we aren't
here for any other genius really of the 20th century, possibly with the exception
of Leonard Bernstein, who had so many facets similar to Glenn, not unsimilar,
including composing, and certainly god knows they say a lot about Lenny's works,
as would David Diamond, by the way, that Glenn was focused - he was far more focused
a person than we realise. And yes, he might have liked to have been able
to say, "I'm a composer", which he was in his way, but not of original notes. JR: I
think that it's true that I suppose if he had really made up his mind to
compose he would have gone ahead, but of course technology, the emergence of all
kinds of possibilities in CBC radio (and he was never fired from CBC: that is not
true, but he had a disagreement with CBC, a big disagreement in television, but it's
not the same as being fired.) I think that he had all kinds of opportunities there.
He became very fascinated with radio documentaries which were very
creative but one - I see one of our - he's just leaving - would you mind
telling him to come back? He probably doesn't know this...
Greetings. I was just going to say one thing about Glenn that you probably don't know,
and that is he wanted to be a film director in his... that's one of the things
which he really wanted to do, and he said about CBC and CBC television, "the problem
is that they have to make all their mistakes on the air so to speak. What is
needed is some kind of experimental studio or some way of experimenting, of trying
things out." And he spent a lot of time watching films, for instance Woman in the
Dunes I think he watched 60 times. He was watching all the shots trying to
understand technically how this was made. He was trying to learn that way as a
sort of apprenticeship, and apart from conducting, that was the other thing that
he really wanted to do, and it would have been quite interesting I think to have
seen how he did, but he certainly intended to go on and move on to new
things. There were of course two organisations in his life which were
extremely important: one was CBS Records which is now of course Sony Classical, and
the other is the CBC. These two organisations were absolutely paramount
in the development of his career. Both gave him a free hand. His record company
let him record more or less what he wanted to do and CBC always said to him,
"what is it you want to do?" And the problem was that at CBC (certainly
when I was head of music) he agreed to all kinds of things, but his pace was
rather slow, and he was not delivering, and I had to sort of jump on him and get
him to deliver and there was lots of bantering backwards and forwards about
this, and certainly some contracts he didn't fulfill at all, but he didn't
really have a very good visual sense and said so. But over his lifetime this began
to change because he felt it was imperative to communicate through the
electronic media and particularly through television. Thank you.
DP: We have just a few minutes left because you have a next activity at 9:30 and it
takes 10 minutes to go there from here. So a few more questions maybe and then
we'll go. S'il y a des gens de langue francaise que veulent poser un question
en francais... changer l'atmosphere un peu, n'hesitez surtout pas. Madame?
Audience Member: Glenn did make a video version of the Idea of North, and maybe that's a good
medium to compare his purely verbal radio version.  JR: Yes he wasn't the
producer though. It was Judith Perlman was the producer from New York. He liked
what she did. At first he thought it would be a terribly difficult thing to do, but he
was very impressed with her and her ideas as to how to do this and certainly
he did collaborate but he didn't do it. I'm talking about something which
he would actually produce in a very creative way. RS: I would mention something
that comes to mind that may amuse some. He did a great many interviews in
the course of his life with different journalists and - I can be corrected but he
always wrote out the questions for all the questioners. He refused to do an interview unless he had picked the subject
matter, and either directed the interviewer to the... sometimes he actually wrote out the questions and Bruno [Monsaingeon],
for example, asked questions on the films that Glenn wrote, and that bothered me somewhat in that on the films (I don't
know how many of you have seen which ones) but the ones that I've seen, there's
an artificiality there - a lack of the kind of warm communicative abilities
that he had when he talked on the telephone or in person that come through.
But he wanted to control the scene so strongly that Tim Page's questions and
other questions that were questioners in the last years, Jonathan Cott's and
whatnot were Glenn's questions. HS: More interesting
than that - excuse me - was the fact that (and he started doing this when I first
met him in 1955) I got a call one evening and he said, "I have someone here I want
you to talk to", and he carried on a major interview
between Glenn and Dr Schauspieldirektor or something, which of course
was Glenn, because he thought it was so remarkable no one could - no one would
know that Glenn was talking with him with a German accent, or in some cases a
French accent, and he'd interview himself and say, "what do you think of it?" RS: He also -
one other thing - he also (and I don't know anything about this but I think Mr
Roberts would know a lot more) - it was just a few things that came up. He had
never been afraid to appear in public way back when he was younger
somewhere along the line he belonged to an amateur theatrical group and we
discovered that we both knew all the words to all the Gilbert and Sullivan
operettas, and so we used to sing them to each other, playing all the parts, and I
knew where I had gotten my remembrance of all of that, because as a boy I had
played in all those operettas, but he, if memory serves me, he had learned
them from that amateur group that was made up of lawyers and doctors and others.
JR: No, it wasn't made up of lawyers and doctors. It started in
my apartment in Rosedale when I was living in Toronto, and I just said to him
one day, because I thought he needed to do other things beside play the piano, and
I said, "you know, why don't we get some friends together?" And I love Shakespeare,
and he loves Shakespeare. I said, "why don't we get together and read him?"
"Oh", he said "that's an incredible idea", so that's what we did.
No, the Gilbert and Sullivan didn't come at all that way, but the invention
of his characters did, because at a certain point we got into extemporisations.
In the course of doing these extemporisations he invented these characters.
We also invented characters, actually, and we had hysterical
conversations in which one of his characters would call me and one of my
characters would reply and we would sort of end just splitting our sides with
laughter. But it was also interesting because he uses - he used
these characters very often when he had to say something he thought was a little
painful. He would use one of his characters to
talk to me, and he would tell me what was on his mind, and he
continued to do that all his life. As far as the questions are concerned, he had a
terrible interview with BBC - it was BBC News, and the the person who asked the
questions was very rough with him; said to him this this kind of thing, "well
you're a total nut anyway", and was, you know, was really very aggressively nasty,
and Glenn felt absolutely humiliated by that. He said, "I'll never go through
that again. I mean I'm okay and in the future I will want to see all the
questions in advance." And it's true that he did write out most of the questions,
in fact became obsessed with it. He tried to do it actually with Yehudi [Menuhin], and
Yehudi wasn't playing ball. Glenn thought that Yehudi couldn't read,
but it wasn't that at all, because Yehudi told me afterwards, "no no no no no", he
said, "I've got my own questions, you know. I've got my own things to say." So that
was really quite amusing. DP: Gentlemen, merci, thank you very much.
Before you go, two little bits of information. One: Mr Silverman might be
surprised to know that, and most of you will probably be surprised, but this is a
fact. I don't think we should hide it. Gould original name is not Gould. That
might come as a shock to you. The Goulds changed the family name in the mid 40s
so I believe, Ray? 1944? 1944 just at the end of the war. The original name of
Glenn Gould was Glenn Gold, so we have a silver man; we might have had a gold man
next to you. RS: I just want to say that I suspected this after I read Friedreich's
book. Something came back to me and that was one day he said to me, "you know, we're
both semi precious metals, or maybe even precious", and I said, "what do you mean?" He
said, "I'm gold and you're silver." Well, I thought he was making a play on
Gould. I had no idea that Gold was in the... DP: It is a fact, and if you see the
archives you might see younger documents relating to Glenn Gould, and you'll see
the name Glenn Gold, so it's not a mistake. It is the original name. Nobody
knows the exact reasons. We have lots of suspicions, of course, and the only person
that could confirm the reasons would be Bert Gould, but I don't think he wants to
talk about it, so... Audience member: On the programmes for this conference, his signature has one 'n'. [inaudible]. JR: Yes it was. He thought very fast, he did
everything very fast. He couldn't write as quickly as he could think, like most
of us, and so Glenn in his signature not always but often came up with one 'n',
and I was amused at the broadcasting studio to see that they've spelt it with the
one 'n', but there are lots of signatures with two 'n's. DP: Anyway, we have to go
now and my last note is a funny one that happened to me on a Sunday afternoon. I
was out of my house and my mother, who was a lovely lady of 78 or 80 I think at
that time, was home and Glenn Gould called. I don't know why he called me on a
Sunday afternoon - he never did in the past. I wasn't home so when I got back home my
mother said (oh, by the way my mother doesn't speak English. She thinks - she
thought she did. Glenn doesn't speak French.
He thought he could). So I came back home and my mother said, "oh, by the way
Daniel, you had a phone call in French." "Oh", I said, "yeah. Who was it?" "Somebody by the
name of Gould." I said, "what, Glenn Gould?". She says, "yes". "Well, what happened?" "Oh", she
says, "we had a half-hour conversation." And I said, "what language did
you use?" She said, "he spoke French and I spoke English."
[Laughter] And then the next time I spoke to Glenn,
I said, "is it true?" He said, "oh, she was a charming lady. We'll have to meet her
one day". I said, "did you really speak French?"
"Of course I did." So this concludes the third of four seminars, this one
having been conducted by three of the more clever retarded people in Toronto.
[Laughter and applause] JR: ....read it, somewhat. And he could read German, somewhat.