Earth Angels is a sponsor of the 2025
Cosmic Summit that's going to be June
20th and 23. Uh I really enjoy that
conference and one of the speakers is
our guest today. His name is Mark Young
and he is coming to us from Australia.
He is a geoarchchaeologist. I'm going to
ask him in a minute exactly what that
means because I haven't heard that
definition. but he's also an expert in
the younger dus impact hypothesis,
cosmic impact events, and lost
civilizations. So, he's a he's right in
the middle of the Earth ancients uh
format. And uh I'm looking forward to
speaking with him. But also, I want to
remind you if you get a chance to get
out to uh Green uh uh North Carolina to
see this CosmicSummit, you should check
it out. If you can't go to the
cosmixsummit.com
and go to their streaming platform, it's
very, very reasonable for the full
program and sign up because you'll hear
people like Mark, you'll hear people
like Randall Carlson and a whole group
of other experts talking about uh
ancient civilizations and other uh
events in the past. So, don't miss it.
Mark, welcome to Earth Ancient. It's
great to have you on the program.
&gt;&gt; Thanks, Cliff. It's great to be here.
Let's start off uh what is the younger
dus impact hypothesis? I mean we we hear
about this uh asteroid hit uh we hear
about the devastation but what
specifically uh is unique to you about
the younger dus impact hypothesis?
&gt;&gt; Well, where do I start? So one unique
thing is uh obviously the scale in
relation to how recently it happened. Uh
certainly it's the largest impact within
I mean if we're talking extinctions wise
since the dinosaurs uh but also
mechanism is quite unique. So rather
than one big asteroid that came in and
destroyed everything the more likely
scenario for the young is a a shower or
a shotgun blast of multiple smaller
objects all over the world. And so it
may even have been periodically over a
decade or so as we pass through a meteor
shower. These things come in uh twice a
year if we're talking about the torids
for example twice a year there's there
would be bombardment episodes. So one
year it could have been North America
the next year South America or even 5
years apart whatever. So yeah there's a
lot of unique aspects of the young
impact compared to other ones.
&gt;&gt; What's the general timeline uh Mark?
what what what would we say it's not a
it wasn't one day it wasn't one week it
was over a period of years wasn't it
&gt;&gt; yeah so uh assuming that the platinum
signature is related to the impact uh it
could have occurred over as many as 14
years that's how long the platinum took
to settle out of the atmosphere um it
could have it could also have been one
day and there was just a lot of dust and
debris flying around so Um yeah, and it
started about 12,870
or something years ago. Uh that's what
we've nailed it down to with the
radiocarbon dating. There's an
uncertainty of a couple of dozen years
or so. And the date like this is one of
the the angles that the critics attack
is the dating in different parts of the
world is slightly off by maybe a decade
here and there, but that's within the uh
the uncertainty of radiocarbon dating
anyway. You're not going to get much
more precise than that. So I think the
official time span that that the common
research group proposes is about 12,870
to 12,730
or something. So within that area
&gt;&gt; okay I should mention that you are part
of the cosmic uh comet research project
correct and that is uh formed by George
Howard and has a a group of people you
you basically discovered George in the
cosmic summit group uh through what the
papers that he was publishing. So I
actually uh so I saw the Joe Rogan
podcast with Graham Hancock and Rand
Carlson back in 2017 and that's what
actually inspired me to enroll at
university to study this stuff. So uh I
actually uh reached out to George in
late 2018 uh cuz I'd noticed that some
of the papers on his website were out of
date. Uh he didn't have all the new ones
on there. So uh that's that was the
start of our uh professional
relationship and uh after after I
graduated with my bachelor's degrees in
2021 I think it was that's when I joined
the comet research group officially.
&gt;&gt; Now uh you were granted is it were you
granted a geoarchchaeology
degree under under uh a degree or I mean
what is a geoarchchaeologist? And I know
the geode does the geology, but how did
how does geology and archaeology fit
together and what what is what is it
that you're studying? Because it's kind
of unique title. I love it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, gearchologists
uh approach archaeology using geo
methods. So, geology, geomorphology,
geochemistry, geoysics, all that kind of
thing. So ground penetrating radar
um
uh electrical resistivity tomography uh
geocchemistry like ICPMS and stuff like
that. So it's basically a a hard science
discipline within archaeology. Uh as we
know archaeology isn't necessarily a
science per se. There's a reason it's in
the humanities under the umbrella of the
humanities. So
&gt;&gt; Right. Excellent. Um, here's one that I'
I I'd love to get clarification on. Some
people say that the impact was in the
Atlantic with sporadic impacts into the
North American and part parts of South
American region, but upto-date data is
has changed. Where would you say the the
spread of the asteroid field hit on
Earth?
&gt;&gt; Yep. So, uh, there we have about four
sites spanning the east coast of the
west coast of South America. And there's
a whole bunch there's one in Syria. Um,
there's a whole bunch throughout Europe.
There's a couple in Greenland where we
found the platinum anomalies up there.
And we've also been studying ocean cores
up there. And there's a few in Canada,
but the main concentrations over North
America.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um, it's speculated that the
Carolina bays were formed by this
impact. Is that what your belief is or
what would you say to that?
&gt;&gt; So, when I started out in this, I I
believe that it was pretty probable that
they were related to the young adults.
Um, but I mean that they're certainly
caused by an impact event. There's no
question about that. But I have my
doubts now as to whether there it was
tied to the young or not. There are
other groups who tie it to the
78,000year event that created the
Australasian techtype field. Yeah, I
think that one's more likely than the
Young Adrius. Uh, and originally a lot
of the Carolina Bay people were on board
with a young timing for it, but
basically it's just Antio now who's a an
advocate of that. So,
&gt;&gt; okay. But Mark, is there a ground zero
placement for perhaps the biggest
portion of this impact? Perhaps uh uh an
impact crater of significant size
&gt;&gt; for the Carolina Bays or for the younger
dest?
&gt;&gt; Just for the younger dus.
&gt;&gt; So when the Hayawa crater came out in
2018, that was very exciting for us. Um,
and while subsequent studies have dated
the impact much earlier, I I think
there's still a possibility that it was
related to the young dryness. Um, like I
said at the start, it probably wasn't
one big impact. Uh, and if it was, it
probably occurred into the ice sheet
rather than into the ground. So, uh, I
know Randall Carlson has identified Lake
Nippagon as a potential site for for the
young dryest one. I certainly think
there's something to be said about that.
If you had an impact into the ice, you
wouldn't expect a traditional crater on
the ground uh because it would act like
a cushion basically. Um and Lake
Nippagon is very interesting in terms of
its morphology. So, uh if I had to put
money on it, I'd say Lake Nippagon is
pretty good, but obviously no studies
actually been done there. So, we we have
no idea. There's a couple of smaller
craters around the place that have been
tentatively identified as being young,
potentially related to the young. Uh but
as I said if we the air burst rain
theory makes most sense for the proxies
that we see. So when these things
detonate in the atmosphere they don't
really leave traditional craters at all.
The only thing they the only traces they
leave are the microscopic evidence that
you find in the soil. So
&gt;&gt; what do you believe was the uh effect
over this period of time on the animal
life on the planet? Randall Carlson
likes to say approximately 80% of the
megapona, the big land animals perished.
And we don't really know how much of the
human population was affected because
there's no documents. There's very
rudimentary uh signatures of a human
race on the planet. But what is your
feeling on on those two subjects? Yeah.
So certainly the megapora
disappearance uh is closely tied with
the young and dry. There have been
critics over the years who said oh well
they actually survived a few hundred
years after the young and dry onset in
these particular areas. And sure that's
likely. It's not like the dinosaurs.
It's not a oneanddone thing. Like if you
have one impact in this region and then
a couple years later you've got another
impact in this region. It creates uh
well there's obviously wildfires
associated with those impacts and that
will cause local sanctions in that era
but that doesn't that's not going to
wipe them off the face of the planet
like and it's possible that the the
Clover people also played a part in
their extinction like that's been the
the doctrine for decades now. And if
there was only a few left over after the
impact events, then it makes sense that
the cliffs would hunt them because
they're also clinging on to their
existence. Regarding the human
populations, there's quite a bit of
evidence uh well over the last few
decades actually, but the first genetic
evidence came out in 2022 to show that
uh there was a South American
civilization uh up to 19 20,000 years
old in South America that disappeared at
the young dry. though. And uh there's a
lot of archaeological sites in
throughout South America uh that have
thought to have been dated to the ply
scene and have been uh I guess heavily
criticized and and denied no doubt
because of the uh in part at least
because of the Clover First doctrine.
But uh I've got a short list of them
here if you'd like me to read them off.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, give us the names. So there's a
there's one called Bokeerial De Pedra
Farada in Brazil and the occupation
there is thought to date between 20 and
45,000 years ago.
&gt;&gt; And how sophisticated are these are
these considered hunters and gatherers
or are these a little more
sophisticated? So, the thing is with
these sites is that the lithics there
aren't anywhere near as sophisticated as
the Clover relics, which is part of the
reason why the they're denied by the
critics. One recent study even claimed
that the the lithics there were made by
Capuin monkeys,
&gt;&gt; but uh I mean the the latest genetic
evidence from the region says that they
weren't. Um, so then we have Doa Toka de
Tirapea in Brazil with evidence of
occupation at least 27,000 years old.
Toko deio deio site in Brazil 35,000
years old. The Aoyo del Vizkino in
Uruguay was 30,000 years. Santa Alina in
Brazil 20,000 years. And uh this this
next site was published in 2020. Chick
Quit Cave in Mexico with occupation
26,000 years and as early as 33 and this
made worldwide headlines because one the
the teams that were doing it were quite
well respected and two well it's
obviously quite groundbreaking in its
age and initially the Montyver site in
Chile was dated to about 18,500 but that
was revised down after years of
criticism. though. And uh obviously now
in North America we have the white sands
footprints which are 24,000 years old
and that's beyond any uh doubt. Now
they've gone back and tested. So
originally they had issues with the
dating method but they've gone back and
used like three different methods now
and they've all come out at 24,000. So
we know that people were there 24,000
years ago.
&gt;&gt; Are are any of these uh people building
temples? Are are we looking at
foundations or are we discovering them
with simple petroglyphs on cave walls
and rudimentary uh tools?
&gt;&gt; So the sites I listed there's no real
structures associated with them. They're
more likely just uh campsites. [snorts]
Um most of the evidence is uh let's see
not particularly strong. So we've got uh
hearths of campsite campfires. We've got
uh rudimentary lithics. We've got uh
like uh animal remains mixed in and
stuff like that. So and this is why
they're not very well accepted because
uh where's the where's the structures?
Where's the unambiguous Clovis points
for example? And uh yeah, so the
civilization there was probably quite
rudimentary. Uh, but I mean that doesn't
mean anything, right? Because if they
were advanced like like in a Graeme
Hancock Atlantis sense, then wouldn't it
make sense that subsequent people have
come in there and salvaged and uh and
scavenged all the the like the metals
there for example?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean, most metal from the Roman
period and the Greek period has been
salvaged and reforged over time to make
weapons for war and things like this.
Like any sort of valuable material is
always picked up by subsequent
occupations.
&gt;&gt; I I stopped you as you were completing
that list. Did I Did you finish?
&gt;&gt; I think so. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Um I recently uh was speaking to
Dr. Richard Hansen who's excavating
Eliodor. He's one of the foremost
Mayanists in the world. And he recently
mentioned that there were two phases to
the Maya. There was a very early phase
that stopped approximately 2,000 years
ago. But they don't really know when the
inception date is. And the curious thing
about this though is that their pyramids
in Guatemala are the largest in the
Americas and the most sophisticated. So
this very very early people was building
and engineering monstrosities
uh in Central and South America. And I'm
curious, is it possible that we've got
our dates wrong and that these earlier
Maya uh that were wiped out may have
been part of this younger Dus impact
hypothesis. Personally, I wouldn't
really point to the Mayer as as dating
back that far, but you you really don't
need the Mer because the Mer
their structures and their architecture
is completely different to what Graeme
Hanok and others have said have pointed
to. I think it's called Han Patcha or
the the the cyclopian
uh architecture at Sakuan and and other
sites like that. There's clearly two
stages of industry there. And if I mean,
for argument sake, all those sites that
I listed off, maybe those people were
the builders of these sites and maybe
they were part of the global
civilization that Graham Hanok advocates
for. And uh I mean cuz the the cyclopian
architecture is found all over the
world, Easter Island, uh Europe, South
America. And so if if this if these
sites and these people uh
are coincident with those uh
constructions and let's face it more
than likely pre Young Adrius those
cyclopian architecture um because
they've there's been no other
catastrophe since the young Adrius that
would be capable of wiping them out
especially on a worldwide level. So
yeah. So what what would you say to
those who advocate for Atlantis uh being
destroyed around this period of time? I
mean we're talking Hancock and perhaps
uh John Anthony West and a number of
authors and researchers who have come
before.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So the Plato's timing for Atlantis
coincides directly with the end of the
Young Adrius and there was a serious
rise in sea levels around that time. So
from a science perspective, there's
certainly some suggestion of validity
there. Um, obviously the the
archaeologists will say, "Show me the
pot shards." and and stuff like that,
but when we're talking about a cataclysm
and we're talking about a sea level
rise, like 90% of the global population
lives within a few kilometers of of the
the coastline, right? Or along rivers.
And so a sea level rise of 150 feet uh
150 meters or 400 feet that's going to
erase almost all evidence of any
civilization that was living there. So
and people say oh well we've done
archaeology on the the coastal shelves
and it's like you can't dive to 400 ft
very easily. Like it's very difficult to
dive that far. And yeah it's I don't
find it convincing. I I think there's
certainly room for an Atlantis and
people like Flint Double who claim
there's there's no evidence at all for
Atlantis. They're just lying because
there's a lot.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I like that.
&gt;&gt; Uh it's just not the kind of evidence
that archaeologists tend to deal in.
&gt;&gt; Why Why is there
&gt;&gt; evidence? Tangential evidence.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Why Why is there so much
resistance to younger dus? Uh it seems
like there's a a certain body of
scientists that are actually uh
evaluating the possibilities and finding
solid evidence for an impact event and
then there's a whole bunch that are
trying to write it off. Why? Why do you
think that's the way it is?
&gt;&gt; There could be any number of reasons
really. Uh one thing would be that um
they don't want it to be true because
that would mean they've been wrong their
whole lives. Uh, one one thing that I
kind of uh veer towards is that they've
actually found Atlantis and they don't
want us to know. They want to hold the
secrets for themselves. And there could
be any number of reasons for that. Um, I
mean, Zahi Has and Edgar Casey, Zahi
Hass's PhD was funded by the Casey
Foundation. And uh if they did find the
Hall of Records, they wouldn't share it
with with everyone because what if it if
what if the Hall of Records told us
about an impending Young Driv 2.0 in our
near future?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; They wouldn't they wouldn't reveal that
because that would cause global panic
and uh yeah, I mean there could be any
number of reasons. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh I find it interesting that you say
that. Um, you know, when I when I
discovered the torid meteor stream, uh,
I was perplexed that we hadn't known
that much about it before, but
apparently our cosmos, Earth
specifically, goes through it every two
years. And
&gt;&gt; twice a year, every year?
&gt;&gt; Is it twice a year? Oh my god. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Late late June and early late October,
early November.
&gt;&gt; And I mean,
&gt;&gt; coincident with Halloween. Is is is it
is there speculation am among
cosmologists that earth has been
impacted in previous times during these
uh uh passroughs or is it unique to just
this younger dus event.
&gt;&gt; So if the torid theory is correct then
it stands to reason that it has happened
in the past and who knows the severity
of those kind of things. Um there are
specs of evidence here and there. Um the
comet research group has published a
paper uh on a few impacts that happened
between 30 and 50,000 years ago. So have
you heard about John Reeves and the
boneyard in Alaska? The comet research
group studied a boneyard deposit in
Siberia and they were finding uh impact
sparials within the skulls of these
animals. And I don't know if you know
the story of how George Howard became
the cosmic tusk.
&gt;&gt; No, talk about it. They they were they
were finding tusks, mammoth tusks that
had meteoric material embedded in them.
So if you imagine this air burst
explosion, it's like a shotgun blast of
meteoric material that affected these
mammoths directly.
&gt;&gt; Wow. And so the CRG in that paper 2017 I
think it was Hagstro medal it's in the
the biblio they theorized that these
these animals were all in placed
catastrophically by by impact events and
it makes sense right because some of
these animals are flash frozen like
you've got entire mammoths fresh flash
frozen still with still with that
daisies in their mouth and their in
their stomach like these things and the
the the bottom the their their legs are
broken and they were some of them had
erections which means they were
esphixxiated but they were buried alive
and so there's unquestionably been
catastrophic events and by the very
nature of meteor stream and how how it
functions early on in it'sed into large
objects right and over time those large
objects disintegrate into smaller and
smaller hierarchically and so the the
idea is that it entered the solar system
about 20 30 years ago. So by 12 years
ago, it's about halfway through its
disintegration compared to today.
&gt;&gt; Why do you think that we're not getting
more information about this uh torred
meteor stream? It seems like if the
powers that be knew that at a period of
time we've had terminating events or
near terminating events, they would want
to set up some kind of a system, you
know, uh perhaps aiming rockets to
deflect meteors and and other large
obstacles that would impact the planet.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, recently we had the NASA
Dart mission, right, where they
intercepted an asteroid and nudged it
off course. And so maybe the reason
they're doing that is because they know
something's coming. Well, maybe maybe
they're just doing it because they can.
&gt;&gt; Funny. Hey, um I'm curious. I just
discovered about a year ago the black
mat, this uh ash layer that's located at
different parts of the planet. Talk
about that and why it's it's so
important in understanding this impact
event.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, just to clarify, the black mat
isn't really an ash layer. There there
are some sites with with a high
concentration of ash, but it's mainly uh
uh decomposed vegetation material. Um so
if you picture this impact event comes
in, it decimates the landscape. The
black matter is representing the
aftermath of that where it's cool and
damp and swampy everywhere and uh the
impact uh proxies are found in direct
contact with the bottom of the black
mat, not within it really. And uh so
we've got this ejector followed by the
black mat. And the black mat contains
the last remnants of the megaporna.
Megaporna has never been found above the
black mat, only within it or below it.
So,
&gt;&gt; and where do we find uh the most
evidence of black mat? Is it through
North America, Europe? Where are they?
Where is it most prominent?
&gt;&gt; North America is the main uh continent
where it's found. It's there's more than
60 sites across North America where it
manifests. Um in Europe, there's uh a
similar black mat. It's called the Oello
Horizon. Critics have dated it to like
14,000 years ago. Um,
but there's some good evidence that it
actually correlates with the young
boundary. Um, so obviously at one side
it contains nanodiamonds, right? So, and
nanodiamonds have only been found in the
young boundary layer. No other layers
above or below. And so there's reason to
believe that whatever the site formation
conditions are over there for whatever
reason it gives off a a different date.
And I mean in some cases it is directly
dated to the drives but in in other
places it's a little bit off. So
&gt;&gt; and you mentioned nano diamonds that
comes up a lot when it comes to these uh
uh comic comet hits. Describe a nano.
Basically it's an exploded uh hunk of
very hard rock. Right.
&gt;&gt; So, it's a piece of carbon uh carbon
materials, they've been found in uh
Okay, so earlier on critics claimed that
this the carbon sparials that nanodons
were being found in were just bug poop,
right? And so, obviously bugs don't poop
nano diamonds. But if even if they did,
that just means that even even if it was
bug poop, I mean that just means that
the bob bug poop was on the surface when
the impact affected it and and created
diamonds within within it. So
&gt;&gt; uh so the nano diamonds are mainly found
in carbon frails. They're also found in
the glass-like carbon proxies that we
find. Um and they they occur during high
temperature, high pressure events. uh
mainly there's also another method
called chemical vapor deposition. So if
we imagine that the impact event
vaporized this carbon material as it
cools it's it condenses and settles on a
on an object and they they can be
produced that way. So there's a there's
a couple of different methods to produce
them. Some critics have claimed they
form in wildfires but there's no
wildfire ever recorded that produces
temperatures high enough to to make
that. And there's no nano diamonds found
in any other layers. Like there's been
tests all the way from before the
younger drives through to modern times.
And there's no nano diamonds anywhere
else. It's only the younger drive
boundary.
&gt;&gt; Weird
&gt;&gt; until you get to about 200 years ago
because obviously modern processes can
manufacture these things. uh you can
make them in a lab for example and
they're they're often used for polishing
and stuff like because obviously they're
diamonds they're very hard so if you
make diamond paste there's going to be
nano diamonds in there and so in modern
sections they are there but once you get
older than a few hundred years there's
nothing until the young
&gt;&gt; okay are they found in ice core at all
&gt;&gt; so this is difficult So in 20 2009, uh
there was a a PBS NOVA documentary about
finding nano diamonds in the Greenland
ice. And so they sent out this team,
they they recovered ice from the young
dry layer and they they looked in there
for nanodiamonds and they they they
found them in high concentrations. Um
however that data critics have recently
been attacking this things and uh even
back in the day shortly after the
documentary came out critics were
writing to PBS saying this is fraud you
need to take it off the air and actually
the executives caved and and they they
took the documentary off the air. Uh
it's called Mega Beast Sudden Death. You
can still view it on YouTube but you
can't view it on PBS anymore. And uh so
assuming that it wasn't fraud, which it
certainly wasn't, there have been nano
diamonds found in the eye sheet, but not
something that I would use as
unequivocal evidence because I mean it's
TV, right? And so who knows what what
happened behind the scenes. I certainly
would never accuse anyone in the comment
research group of fabricating this
stuff, but there are questions about it.
That's all I'll say on that.
&gt;&gt; What was the name again, Mark? Uh, you
can find it on YouTube.
&gt;&gt; Meabase sudden death.
&gt;&gt; Meab beasts sudden death.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you for that. Um, that goes
gets into my next question which is the
melting of the ice caps uh and a glacier
snow during this impact. The big thought
is that there was a massive flood, but
you say otherwise. You say there was not
a massive flood. You say there were
perhaps a regional flooding. talk about
that a little bit.
&gt;&gt; So when people like Graham Hancock and
Rand Carlson have talked about this on
podcast, they they often make the claim
that not directly, but they imply that
the the 400 ft rise in sea level
happened overnight and that's not the
case at all. It happened over a few
thousand years after the end of the ice
age. However, at the Young's onset,
there is a global sea level rise of
about 5 meters and that is very
significant volumes of water entering
the oceans in a very short time. And so,
and there's obviously uh Lake Agassy for
decades there's been arguments over when
Lake Agassy drained and the route that
it drained. So there's they've
identified three different routes that
it could have drained from, but uh and
the the most recent study said it
drained at the start of the young, but
all of them disagree as to which route
it was at which time, right? But I think
the more likely explanation for that is
that there was an impact into the ice
sheet and that released a crap ton of of
melt water that flowed off of the ice
sheet into Lake Agass City and it
drained through all three of those
routes at the same time. And obviously
there's a a significant Heinrich event
at the time of the young which means
that there was lots of icebergs and and
chunks of the ice sheet that flowed off
of the ice sheet and drop debris out in
the ocean. And so I mean the most likely
scenario I mean obviously if an impact
occurred into the ice sheet it's going
to throw throw off a lot of melt water
and it'll uh break up large portions of
it, right? And uh yeah, there's not uh a
whole lot of uh incontrovertible
evidence for this, but yeah, I I think
that's quite likely.
&gt;&gt; So there's no areas that you or any
other scientists have discovered where
there were some of these uh meteors were
impacting the ocean and causing tsunami
like events uh covering landforms miles
inland. It's difficult because obviously
if it impacts in the ocean, the crater
is on the bottom of the ocean. So, it's
very difficult to find. There have been
various claims of mega tsunamis, but
there's not much evidence to support it,
at least on the land. But we have to
remember the seas were 150 m or 400 ft
lower then. So, if there was a mega
tsunami, the the dunes or the chevrons
that it produced are underwater now,
&gt;&gt; right? Even harder than finding a crater
on the bottom of the ocean is dating
that crater, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You can you can find all the craters you
want, but you're going to date them. You
need you need to drill them specifically
and look for evidence within them.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, that's that's amazing. Uh talk
about the the uh changes in vegetation
before and after the younger dus kind of
indicates this uh worldwide event.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So if if you look at the the
Greenland temperature data, it shows
lots of spikes up and down, but overall
there's a a big trend of ice age and
then slowly rising into the whole scene.
But the younger dry interrupts this
gradual curve, right? So rather than a
nice smooth curve like that, it goes
like this up and down. And that is one
of the indications that something
catastrophic happened there, right? cuz
obviously you've got all these
oscillations further down the line
during the ice age, but they're nowhere
near comparable to what happened at the
young. And so obviously before the
young, you've got 50 different genera of
roaming the earth that don't
know that aren't there afterwards.
you've got um and and interestingly
right so if you look at the temperature
data for previous interglacials like
what we're in now they don't look
anything like the whole scene the whole
scene is very stable only tiny little
oscillations in temperature all
throughout and that's not what happened
in the previous ones like the previous
ones are still interrupted by major
spikes and oscillations so I mean
there's a number of unique components uh
that I talked about in that 2023 lecture
at the cosmic summit like the methane
concentrations
um and stuff like that. So not only
that, vegetation patterns were were very
different before the young and
afterwards. Um I showed in that
presentation uh the dynamics between
grasslands and woodlands and and pine
forest and stuff like that. It changed
dramatically very quickly and that's not
something you see in previous events
either. Are geologists um commenting on
this change when they look back
historically to various activities that
are uh uh coming from outer space and
impacting the earth? Do they even
comment on that or do they do they not
comment on it? So actually geologists
are often the most accepting of the
young and destemical
proxies and they say well that's
obviously an impact. It's mainly most of
the push back comes from archaeologists.
Did did that come through clearly? I was
having
&gt;&gt; I I you went off for a minute. Can you
repeat what you just said?
&gt;&gt; So geologists are actually the most
accepting of the young dry stuff. It's
mainly archaeologists that have a
problem with it. Um and like a geologist
can look at these impact proxies and say
yeah like they can't have been caused by
anything else unless you're saying that
there was that I mean so this is a catch
22 right so these proxies been produced
by a high technology civilization but
the assumption of archaeologists is that
there was no such civilization then so
assuming there was no such civilization
then they can only have been caused by
an impact event
&gt;&gt; funny Um, I mean, we've got melting
temperatures that are not up for debate.
Like, melted quartz needs 2,100°
to melt it, and volcanoes can't do that.
The only thing that can do that is
modern technology and an impact event,
which is part of why some of the critics
call us all frauds. Like, they claim
that everything that we we show is fraud
and that we we sprinkled it in the
sample ourselves. And it's like, no,
that's not possible. maybe in the first
couple of years when only a handful of
scientists had looked at this stuff, but
there's dozens of papers with samples
that have never passed through the hands
of any common research group member. And
so what they're suggesting in that case
is that there's a global conspiracy
between wellrespected scientists to
manufacture this evidence. And that's
not happening. It's simply not. Yeah. So
this worldwide that conspiracy is uh is
this the excuse for not acknowledging
your work?
&gt;&gt; More or less. Uh a lot of the critics
like Marco and stuff like that, they
just say, "Oh, that's all fraudulent.
Don't worry about that." But it's it's
just not simple as that.
&gt;&gt; I want to ask you about uh in our time
that we we have remaining. Um when we
look at places like Gobecley, Kahani,
uh perhaps some of these underground
cities like Daren Kuru in Turkey, it
looks like they're reboot centers where
someone's trying to show people how to
farm or animal husbandry or begin
looking at the cosmological cycles. What
would you say about that? Would would
you believe would you would you have a a
a feeling that they are recovery outlets
for people that have survived these
impact events?
&gt;&gt; See, this this always makes me laugh
because the archaeologists say, "Oh,
there's no evidence of a lost
civilization anywhere." And but they've
just they've discovered all these sites
dating to exactly when they're supposed
to be dated, right? So 20 years ago,
they didn't know and they would have
said these things don't exist, but now
they do. And there's good evidence that
go back is much older than they've dated
it to. Right.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Not only because some of the some of the
pillars are inserted into walls like
there's walls built up around them that
cover up the carvings. And so that
t-pillar was taken from somewhere else
and and reused in the construction of
goep. And uh uh regarding the specific
question about uh sort of reivilization
uh potentially I don't know if there's
good evidence to suggest that but
there's certainly not good evidence to
deny it. Um
&gt;&gt; and and I mean like I just said those
pillars have been reused from somewhere.
Maybe the original site that they were
reused from was was older and they've
come in after the Cataclysm. They've
rebuilt these sites and they've
restarted. Who knows? I just don't know.
They can't say that. They can't say that
it wasn't that.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it's still a huge mystery uh as to
the function, but that it looks like
given not only the date, but just what
they have found so far that they were
educational centers of some kind. Are
there other hints and evidence of
similar sites that you have discovered
in any other parts of the world? Not
that I'm uh particularly aware of or not
that come to mind at least. I'm sure
there are some I mean we talked about
earlier about the cyclopian
architecture. Um so obviously sites with
the cyclopian architecture below and
more modern architecture above they will
have been repurposed um or reoccupied
over time.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh yeah I I can't really think of
anything than that. We o open the uh
show with you talking about a number of
civilizations that have been found up
and down the Americas. Uh do you believe
or have any sense of a sophisticated
hierarchy civilization like an Atlantis
like a Leoria uh existing in other parts
of the of the planet? And where would
they be?
&gt;&gt; I mean obviously in Europe I mean the
Middle East we've got Gabaki, we've got
the tapes, right? There's a few of them
now. Um,
uh, obviously on Easter Island, you've
got cyclopian architecture there,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Um, uh, I don't I haven't really looked
into Malta too much, but you've got
similar architecture on Malta. Um,
there's there's, uh, at at the bottom of
the Mediterranean Sea, there's actually
standing stones there with holes drilled
in them. So, uh, I mean, unless they
fell off a boat and landed upright in
the in the ground, [laughter] they were
certainly there before the the Med Sea
flooded, right? So, uh, and there's been
stone circles found in at the bottom of
Lake Michigan as well, I believe. Um, I
mean, there's there's all sorts of
potential locations, but obviously it's
all very thin evidence. Like, there's no
archaeological evidence other than the
structures itself. And I mean I I mean
we've got Gang Padang in Indonesia as
well, which I am convinced despite the
the push back from archaeologists, I'm
convinced that there was humans living
there 25,000 years ago and the site was
built as a megalithic site. You can
argue over whether it's a pyramid or
not, but it's certainly pyramidal. Um,
and the the lowest level that's been
dated about 26,000 years ago is where
the artifacts have been found. The Ku
Jang stone among chief among them. So,
&gt;&gt; and that's the big problem with Kenang
is the fact that it's been carbonated.
It's such a ancient period, a very old
time. Why do archaeologists have such a
problem with that? What I mean, because
they just are all over Danny Hillman
about that, the geologist who found and
excavated that site
&gt;&gt; just because it's a bald climb really.
And the the dating isn't direct dating
of archaeological material. They they've
they've drilled core samples and they
brought material from the core samples
and they've dated that material. Argue,
well, that's not enough to say that this
was occupied back then. But there's a
lot of archaeology that's been done on
the exact same type of dating. And the
fact that that thating was done on coral
samples rather than archaeological
material is almost the entire basis for
its retraction. And so if they want to
retract articles for that, then they're
going to have to retract hundreds more.
It's it's just dumb. And if you look at
the Ku Jang stone that's taken from the
interface between the two lowest layers,
it's very clearly an artifact. That is
not natural. You can't if any
archaeologist looks at that and tells
you it's natural, never believe anything
they say cuz they're not interested in
the truth.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Hey Mark, it's been fun talking
with you. Uh you're going to be uh
physically at the cosmic summit in June.
Are you'll be flying to North Carolina?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And what is the uh title of your talk?
&gt;&gt; That's to be determined. I still haven't
fully settled on what I'm going to be
presenting, but it'll be interesting.
It'll be young and dry related. It might
be a hybrid of the latest research in
combination with a bunch of stuff about
the critics. Um because since the
Hancock Dibble debate, the critics have
really stepped it up a notch and and
obviously I might present some of that
scientific fraud that I discovered
published to discredit the young
address. I'll talk about that.
&gt;&gt; Talk a little bit about uh what you have
determined and called scientific fraud.
What what does that mean specifically?
give us some examples.
&gt;&gt; Right. So, a bunch of critics published
a paper from Hall's Cave and they state
in the paper that the geochemical
evidence from the Young D boundary was
caused by vulcanism. But what they did
is they they collected all these this
data. They they used very shoddy methods
and that but that's neither here nor
there. And what they did is when they
found that one of the samples came back
with a major platinum anomaly like the
rest of the young dry sites, they said,
"Oh, we better not include that in our
paper. We better delete that sample
because we want to say the young dus
occurs above that." So their young and
dry occurs at 151 cm in the in the in
the strata, but the sample directly
below that at 153 cm has the platinum
spike at the young dryest. So in order
to claim that their samples up here are
the young dryers, they had to delete
this sample because they couldn't claim
that if they hadn't deleted this. And so
a co-author who was originally on the
paper but pulled his name off after they
submitted it. He sent me the original
data that they had in the paper. And
that's how we know they deleted it
because the paper that's published
doesn't have that sample in it anywhere.
There's no mention of it. But that
sample single-handedly disproves their
entire conclusions. They can't claim
anything they claim unless they delete
that sample.
&gt;&gt; Oh my god. So, who are you going to be
the one that outs them?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I've I've been on a couple of
podcasts talking about it in depth. Um
I'm going to present it in depth at the
Cosmic Summit. Um
&gt;&gt; Oh, okay. So, those of you listening,
either get yourself out to North
Carolina or listen to uh Mark on the
streaming program. By the way, it's $75
for the entire program. uh Saturday,
Sunday, and I think there's some other
uh programs on Monday the 20th through
the 22nd and 23rd. I think Randall
Carlson's doing a special presentation
on Monday and a couple of other people.
So, the streaming price 75 bucks for the
whole weekend is very, very reasonable.
And by the way, if you do not make those
specific presentations, they're
cataloged and stored for you to look at
at your leisure, which is a very very
fun and uh great benefit because we all
live in different parts of the world.
And uh we can't be uh up at the actual
time of the presentation. So consider
that cosmic sunnament.com
go to the button on top and look for
streaming and uh check it out and make
sure to see Mark Young his presentation.
What day are you speaking Mark?
Saturday, Sunday or Monday?
&gt;&gt; Uh it's on the Saturday I believe in the
morning before lunch. So
&gt;&gt; Okay. Excellent. So wonderful Mark Young
uh geoarchchaeologist. Thanks for
joining me. A real pleasure. And uh I
expect at some point when you recover
from all your discoveries that you
produce a book, fella.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So I I've I've written basically a
thesis length article on Graham
Hancock's website. It's about 50 60,000
words uh going over all the different
aspects of the young. Um so I might
adapt that and publish it. There's
there's any number of things I could
write about. So
&gt;&gt; yeah, writing takes
&gt;&gt; definitely on the cards at some point.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, takes time and energy. So, hey, I
really appreciate you joining us and uh
I hope your show is uh filled with
people and uh let's have you back again.
&gt;&gt; Sounds good, Cliff.